Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Secs. 1-2 and 1-8, of the 2000 Code of
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction. [Amended 5-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 233; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 306]
A. It is the legislative intent of the Village Council, in adopting this Code,
that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to
protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village. In the construction of this Code and any
amendment to this Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Village
of Spring Lake, adopted February 17, 1997, and shall include any
amendment to such Charter.
(2) Code. The terms "this Code" and "Code" shall mean the Code of
Ordinances, Village of Spring Lake, Michigan.1
(3) Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code,
when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a
legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in
hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to
midnight, shall be excluded if the time period expires on a Sunday
or legal holiday.
(4) Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items,
conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions,
provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or"
or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a) The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms,
conditions, provisions or events apply.
(b) The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply singly or in any combination.
(c) The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms,
conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in
combination.
(5) County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean the
County of Ottawa in the State of Michigan.
1. Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
(6) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations and to all neuter objects as well as to males.
(7) May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not
mandatory.
(8) May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition.
(9) Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction"
shall mean an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any
ordinance of the Village, but which is not a crime under this Code
or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without
limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as
authorized by Chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA
§ 600.8701 et seq., MSA § 27A.8701 et seq.), as amended. A
municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a
violation of this Code that is a criminal offense.
(10) Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one
person and thing.
(11) Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" shall be
construed to include the term "affirmation" in all cases where by
law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases
the term "sworn" shall be construed to include the term "affirmed."
(12) Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever
any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if
followed by the words "of the Village of Spring Lake, Michigan."
Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the Village
is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or his
deputy or authorized subordinate.
(13) Person. The term "person" includes firms, joint ventures,
partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or
organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or
unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether
acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and all
federal, state and local agencies of government, as well as natural
persons, and includes all their legal representatives, heirs,
successors and assigns.
(14) Public Acts. References to Public Acts are references to the Public
Acts of Michigan. For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of
1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1909. Any reference to a Public Act, whether by Act number or by
short title, is a reference to the Act as amended.
§ 1-1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 1-1
1:4
§ 1-2. General penalties and sanctions; continuing violations;
injunctive relief. [Amended 5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 232; 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 233]
(15) Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
(16) State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to
mean the State of Michigan.
(17) Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future
as well as the present and past.
(18) Village. The term "Village" shall mean the Village of Spring Lake,
Michigan.
(19) Village Council. The term "Village Council" and "Council" shall
mean the Village Council of the Village of Spring Lake.
(20) Village Manager or his or her designee. The term "Village Manager
or his or her designee" shall mean the individual employed by the
Village to enforce the codes adopted by the Village, including but
not limited to Chapter 390, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Spring Lake, the building codes,2 and ordinances pertaining to the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents. This individual shall be
responsible for Code compliance and shall serve as Planning
Administrator.
B. Any word or term not defined in this Code shall be considered to be
defined in accordance with its common or standard definition.
A. Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Village is
specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a municipal civil
infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.
B. The penalty of a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding
$500 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90
days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the
violation by this Code or any ordinance.
C. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be
a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance,
plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized
under Chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA § 600.8701 et
seq., MSA § 27A.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws. Municipal
civil infractions shall be subject to the enforcement procedures as set
forth in Chapter 25, Municipal Civil Infractions, of the Code of the
Village of Spring Lake.
(1) Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine
2. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 127, Building Regulations.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
for a violation shall be $200, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each infraction. [Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 348]
(2) Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a
person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any
ordinance. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means
a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of
the same requirement or provisions committed by a person within
any twelve-month period (unless some other period is specifically
provided by this Code or any ordinance) and for which the person
admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless
otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a
particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for
a repeat offense shall be as follows:
(a) The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
$350, plus costs. [Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 348]
(b) The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be $500, plus costs.
D. A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance, and any
omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any
ordinance.
E. Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance
continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to
penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.
F. In addition to any remedies available at law, the Village may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain,
prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any Village ordinance.
§ 1-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 1-2
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 348]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to MCLA § 78.24a and Section C-44 of the Charter of the Village of
Spring Lake, the ordinances of the Village of Spring Lake of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Spring
Lake, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code and consisting of Chapters 1 through 390, together with an
Appendix and the Village Charter, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Spring Lake," hereinafter known
and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the adoption of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force. This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the Code of Ordinances,
Spring Lake, Michigan, adopted October 2, 2000, by Ordinance No. 269, as
amended and supplemented.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon publication after adoption.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Clerk/Treasurer of the
Village of Spring Lake by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Village
Council to make them a party thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Spring
Lake" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Spring Lake, pursuant to law, shall
cause to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting
Ordinance is a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk/Treasurer or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk/Treasurer to keep upto-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk/Treasurer, or an authorized agent of the Clerk/Treasurer, upon
the payment of a fee to be set by the Village Council, or may be furnished
electronically. The Clerk/Treasurer may also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Spring Lake to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine or not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
This Code and the various parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs,
sentences, phrases, and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase,
or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this Code shall not
be affected thereby and shall remain in effect and valid.
§ 1-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 1-13
1:8
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal; certain ordinances not
affected by this Code.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14, above, shall not affect the validity of the following ordinances,
rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal. The
ordinances or portions of ordinances designated below continue in full force
and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.
A. Except as provided in § 1-15, below, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code
adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that
such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Village of Spring Lake which is not in conflict
with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force
and effect.
B. The following Ordinances (of the 2000 Code of Ordinances) are
specifically repealed:
(1) Former Chapter 10, Article II, Mechanical Amusement Devices.
(2) Former Chapter 22, Article II, License.
(3) Former Chapter 39, Article I, Wetland Regulations.
(4) Former Chapter 74, Article IV, Snowmobiles.
(5) Former Chapter 86, Article 11, Marine Safety.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 16, 2016.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
E. Any franchise (including gas, electric, and cable franchise agreements),
license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, deed, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats and/or vacation of such.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation and other benefits to officers and
employees.
L. Any ordinance pertaining to the rezoning of property, or adopting or
amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. The annexing of property into the Village or description of corporate
limits; and/or the de-annexing or exclusion of property from the Village.
O. Any ordinance providing for the duties of Village officers or employees
not codified in this Code.
P. Any ordinance adopting or amending a Comprehensive Plan.
Q. Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect.
R. Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect.
S. Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Village Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
§ 1-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 1-16
1:10
§ 1-17. References to Michigan Compiled Laws.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A, attached hereto and made a part hereof, are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)3
C. Nomenclature. The following outdated terms are updated as follows
(1) Throughout the Code: "Community Services Director" is changed
to "Village Manager or his or her designee."
(2) In Chapter 390, Zoning, references to "Zoning Act" are changed to
"Zoning Enabling Act."
A. Throughout the Code, a reference to "Michigan Compiled Laws" shall
include all sections of law, as last amended, which are assigned a
compilation number by the Legislative Service Bureau and are not
subsequently repealed.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a reference to all or part of a
statute, regardless of whether the words "as amended" are used in the
reference, shall include the latest amendments to the statute or part.
3. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-16B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 4-16-2018 by Ord. No.
348]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY
§ 7-1. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent, employee or member of the Village Council shall be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to any person as a result
of any act, decision or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the
discharge of their duties or responsibilities pursuant to this Code.
Chapter 18
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 39.
Historic conservation — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 1-17 SPRING LAKE CODE § 7-1
1:12
ARTICLE I
Downtown Development Authority
[Adopted as Ch. 58, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 18-1. Creation.
Pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCLA § 125.1651 et seq.), the
Village establishes a Spring Lake Downtown Development Authority.
§ 18-2. Designation of downtown district boundaries.
The boundaries of the downtown district within which the Downtown
Development Authority shall exercise its powers are determined to be
as delineated and set forth on Exhibit A which is on file in the Clerk/
Treasurer's office.
§ 18-3. Powers and duties.
The Downtown Development Authority shall have and exercise such powers
and duties as are provided in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCLA § 125.1651
et seq.).
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:13

ARTICLE II
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 254; amended in its entirety
2-3-2005 by Ord. No. 275 (Ch. 58 Art. II, Div. 2, of the 2000 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 18-4. Approval and adoption of amendments to plan.
§ 18-5. Considerations.
A. It is determined that the first amendment to the Restated and Amended
Village of Spring Lake Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing
Plan for the Spring Lake Downtown Development Area constitutes a
public purpose. The plan is approved and adopted. A copy of the plan
shall be maintained on file in the Village Clerk/Treasurer's office and
shall be cross-indexed to this article.
B. It is hereby determined that the second amendment to the Restated and
Amended Village of Spring Lake Development Plan and Tax Increment
Financing Plan for the Spring Lake Downtown Development Area
(collectively referred to as the "plan") constitutes a public purpose. The
plan is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the plan shall be
maintained on the file in the Village Clerk/Treasurer's office and shall
be cross-indexed to this article.
A. This article and the approval of the Downtown Development Plan and
Tax Increment Financing Plan, and the determination of public purpose,
are based on the following considerations:
(1) The findings and recommendations of the Development Area
Citizens Council.
(2) The plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of
Public Act No. 197 of 1975 [MCLA § 125.1667, MSA § 5.3010(17)].
(3) That the proposed method of financing the development described
in the plan is feasible and the Downtown Development Authority
has the ability to arrange the financing.
(4) That the development described in the plan is reasonable and
necessary to carry out the purposes of Public Act No. 197 of 1975
[MCLA § 125.1651 et seq., MSA § 5.3010(1) et seq.].
(5) That the land included within the development area, as described
in the plan, be acquired as reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes of the plan and Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCLA
§ 125.1651 et seq., MSA § 5.3010 et seq.) in an efficient and
economically satisfactory manner.
(6) That the plan is in reasonable accord with the Village Master Plan.
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:15
§ 18-6. Approval and adoption of third amendment to plan. [Added
10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
(7) That public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities,
are or will be adequate to serve all of the projects described in the
plan and the development area generally.
(8) That all changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, if any, as described in the plan are reasonably necessary
for the projects described in the plan and for the Village.
B. This article and approval of the plan, and determination of public
purpose, are based upon the following considerations:
(1) The findings and recommendations of the Development Area
Citizens Council;
(2) The plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of
Michigan Act 197 of 1975, as amended;
(3) The proposed method of financing the development described in
the plan is feasible, and the Spring Lake Downtown Development
Authority has the ability to arrange the financing;
(4) The development described in the plan is reasonable and necessary
to carry out the purposes of Michigan Act 197 of 1975, as amended;
(5) That the land included within the development area as described in
the plan is reasonably necessary to carry on the purposes of the
plan and Act 197 of 1975 in an efficient and economically
satisfactory manner;
(6) That the plan is in reasonable accord with the Village of Spring
Lake Master Plan;
(7) That public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities
are or will be adequate to serve all of the projects described in the
plan and the development area generally;
(8) That all changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, if any, as described in the plan are reasonably necessary
for the projects described in the plan for the Village of Spring Lake.
A. Approval and adoption of the third amendment to the Restated and
Amended Spring Lake Downtown Development Authority Development
Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan. It is hereby determined that
the third amendment to the Restated and Amended Village of Spring
Lake Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the
Spring Lake Downtown Development Area (collectively referred to as
the "plan") constitutes a public purpose. The plan is hereby approved
and adopted. A copy of the plan shall be maintained on file in the Village
Clerk/Treasurer's office and shall be cross-indexed to this section.
§ 18-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 18-6
1:16
§ 18-7. Approval and adoption of fourth amendment to plan. [Added
12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 342]
B. Considerations. This section and approval of the plan, and
determination of public purpose, are based upon the following
considerations:
(1) The findings and recommendations of the Development Area
Citizens Council;
(2) The plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of
Michigan Act 197, as amended;
(3) The proposed method of financing the development described in
the plan is feasible, and the Spring Lake Downtown Development
Authority has the ability to arrange the financing;
(4) The development described in the plan is reasonable and necessary
to carry out the purposes of Michigan Act 197, as amended;
(5) The land included within the development area as described in the
plan is reasonably necessary to carry on the purposes of the plan
and Act 197 in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner;
(6) The plan is in reasonable accord with the Village of Spring Lake
Master Plan;
(7) Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities are
or will be adequate to serve all of the projects described in the plan
and the development area generally;
(8) All changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, if any, as described in the plan are reasonably necessary
for the projects described in the plan for the Village of Spring Lake.
C. Conflicts. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
section are expressly repealed.4
A. Approval and adoption of the fourth amendment to the Restated and
Amended Spring Lake Downtown Development Authority Development
Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan. It is hereby determined that
the fourth amendment to the Restated and Amended Village of Spring
Lake Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the
Spring Lake Downtown Development Area (collectively referred to as
the "plan") constitutes a public purpose. The plan is hereby approved
and adopted. A copy of the plan shall be maintained on the file in the
Village Clerk/Treasurer's office and shall be cross-indexed to this
section.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-7
1:17
§ 18-8. Approval and adoption of fifth amendment to plan. [Added
5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 344]
B. Considerations. This section and approval of the plan, and
determination of public purpose, are based upon the following
considerations:
(1) The findings and recommendations of the Development Area
Citizens Council;
(2) The plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of
Michigan Act 197, as amended;
(3) The proposed method of financing the development described in
the plan is feasible, and the Spring Lake Downtown Development
Authority has the ability to arrange the financing;
(4) The development described in the plan is reasonable and necessary
to carry out the purposes of Michigan Act 197, as amended;
(5) The land included within the development area as described in the
plan is reasonably necessary to carry on the purposes of the plan
and Act 197 in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner;
(6) The plan is in reasonable accord with the Village of Spring Lake
Master Plan;
(7) Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities are
or will be adequate to serve all of the projects described in the plan
and the development area generally;
(8) All changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, if any, as described in the plan are reasonably necessary
for the projects described in the plan for the Village of Spring Lake.
C. Conflicts. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
section are expressly repealed.
D. Effective date. This section is hereby declared to be effective on
December 21, 2015.
A. Approval and adoption of the fifth amendment to the Restated and
Amended Spring Lake Downtown Development Authority Development
Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan. It is hereby determined that
the fifth amendment to the Restated and Amended Village of Spring
Lake Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the
Spring Lake Downtown Development Area (collectively referred to as
the "plan") constitutes a public purpose. The plan and amended
boundaries are hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the plan shall
be maintained on file in the Village of Spring Lake Clerk/Treasurer's
office and shall be cross-indexed to this section.
§ 18-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 18-8
1:18
B. Considerations. This section and approval of the fifth amendment to the
Restated and Amended Spring Lake Downtown Development Authority
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan is based on the
determination of the Village Council that it continues to be necessary
and in the best interests of the public to halt property value
deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in its
business district, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to
promote economic growth in the business district.
C. Conflicts. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
section are expressly repealed.5
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:19
Chapter 25
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 25-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word or term not defined
in this section shall be considered to be defined in accordance with its
common or standard definitions.
ACT — Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA § 600.101 et seq., MSA § 27A.101
et seq.).
AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIAL — A police officer or other personnel
of the Village authorized by ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.
BUREAU — The Spring Lake Village Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
as established by this chapter.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission that is prohibited
by ordinance of the Village, but which is not a crime under this chapter
or other ordinances of the Village, and for which civil sanctions, including
without limitation fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as
authorized by Chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA § 600.8701
et seq., MSA § 27A.8701 et seq.). A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser
included offense of a violation of the ordinances of the Village which is a
criminal offense.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized Village official, directing a person to appear
at court of law regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil
infraction violation by the person cited.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION DETERMINATION — A determination that
a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the
following:
A. An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction;
An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with
explanation;
B.
§ 18-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 25-1
1:20
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE — A written notice
prepared by an authorized Village official, directing a person to appear at
the Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation
by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the Village, as authorized under
Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act [MCLA §§ 600.8396, 600.8707(6),
MSA §§ 27A.8376, 27A.8707(6)].
§ 25-2. Action; commencement.
A municipal civil infraction may be commenced upon the issuance by an
authorized Village official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing
the alleged violator to appear in court or a municipal civil infraction
violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the Bureau.
§ 25-3. Issuance and service of citations.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
Village officials as follows:
A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal
hearing; or
C.
A default judgment for failing to appear as directed by citation or other
notice.
D.
A. The time for appearance specified on a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified on a citation shall be the County
District Court unless the person cited for a municipal civil infraction is
under the age of 17 at the time of the occurrence of the violation, at
which time the matter shall be referred to the County Probate Court.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively, shall be in the form
approved by the state court administrator, and shall consist of the
following parts:
(1) The original, which is a complaint and notice to appear, shall be
filed with the County District Court;
(2) The first copy shall be retained by the Village and/or the ordinance
enforcing agency;
(3) The second copy shall be issued to the alleged violator if the
violation is a municipal civil infraction; and
(4) The third copy shall be issued to the alleged violator if the violation
is a misdemeanor.
D. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized Village
official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:21
§ 25-4. Contents of citations.
immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare
under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the
best of my information, knowledge and belief."
E. An authorized Village official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as
possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies
of a citation.
F. An authorized Village official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person violate an ordinance, a violation of which is a
municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the
prosecuting attorney or Village Attorney approves in writing the
issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
Village official as follows:
(1) Except as provided in Subsection G(2) of this section, an authorized
Village official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the
alleged violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
municipal civil infraction citation does not need to be personally
served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner
or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy
on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In
addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the
owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known
address. A citation served in accordance with this subsection for a
violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or
other structure shall be processed in the same manner as a citation
served personally upon a defendant.
A. A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name of the
plaintiff and the name and the address of the alleged violator, the
municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator
shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time
at or by which the appearance shall be made.
B. A municipal civil infraction citation shall inform the alleged violator to
do one of the following:
§ 25-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 25-4
1:22
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with
explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance, in person
or by representation.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a Judge or
District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
Judge is requested by the Village.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a Judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. A party
requesting a formal hearing shall notify the court and the other
party of the request at least 10 days before the hearing date,
which request may be made in person, by representation, by
mail or by telephone.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility with
explanation in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified to appear
for a hearing unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the Village.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the
alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at
the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and
will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on
the municipal civil infraction. Return of the citation with an admission
of responsibility and with full payment of applicable civil fines and
§ 25-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:23
§ 25-5. Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
costs, return of citation with an admission of responsibility with
explanation, or timely application to the court for a scheduled date
and time for an appearance under Subsection C(1) or a hearing under
Subsection C(2) of this section constitutes a timely appearance.
E. If an authorized Village official issues a citation as set forth in this
section, the court may accept an admission with explanation or an
admission or denial of responsibility without the necessity of a sworn
complaint. If the defendant denies responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction, further proceedings shall not be held until a sworn complaint
is filed with the court. A warrant for arrest for failure to appear on the
municipal civil infraction citation shall not be issued until a sworn
complaint relative to the municipal civil infraction is filed with the
court.
A. The Village establishes a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as
authorized under Section 8396 of the Act (MCLA § 600.8396, MSA
§ 27A.8396) to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil
infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices
issued and served by authorized Village officials, and to collect and
retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by ordinance. The expenses of
operating the Bureau shall be borne by the Village, and the personnel of
the Bureau shall be Village employees.
B. The Bureau shall be located at the Village Hall, and shall be under the
supervision and control of the Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer,
subject to the approval of the Village Council, shall adopt rules and
regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint any necessary
qualified Village employees to administer the Bureau.
C. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for
which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil
infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been
issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation
shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the Bureau.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the Village from issuing
a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting
any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be
required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the
Bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of
appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of
any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way
diminish the person's right, privileges and protection accorded by law.
D. The scope of the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting
admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and
collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those
admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any
person who denies having committed the offense or who admits
§ 25-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 25-5
1:24
§ 25-6. Violation notices; appearances; citations.
§ 25-7. Sanctions; continuing violations; injunctive relief.
The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a
civil fine in the amount as provided by ordinance, plus any costs, damages,
expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Public Act
No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA § 600.8701 et seq., MSA § 27A.8701 et seq.), and
other applicable laws.
responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the Bureau
determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to an alleged violation.
A. An authorized Village official may issue and serve a municipal civil
infraction violation notice instead of a citation under the same
circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for service of
municipal civil infraction citations. In addition to any other information
required by this chapter or other ordinance, the violation shall indicate
the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the:
(1) Methods by which an appearance may be made;
(2) Address and telephone number of the Bureau;
(3) Hours during which the Bureau is open;
(4) Amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation; and
(5) Consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within
the required time.
B. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice
shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by
the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction
violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by
representation.
C. If an authorized Village official issues and serves a municipal civil
infraction violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not
made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of
fines for the violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil
infraction citation may be filed with the County District Court and a
copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged
violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed
with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the
requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the
Act (MCLA §§ 600.8705, 600.8709, MSA §§ 27A.8705, 27A.8709) but
shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in
the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the
alleged violator how to respond to the citation.
§ 25-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8
1:25
§ 25-8. Authorized Village officials.
The Village Manager or his or her designee, the Chief of Police of the Village
of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg Police Department and duly appointed
officers of the Village of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg Police Department
are designated as the authorized Village officials to issue municipal civil
infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or
municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to
appear at the Bureau) as provided by this chapter.
Chapter 39
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown development — See Ch. 18.
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Historic conservation — See Ch. 215.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 39-1. Scope, purpose, and intent.
§ 39-2. Establishment; membership.
The Village Council confirms the establishment, under the Michigan
Planning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et
seq., of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have nine
members. Members of the Planning Commission as of the effective date of
this chapter shall, except for an ex officio member whose remaining term
on the Planning Commission shall be limited to that member's term on
the Village Council, continue to serve for the remainder of their existing
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Village
Council under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 33 of
2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act No. 110 of 2006, MCLA § 125.3101 et seq., to establish the
Spring Lake Village Planning Commission (the "Planning Commission")
with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those Acts and
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and any future
amendments to this chapter.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide that the Village Council shall
confirm the establishment, under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act No. 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq., of the Planning
Commission; to establish the appointments, terms and memberships of
the Planning Commission; to identify the officers and the minimum
number of meetings per year of the Planning Commission; and to
prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the Planning Commission.
§ 25-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 39-2
1:26
terms so long as they continue to meet all of the eligibility requirements for
Planning Commission membership set forth within the Michigan Planning
Enabling Act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.
§ 39-3. Appointment and terms.
§ 39-4. Removal.
The Village Council may remove a member of the Planning Commission for
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges
and after a public hearing.
§ 39-5. Conflict of interest.
A. The Village President, with the approval of the Village Council by a
majority vote of the members elected and serving, shall appoint all
Planning Commission members, including the ex officio member.
B. The Planning Commission members, other than an ex officio member,
shall serve for terms of three years each.
C. A Planning Commission member shall hold office until the member's
successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as the original appointment.
D. Planning Commission members shall be qualified electors of the
Village, except that one Planning Commission member may be an
individual who is not a qualified elector of the Village. The membership
of the Planning Commission shall be representative of important
segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental,
educational, and social development of the Village, in accordance with
the major interests as they exist in the Village, such as agriculture,
natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government,
transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be
representative of the entire geography of the Village to the extent
practicable.
E. One member of the Village Council shall be appointed to the Planning
Commission as an ex officio member.
F. An ex officio member has full voting rights. An ex officio member's term
on the Planning Commission shall expire with that member's term on
the Village Council.
G. No other elected officer or employee of the Village is eligible to be a
member of the Planning Commission.
A. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a Planning Commission
member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the
member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Planning
Commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of
interest as required by this chapter constitutes malfeasance in office.
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-5
1:27
§ 39-6. Compensation.
The Planning Commission members may be compensated for their services
as provided by Village Council resolution. The Planning Commission may
adopt bylaws relative to compensation and expenses of its members for
travel when engaged in the performance of activities authorized by the
Village Council, including, but not limited to, attendance at conferences,
workshops, educational and training programs and meetings.
§ 39-7. Officers; committees.
§ 39-8. Bylaws; meetings; records.
B. For the purposes of this section, the Planning Commission shall define
conflict of interest in its bylaws.
A. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a secretary
from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it considers
advisable. An ex officio member of the Planning Commission is not
eligible to serve as Chairperson. The term of each office shall be one
year, with opportunity for reelection as specified in the Planning
Commission bylaws.
B. The Planning Commission may also appoint advisory committees whose
members are not members of the Planning Commission.
A. The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of
business.
B. The Planning Commission shall hold at least four regular meetings each
year, and shall by resolution determine the time and place of the
meetings.
C. Unless otherwise provided in the Planning Commission's bylaws, a
special meeting of the Planning Commission may be called by the
Chairperson or by two other members, upon written request to the
secretary. Unless the bylaws otherwise provide, the secretary shall send
written notice of a special meeting to Planning Commission members at
least 48 hours before the meeting.
D. The business that the Planning Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open
Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976, MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
E. The Planning Commission shall keep a public record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings, and determinations. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Planning Commission in
the performance of an official function shall be made available to the
public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act
No. 442 of 1976, MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 39-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 39-9
1:28
§ 39-9. Annual report.
The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to the Village
Council concerning its operations and the status of the planning activities,
including recommendations regarding actions by the Village Council related
to planning and development.
§ 39-10. Authority to make Master Plan.
§ 39-11. Subdivision and land division recommendations.
Chapter 55
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
A. Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act
No. 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq., and other applicable planning
statutes, the Planning Commission shall make a Master Plan as a guide
for development within the Villages's planning jurisdiction.
B. Final authority to approve a Master Plan or any amendments thereto
shall rest with the Planning Commission unless the Village Council
passes a resolution asserting the right to approve or reject the Master
Plan.
C. Unless rescinded by the Village, any plan adopted or amended under
the Village Planning Act, Public Act No. 168 of 1959, MCLA § 125.321
et seq., need not be readopted under the Michigan Planning Enabling
Act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.
A. The Planning Commission may recommend to the Village Council
provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land.
Before recommending such an ordinance or rule, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or
rule. The Planning Commission shall give notice of the time and place of
the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village.
B. The Planning Commission shall review and make recommendations on
a proposed plat before action is taken by the Village Council under the
Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967, MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
Before making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the Planning
Commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or
other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15
days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately
adjoining the proposed platted land.
§ 39-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-11
1:29

ARTICLE I
Village Council
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances; amended
in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).]
§ 55-1. President and Council members.
The annual salaries for the President of the Village Council and for members
of the Village Council shall be established by resolution of the Village
Council, from time to time.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:31
Chapter 90
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cost recovery — See Ch. 152.
Fireworks — See Ch. 183.
Offenses — See Ch. 240.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 249.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 365.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 90-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALCOHOL — The product by distillation or fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted with water or not, whatever may be its origin. It does not
mean ethyl and/or industrial alcohol, diluted or not, that has been denatured
or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented
and by whatever name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by
volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
VENDOR — A person licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission to
sell alcoholic liquor.
WINE — The product made by the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice
of grapes or any other fruit with the usual cellar treatment, and containing
not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The term "wine" shall include fruit
(fermented) juices other than grapes.
§ 90-2. State license required; compliance with state law.
No person shall do or engage in any act relating to traffic in alcoholic
liquors for which a license is required under the laws of the state, without
first obtaining a license pursuant to and under the laws of the state. No
person shall, directly or indirectly, or by a clerk, agent or employee,
manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, barter, furnish or import
for sale, transport for hire or transport, or possess any beer, wine, spirits
and/or alcoholic liquor unless such person shall have fully complied with the
laws of the state and/or the rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control
Commission.
§ 55-1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 90-3
1:32
§ 90-3. Hours of sale.
No licensee under the laws of the state shall sell or furnish any alcoholic
liquor on any day or at any hour or time not permitted under the laws of the
state or the rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control Commission.
§ 90-4. Furnishing food with liquor.
No vendor shall make any regulation requiring the purchase or serving of
food with the purchase of any alcoholic liquor, nor shall any food of any kind
be given away in connection with the sale of alcoholic liquor.
§ 90-5. Alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises.
No vendor shall knowingly permit any alcoholic liquor sold by the vendor
for on-premises consumption to be removed from the premises where sold.
§ 90-6. Intoxicated persons.
No vendor shall sell or furnish any alcoholic liquor of any kind or description
at any time in connection with their business to a visibly intoxicated person.
§ 90-7. Age of purchaser; posting of signs; defenses to actions.
§ 90-8. Possessing or transporting in motor vehicle or boat by
minor.
A. Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the
person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age,
or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less
than 21 years of age is guilty of a violation of this section. A suitable
sign which describes this section and the penalties for violating this
section shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each room where
alcoholic liquors are sold. The signs shall be approved and furnished by
the State Liquor Control Commission.
B. In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or
the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before
furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor
vehicle operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the
Federal Selective Service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of
the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under
this section.
A. A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or
possess, in a motor vehicle, boat or other conveyance, any alcoholic
liquor unless the person is employed by a licensee under state law, the
Liquor Control Commission, or an agent of the Liquor Control
Commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor under the
§ 90-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:33
§ 90-9. Purchase, possession or consumption by underage person;
civil penalties.
person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the
person's employment.
B. If a person is convicted under Subsection A of this section for
transporting or possessing any alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle,
within 30 days after the conviction of a person for the violation of
Subsection A, which conviction has become final, complaint may be
made by the arresting officer or the officer's superior before the District
Court from which the warrant was issued, which complaint shall be
under oath and shall contain a description of the motor vehicle in which
alcoholic liquor was possessed or transported by the person less than
21 years of age in committing the offense and requesting that the motor
vehicle be impounded as provided in this section. Upon the filing of the
complaint, the Court shall issue an order to the owner of the motor
vehicle to show cause why the motor vehicle shall not be impounded.
The order to show cause shall have a date and time fixed in the order for
a hearing, which date shall not be less than 10 days after the issuance
of the order, and shall be served by delivering a true copy to the owner
not less than three full days before the date of hearing or, if the owner
cannot be located, by sending a true copy by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner. If the owner is a nonresident of the state,
service may be made upon the Secretary of State as provided in Section
403 of Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.403, MSA § 9.2103).
C. If the Court determines upon the hearing of the order to show cause,
from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of the
commission of the offense the motor vehicle was being driven by the
person less than 21 years of age with the express or implied consent or
knowledge of the owner, and that the use of the motor vehicle is not
needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of the owner's employment or
the actual operation of the owner's business, the Court shall authorize
the impounding of the vehicle for a period to be determined by the
Court, of not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days. The Court's order
authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall authorize a law
enforcement officer to take possession without other process of the
motor vehicle wherever located and to store the vehicle in a public or
private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle.
Appeal shall lie from the order to the Circuit Court of the County, and
the provisions governing the taking of appeals from judgments for
damages shall be applicable to the appeal. This section shall not
prevent a bona fide lienholder from exercising rights under a lien.
D. A person who knowingly transfers title to a motor vehicle for the
purpose of avoiding this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor under this
chapter.
A. No person less than 21 years of age shall purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume alcoholic liquor in a licensed premises, or possess alcoholic
§ 90-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 90-9
1:34
§ 90-10. Fraudulent identification prohibited.
No person shall furnish fraudulent identification to a person less than 21
years of age, and no person less than 21 years of age shall use a fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor.
§ 90-11. Appearance ticket for certain violations.
liquor on or in any other public or private premises, except as provided
in § 90-8 and Subsection C of this section. A person less than 21 years
of age who violates this subsection is liable to the following civil fines:
(1) For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100;
(2) For a second violation, a fine of not more than $200, or
participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined in
Section 6107 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 [MCLA § 333.6107,
MSA § 14.15(6107)], and designated by the administrator of
substance abuse services, or both;
(3) For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more than $500, or
participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined in
Section 6107 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 [MCLA § 333.6107,
MSA § 14.15(6107)], and designated by the administrator of
substance abuse services, or both.
B. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a person less than 21
years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working
hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a person
licensed by this chapter by the Liquor Control Commission, or by an
agent of the Liquor Control Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not
possessed for personal consumption.
C. This section shall not be construed to limit the criminal liability of any
person, regardless of age, who shall possess an open receptacle or
container of alcoholic liquor in a public place or motor vehicle contrary
to § 90-12; and the civil fine provisions set forth in this section shall
have no application in such cases.
D. This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal liability
of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent or employee for a
violation of this chapter.
A. An officer of the Village Police Department who witnesses a person
violating § 90-9 for which a civil fine is prescribed may stop and detain
the person for purposes of obtaining satisfactory identification, seizing
illegally possessed alcoholic beverages, and issuing an appearance
ticket.
B. As used in this section, the term "appearance ticket" means a complaint
or written notice issued and subscribed by a law enforcement officer
directing a designated person to appear in the District Court at a
§ 90-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-11
1:35
§ 90-12. Consumption in public areas; open containers.
§ 90-13. Special use permit. [Amended 5-16-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
designated time in connection with the alleged violation for which
a civil fine is prescribed. The appearance ticket shall consist of the
following parts:
(1) The original, which shall be a complaint or notice to appear by the
officer and filed with the Court;
(2) The first copy, which shall be the abstract of Court record;
(3) The second copy, which shall be delivered to the alleged violator;
and
(4) The third copy, which shall be retained by the Police Department.
C. A Judge may accept a defendant's admission of the allegations set forth
on the appearance ticket and shall direct the civil sanctions imposed by
§ 90-9A. If the defendant denies the allegations on the appearance
ticket, the Judge shall set a date for trial. If a person fails to appear on
the date specified on the appearance ticket, the Judge shall enter a
default judgment against the defendant.
A. No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on any highway, street, alley,
public school grounds, publicly owned parking lot, or any public or
private property which is open to the general public and which is not
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
B. A person shall not transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a
receptacle or container which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal
is broken, within the passenger compartment of a vehicle located within
the Village. If the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment
separate from the passenger compartment, a receptacle or container
which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken shall be
encased or enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered
passenger vehicle licensed by the State Department of Transportation.
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in this chapter, beer
and wine as defined in the State of Michigan Liquor Control Code,
Public Act No. 58 of 1998 [MCLA § 436.1101 et seq., MSA
§ 18.1175(101) et seq.], may be sold and consumed in accordance with
that Act and the rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control
Commission within the confines of land owned, leased or controlled by
the Village only on those specific dates and times as determined by the
Village Council. This section is intended to provide standards, priorities
and procedures which will permit the Village Council to exercise its
authority for the maximum benefit of the Village and its persons and
property.
§ 90-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 90-13
1:36
B. A not-for-profit corporation or a foundation only may make application
to the Village Council pursuant to the laws of the state and this section,
for a temporary use beer and wine sale and consumption special use
permit for use only on the dates and times as provided for by the Village
Council within the confines of land leased or controlled by the Village.
Such not-for-profit corporation or foundation shall also disclose to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer in an application to be submitted to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer, as follows:
(1) That it has had issued to it, and is still in effect, a determination
that the applicant is exempt from income taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United
States;
(2) A list of the name and business address of the applicant and the
names and addresses of all of its directors and officers;
(3) The proposed hours of operation contemplated for such use and
indicate that such operation shall cease the sale and prohibit the
consumption of beer and wine on the premises after a time as
established by the Village Council, and that such sale and
consumption of beer and wine shall not commence prior to such
time as established by the Village Council in the evening of each
day during which such permit is authorized;
(4) The names, addresses and local telephone numbers of three
responsible persons who are officers, directors or a member of the
applicant who will be of adult age and will remain responsible for
the activities on the premises for which the special use permit is
issued at all times during the operation of such beer and wine sale
and consumption;
(5) The security measures to be provided at the premises; and
(6) The restroom facilities and maximum number of persons to be
allowed at any time within the area within which beer and wine is
proposed to be sold and consumed.
C. The Village Council, in open meeting, shall determine by a majority vote
of members present whether such special use permit shall be granted,
subject to the terms of this section. In the event of approval of a special
use permit for a not-for-profit corporation or foundation with the
qualifications stated in this section, only one such permit shall be
approved; and it shall only be utilized if and when approval is also
obtained from the State Liquor Control Commission for the lawful
conduct of beer and wine sales and consumption on the premises stated
for which the permit is issued at the times and on the dates provided in
this section. If there is a revocation for any reason of a permit or license
which has been issued by the Liquor Control Commission to a vendor
for sale of beer and wine on the premises for which the Village has
issued a permit, the permit authorized by this section shall likewise be
forthwith revoked.
§ 90-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-13
1:37
Chapter 103
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Offenses — See Ch. 240.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 249.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Tourist park — See Ch. 351.
Securing animals to trees — See Ch. 358,
§ 358-6.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
D. The holder of such permit shall cause at least one tent or similar
temporary weather shelter to be located upon the premises area within
which shall be located at least one of the dispensers of the beer and
wine, and also chairs and tables for patrons. There shall be a positive
method of patrolling access into such area, such as a fence or similar
type temporary structure; and there shall be available within such
confined area sufficient restroom facilities for the patrons of the
establishment.
E. Upon the expiration of any permit issued pursuant to this section, all
tables, chairs, fences, beer tents and other areas furnished by the notfor-
profit corporation or foundation shall be dismantled and removed
from the premises; and the grounds shall be returned to a condition
existing prior to the occupancy by the permit holder and all paper and
debris removed.
F. Any permit holder shall not exercise any rights granted under this
section without first delivering to the Village Clerk/Treasurer a validly
issued and effective liability insurance certificate naming the Village, its
elected officials, employees and duly appointed agents, as insureds in
the minimum amount as required by the Village for comprehensive allrisk
liability coverage for negligence or other liability claims against the
permit holder and such named persons or entities. The permit holder
shall also hold such named persons or entities harmless from claims,
injury or damage to persons or property arising out of any incidents of
the permit holder occurring by reason of its activities pursuant to such
permit.
G. No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferred to
another person or premises other than the one for which it was issued.
H. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be prominently displayed
in the area where beer or wine is to be sold.
§ 90-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 90-13
1:38
ARTICLE I
Animal Control
[Adopted as Ch. 14, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 103-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL — Any living, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not including
man.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person designated by the Village
to enforce the provisions of this article or any law enforcement officer
empowered to enforce municipal ordinances.
AT LARGE — Any animal which is off the premises of the owner, and not
under the direct control of the owner or a member of their immediate family
or other responsible person, by means of a leash, cord, chain or other such
restraint.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal which, without provocation, attacks
or injures a person who is peaceably conducting themselves in any place
where they lawfully may be. Dangerous animals shall also include any
animal which, because of its size, vicious propensity or other characteristic,
would constitute a danger to human life, property or domestic animals if not
restrained or kept in a safe manner.
DOG — Any animal of the family Canidae, of either or no sex and of any age.
KENNEL OPERATOR — Any person who operates an establishment, other
than a pound or animal shelter, where dogs and/or cats are maintained for
boarding, training, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation; or who
sells, exchanges or offers for adoption with or without charge dogs and/or
cats which they have produced or raised. A person who owns or harbors
three or fewer female animals shall not be considered a kennel operator.
OWNER — Any person who has a right or property interest in an animal,
who keeps or harbors an animal, who has an animal in their care, who acts
as custodian of an animal, or who knowingly permits any domestic animal to
remain on or about any premises occupied by them or under their control.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
legal entity.
PET SHOP OWNER — Any person who operates an establishment, other
than a pound or animal shelter, where animals are sold, offered for sale,
exchanged or offered for adoption with or without charge. A person who
sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption only such animals that
they have produced or raised shall not be considered a pet shop operator.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Village or by the state or
any city, county, or township, and whose duty it is to preserve the peace or
to make arrests or to enforce the law.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-1
1:39
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal or animals which:
RESTRAINT — An animal shall be deemed under restraint if:
§ 103-2. Keeping or housing of animals.
The keeping of household pets (including cats, dogs, household fish and
household birds) and other animals shall only be permitted within the
Village as is authorized by this article.
§ 103-3. Dog licenses.
§ 103-4. Prohibited acts; running at large; wild and dangerous
animals; maintenance.
A. Chases passersby or passing vehicles;
B. Attacks other animals;
C. Is at large three or more times within a year's time;
D. Damages private property; or
Barks, howls, cries or runs at large, so as to disrupt the peace of the
neighborhood.
E.
It is under the control of its owner or other responsible person by
means of a leash, cord, rope, strap, chain or lead held by such owner
or person and securely fastened to the collar or harness attached to the
animal; or
A.
It is securely enclosed, confined or restrained on premises where it
lawfully may be so as to be unable to enter upon the public way or to
molest persons lawfully using the public way.
B.
A. No owner of any dog shall own, harbor, maintain, possess or permit any
dog to remain on such owner's premises within the Village unless the
owner shall have complied with the laws of the state providing for the
licensing and registration of such dog.
B. Every owner shall be required to provide any dog owned by him with a
collar to which the license tag issued for such dog shall be affixed, and
the owner shall be responsible for seeing that the collar and tag are
worn by each dog constantly when off the premises of the owner.
A. Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep, harbor or
have charge of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, when any
one or more of the following facts exists:
(1) The animal has an ugly or vicious disposition, shows vicious habits
and has molested any person or animal lawfully in or upon any
public street or place. For purposes of this section an animal who
§ 103-1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 103-4
1:40
has bitten or attacked another person shall be refutably presumed
to be vicious;
(2) Such animal has attacked or bitten any person or animal, or has
destroyed any property or domestic animal;
(3) The animal, by destruction of property or trespassing upon the
property of others, has become a nuisance in the vicinity where
kept;
(4) Any dog, by loud barking, howling or yelping, has become a
nuisance in the vicinity where kept; or
(5) The animal appears to be suffering from rabies or affected by
hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease.
B. Running at large. No person shall cause or permit any animal kept by
that individual to run at large within the Village. Animals which are on
any street, alley or sidewalk, or any other public place, without being
held securely on a leash, shall be deemed to be running at large. It shall
be unlawful to permit any animal to run at large on the property of
another without the permission of the owner of that property.
C. Unwanted animals. No owner may abandon an animal. Unwanted
animals shall be offered to responsible persons for adoption or to an
animal shelter. If an unwanted animal is not accepted by an animal
shelter, the animal shall be humanely dispatched by a licensed
veterinarian.
D. Keeping of wild animals. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on
their premises any wild animal as a pet or for display or exhibition
purposes unless that person has obtained a permit from the state
authorizing such activity. This subsection shall not apply to performing
animal exhibitions or circuses. An Animal Control Officer shall have the
power to release or order the release of any wild animal capable of
surviving in the wild and/or turn such animal over to any agency
authorized by the state to house wildlife.
E. Keeping dangerous animals.
(1) No person shall permit any dangerous animal to be on any private
or public property, other than the owner's property, unless such
animal is securely muzzled or caged. Adequate safeguards shall be
taken to prevent unauthorized access to a dangerous animal on the
owner's premises by persons unlawfully on the premises.
(2) Whenever an Animal Control Officer determines upon personal
observation or investigation that an animal is a dangerous animal
as defined in this article, the officer shall notify the owner of the
animal in writing of the determination, the reasons for the
determination, and the requirements of this section regulating the
keeping of dangerous animals.
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:41
§ 103-5. Sanitary and health conditions.
All kennel operators, pet show operators, and animal shelters shall:
§ 103-6. Care and treatment of animals.
(3) Any dangerous animal running at large which constitutes a danger
to persons or property and which cannot safely be taken or
impounded may be destroyed by an Animal Control Officer,
however in all cases where the animal has seized or bitten any
person or animal with its teeth or jaws so as to cause a puncture or
abrasion of the skin, or where the animal is suspected to be rabid,
no injury should be done to the head of the animal and it is the duty
of the person slaying such animal to immediately deliver the
carcass to an Animal Control Officer or a licensed veterinarian.
F. Diseased animals. It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit a domestic
animal afflicted with a contagious disease to run at large or to be
exposed in any public place whereby the health of any other animal or
person may be affected.
G. Order to show cause why animal should not be destroyed. The Animal
Control Officer may issue a citation for a violation of this article or a
complaint may be filed in the District Court and such District Court
shall thereupon issue a summons to the owner of such animal to show
cause why the animal should not be killed or otherwise disposed of as
ordered by the Court. Upon hearing, the District Court upon finding
that one or more of the facts as set forth in this article exists, shall order
such animal to be killed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the
Court. All costs incurred for the disposition of the animal shall be paid
by the owner. Such action shall be in addition to any penalty imposed
pursuant to § 1-2.6
A. Maintain sanitary conditions in areas where animals are kept for any
period of time;
B. Provide sufficient and proper ventilation in all areas where animals are
kept for any period of time;
C. Provide adequate nutrition for all animals; and
D. Take reasonable care to prevent the transmission of disease, including
necessary veterinary care.
A. Humane care. No person shall cruelly treat, beat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse any animal. No owner of an animal shall
fail to provide such animal with sufficient and wholesome food and
6. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 14-34(h), Permitting dog to soil public or private property, of
the 2000 Code of Ordinances and added 9-17-2001 by Ord. No. 273, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 103-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 103-6
1:42
§ 103-7. Permitting dog to soil public or private property. [Amended
3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2797]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care, or control
of a dog to allow or permit such dog to soil any public or private property
other than that of the owner, keeper, custodian, or person having control of
such dog without promptly removing or disposing of, in a sanitary manner,
any of its excreta deposited by a dog upon any public or private property.
This provision shall not apply, however, to an owner who is blind or visually
impaired, if such owner's dog is a trained guide dog.
§ 103-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2798]
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for "repeated violations," which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
water, proper shelter, and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when necessary to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment.
B. Inhumane treatment. No person shall cause any animal to be subject to
cruel or inhumane treatment, including, but not limited to:
(1) The unnecessary separation of a female animal from its offspring
before such time as the offspring can survive such separation;
(2) Painting, dyeing, or otherwise coloring any animal as a novelty or
offering such animal for sale, exchange or adoption;
(3) Promoting, inciting or conducting animal fights or the intentional
killing of animals for wagering or entertainment;
(4) Keeping an animal in any container or other enclosed area without
sufficient food, water, light, ventilation and care for an
unreasonable length of time so as to cause undue discomfort or
suffering;
(5) The unnecessary killing of any species of animal except rat, mouse
or mole; and
(6) The transporting of any living animal on the running board,
fenders, hood or other outside part of any vehicle unless suitable
harness, cage or enclosure is provided so as to protect such animal
from falling or being thrown therefrom.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-8
1:43
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.9
9. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 103-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 103-8
1:44
Chapter 127
BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 196.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Water connections — See Ch. 373.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 103-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-8
1:45

ARTICLE I
Building Construction
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 127-1. Enforcing agency; administration of state standards.
[Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 325]
§ 127-2. Fees.
For purposes of the State Construction Code as adopted by this article, the
building permit and inspection fees shall be such fees as are established and
adjusted by Village Council resolution.
§ 127-3. Violations and penalties.12
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.13
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in
accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended (the "Act"),10 the Village is designated as the enforcing agency
to discharge the responsibility of the Village under the Act. The Village
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the
Act throughout its corporate limits.11
B. Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, including the
State Building Code and the State Residential Code, and in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of the Act, the Village assumes responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of the Act, including Appendix G of the
State Building Code, throughout the Village's corporate limits.
10.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1508b(6).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-3
1:47

ARTICLE II
Electrical Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. III, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 127-4. Adoption and administration of standards; enforcing
agency.14
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 [MCLA § 125.1501
et seq., MSA § 5.2949(1) et seq.], the Village accepts responsibility for
the administration and enforcement of the State Electrical Code as
promulgated by the Bureau of Construction Codes, Department of Licensing
and Regulatory Affairs, which code is adopted pursuant to the State
Construction Code; the Village is designated as the enforcing agency to
discharge the responsibilities of the Village under Public Act No. 230 of
1972 [MCLA § 125.1501 et seq., MSA § 5.2949(1) et seq.].
§ 127-5. Fees.
For purposes of the State Electrical Code as adopted by this article, the
electrical permit and inspection fees shall be such fees as are established
and adjusted by Village Council resolution.
§ 127-6. Violations and penalties.15
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.16
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
16.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 127-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-6
1:49

ARTICLE III
Plumbing Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. IV, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 127-7. Adoption and administration of standards; enforcing
agency.17
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA
§ 125.1508a), the Village accepts responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the State Plumbing Code as promulgated by the Bureau of
Construction Codes, Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, which
code is adopted pursuant to the State Construction Code; the Village is
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the
Village under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1508a).
§ 127-8. Fees.
For purposes of the State Plumbing Code as adopted by this article, the
plumbing permit and inspection fees shall be such fees as are established
and adjusted by Village Council resolution.
§ 127-9. Violations and penalties.18
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.19
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
19.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 127-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-9
1:51

ARTICLE IV
Mechanical Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. V, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 127-10. Adoption and administration of standards; enforcing
agency.20
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 [MCLA § 125.1501
et seq., MSA § 5.2949(1) et seq.], the Village accepts responsibility for
the administration and enforcement of the State Mechanical Code as
promulgated by the Bureau of Construction Codes, Department of Licensing
and Regulatory Affairs, which code is adopted pursuant to the State
Construction Code; the Village is designated as the enforcing agency to
discharge the responsibilities of the Village under Public Act No. 230 of
1972 [MCLA § 125.1501 et seq., MSA § 5.2949(1) et seq.].
§ 127-11. Fees.
For purposes of the State Mechanical Code as adopted by this article, the
mechanical permit and inspection fees shall be such fees as are established
and adjusted by Village Council resolution.
§ 127-12. Violations and penalties.21
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.22
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
22.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 127-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-12
1:53
Chapter 135
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 196.
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 202.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 135-1. Purpose and findings.
The purpose of this chapter is to control unregulated burning in the Village.
The Village has found that unregulated burning increases the risk of
property damage caused by fires and threatens the safety and well-being
of the Village's residents and other persons. The Village further finds that
greater regulation of burning is necessary because the residential density
of the Village has increased dramatically, and because smoke from open
burning, particularly burning leaves, exacerbates breathing difficulties for
many individuals. Further, other local units of government bordering the
Village and in the general area have enacted leaf-burning bans. The Village
has approved this chapter to regulate open burning throughout the Village.
§ 135-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BONFIRE — A type of recreational fire, which may be allowed in accordance
with the provisions below.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of Spring Lake Fire Department or other person
designated by the Fire Chief.
ROADWAY, SIDEWALK, STREET, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall
have the definitions given to them in the Michigan Vehicle Code, being
Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.1 et seq.).
SUPERVISING ADULT — A person who is an adult (i.e., at least 18 years of
age) and who is the person responsible to supervise a fire.
§ 135-3. Unlawful Burning.
A. No person shall ignite or otherwise cause to burn any garbage, trash,
grass clippings, brush, debris or refuse, whether animal, vegetable,
mineral, wood or synthetic in any open fire, in a bonfire, in a receptacle
§ 127-12 SPRING LAKE CODE § 135-3
1:54
or in any other manner within the lands of the Village, except as may be
permitted by Subsection B or C of this section.
B. A bonfire may be set for recreational purposes only when expressly
permitted by the Village Council.
(1) Requests for recreational bonfires shall be considered for a permit
by the Village Council if:
(a) The recreational bonfire is sponsored by governmental agency
or nonprofit corporation;
(b) The proposed site of the bonfire and safety plans have been
evaluated by the Fire Chief, or designee, and have been found
to be reasonable;
(c) A supervising adult must constantly attend the fire. The person
shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing
equipment as may be necessary for total control of the fire (i.e.,
fire extinguisher, garden hose, dirt, sand.) The fire must be
totally extinguished before the supervising adult leaves the
scene;
(d) The Fire Chief has determined that the proposed location is
safely removed from any building, structure or other material
which could ignite or which could create a public health or
safety problem due to smoke or heat;
(e) If any recreational fire or bonfire gets out of control and the
Fire Department is called, the supervising adult shall be liable
for costs incurred by the Fire Department pursuant to the cost
recovery provisions pursuant to Chapter 152.
(f) The fuel for such fire shall consist of dry wood.
(2) Requests for recreational bonfires shall be submitted to the Village
Manager in time to be reviewed in advance of submission to the
Village Council for their consideration.
C. A recreational fire may be set on private property by the owner of the
property or in specifically designated areas of public campgrounds. The
fire must be contained to an enclosed pit, fire-retaining ring or portable
outdoor fireplace and have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
(1) The fire shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or
combustible material and a supervising adult must be present at all
times. A recreational fire must be totally extinguished before the
supervising adult leaves the scene. Recreational fires are limited to
clean wood which is not rotted or rotting, or construction wood
which is not treated.
§ 135-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:55
§ 135-4. Prohibited Acts.
Subject to the provisions of § 135-3B, no person shall:
D. No person within the municipal boundaries of the Village shall ignite or
otherwise cause to burn any leaves and yard waste, and no leaves and
yard waste shall be permitted to be placed in any receptacle, or
otherwise picked up by a disposal service, for delivery to a Type II
sanitary landfill. All leaves and yard waste shall be disposed of by
utilization on the premises from which the leaves and yard waste were
gathered or otherwise in conformity with this section. Such leaves and
yard waste may at all times be placed, in accordance with a resolution
of the Village Council, directing the manner, time, place and fees for
use, in an alternative solid waste composting disposal area licensed and
maintained on behalf of the Village, in conformity with part 113 of
Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.19501 et seq., MSA 13A.19501 et
seq.) and the solid waste alternative program administrative rules
promulgated under that act.
A. Set on fire or cause to be set on fire any flammable material located on a
roadway, sidewalk, bicycle path, or any improved portion of a street;
B. Dispose of a lighted match, cigarette, cigar, ashes or other flaming or
glowing substance, or any other substance or thing that is likely to
ignite a forest, brush, or grass fire, or throw or drop from a moving
vehicle any such objects or substances;
C. Set on fire or cause to be set on fire any flammable material without
taking reasonable precautions, both before and at all times after
lighting the fire, to prevent the fire from spreading;
D. Leave a fire before it is extinguished, if the person is the supervising
adult;
E. Set a backfire or cause a backfire to be set, except under the direct
supervision of the Fire Chief;
F. Use or operate a welding torch, tar pot, or any other device which may
cause a fire outside of a building, without clearing flammable material
surrounding the operation and without taking such other reasonable
precautions necessary to ensure against the starting and spreading of
fire;
G. Operate or cause to be operated any engine, machinery or motor
vehicle not equipped with spark arresters or other suitable devices to
prevent the escape of fire or sparks;
H. Discharge or cause to be discharged a gun firing flares, incendiary or
tracer bullets or tracer charges onto or across any forest or grassland;
§ 135-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 135-4
1:56
§ 135-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
In addition to any other charges, fines or penalties for which a person
may be liable under applicable law or local ordinance, any violation of this
chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day during which any
violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. Increased civil fines may be imposed for "repeated violations,"
which means a second or subsequent municipal civil infraction violation
committed by a person within any twelve-month period and for which
a person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The
increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth in § 1-2.
Chapter 152
COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 365.
I. Engage in open burning except in compliance with this chapter, and
even with a supervising adult present, who shall be liable for costs
incurred by the Village;
J. As a supervising adult, allow an open fire to smolder;
K. As a supervising adult, allow an open fire to remain burning when wind
velocity is below three miles per hour or exceeds seven miles per hour;
or
L. Engage in any other activity which is prohibited by the terms of this
chapter.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:57

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Costs of Prosecution and Emergency Response
[Adopted 10-3-2005 by Ord. No. 285 (Ch. 74, Art. VI, of the 2000
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 152-1. Purpose.
The Village Council has determined that it is in the best interests of the
citizens of the Village to provide for the recovery of costs associated with an
emergency response and the expenses for prosecution of certain offenses
by or on behalf of the Village, as permitted by Act 372 of the Public Acts of
2000, as amended, MCLA § 769.1f et seq.
§ 152-2. Costs of prosecution and/or emergency response for
certain offenses.
A. Following conviction of any of the following offenses, the person
convicted shall reimburse the Village for the expenses of prosecuting
that person, as provided in this section:
(1) A violation or attempted violation of Section 601d, 625(1), (3), (4),
(5), (6) or (7), Section 625m or Section 626(3) or (4) of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA §§ 257.601d, 257.625,
257.625m, and 257.626, or of a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to Section 601d(1), 625(1), (3) or (6) or Section
625m or 626 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA
§§ 257.601d, 257.625, 257.625m and 257.626.23
(2) Felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder, or
attempted felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or
murder, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle,
snowmobile, ORV, aircraft, vessel, or locomotive engine while the
person was impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substance, as defined in Section 7104 of the
Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.7104, or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or
had an unlawful blood alcohol content.
(3) A violation or attempted violation of Section 82127 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA
§ 324.82127.
(4) A violation or attempted violation of Section 81134 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA
§ 324.81134.24
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:59
(5) A violation or attempted violation of Section 185 of the Aeronautics
Code of the State of Michigan, 1945 PA 327, MCLA § 259.185.
(6) A violation or attempted violation of Section 80176(1), (3), (4), or
(5) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
1994 PA 451, MCLA § 324.80176, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to Section 80176(1) or (3) of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA
§ 324.80176.
(7) A violation or attempted violation of Section 353 of the Railroad
Code of 1993, 1993 PA 354, MCLA § 462.353.25
(8) A violation or attempted violation of Chapter XXXIII or Section 327,
327a, 328, or 411a(2) of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328,
MCLA §§ 750.200 to 750.212a, 750.327, 750.327a, 750.328, and
750.411a.
(9) A finding of guilt for criminal contempt for a violation of a personal
protection order issued under Section 2950 or 2950a of the Revised
Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, MCLA §§ 600.2950 and
600.2950a, or for a violation of a foreign protection order that
satisfies the conditions for validity provided in Section 2950i of the
Revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, MCLA § 600.2950i.
B. The expenses for which reimbursement may be obtained under this
article include all of the following:
(1) The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement
personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which the
conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the
person after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident,
investigating the incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence,
including, but not limited to, determining bodily alcohol content
and determining the presence of and identifying controlled
substances in the blood, breath, or urine.
(2) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including overtime
pay, of Fire Department and emergency medical service personnel,
including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical
service personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing
firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to
the incident from which the conviction arose.
(3) The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by Fire Department
and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer
firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in
providing services in relation to the incident from which the
conviction arose.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 152-2
1:60
§ 152-3. Imposition of costs by court.26
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit or restrict the Ottawa County
Circuit Court, the Ottawa County District Court, or the Ottawa County
Juvenile Court from imposing the costs of prosecution as part of a sentence
following conviction of any of the offenses listed in § 152-2A, as authorized
by MCLA § 769.1f(1); provided, however, that neither the Village nor the
county shall be fully reimbursed more than once for the expenses incurred
in the prosecution of an offense.
§ 152-4. Procedures for determination and recovery of costs.27
The costs of prosecution for the offenses listed in § 152-2A shall be
determined and recovered in the following manner.
(4) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including, but not
limited to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel for time spent
investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes resulting in
conviction.
(5) The cost of extraditing a person from another state to this state,
including, but not limited to, all of the following:
(a) Transportation costs; and
(b) The salaries or wages of law enforcement and prosecution
personnel, including overtime pay, for processing the
extradition and returning the person to this state.
(6) An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced by
the prosecuting attorney or the state or local unit of government
named in the order to receive the reimbursement in the same
manner as a judgment in a civil action.
A. Charge against person. The expenses incurred by the Village as a result
of a prosecution for an offense set forth in § 152-2A shall be charged to
the person liable for the expenses under the terms of this article. The
charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the Village
in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract,
expressed or implied.
B. Cost recovery schedule. The Village Council may, by resolution, adopt a
schedule of costs specifying the expenses associated with a prosecution
of an offense set forth in § 152-2A, or may recover actual costs. Any
schedule adopted pursuant to this section shall be available to the
public from the Village Clerk/Treasurer or his/her designee. The
schedule adopted by the Village Council may be a flat fee based on a
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-4
1:61
§ 152-5. Conflict with criminal provisions; coordination of collection
efforts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or
reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines imposed by a
court for any criminal offense under Michigan law. If recovery of the costs
of prosecution are required as part of a criminal sentence, the Village Clerk/
Treasurer shall work with the relevant court to coordinate recovery of the
cost of prosecution.
study of the average of costs sustained in making a prosecution for the
listed offense.
C. Billing. The Village Clerk/Treasurer, or his/her designee, may, within 10
days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for a
prosecution and conviction, submit a bill for the costs by first-class mail
or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated
under this article. The bill(s) shall require full payment in 30 days from
the date of mailing or personal service.
D. Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person
described in this article as liable for the expense of a prosecution for an
offense listed in § 152-2A, to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall
be considered a default. In case of default, the Village may commence a
civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law, or may
contract with a collection agency to recover said expenses and costs in
the name of the Village.
§ 152-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 152-5
1:62
Chapter 168
FERTILIZERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 202.
Groundwater use — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 168-1. Legislative findings.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings stated respectively in this section.
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR — Any individual or entity that applies
manufactured fertilizer in the Village in exchange for money or other
valuable consideration.
INSTITUTIONAL APPLICATOR — Any individual or entity that applies
manufactured fertilizers for the purpose of maintaining turf areas.
"Institutional applicator" shall include, but is not limited to, owners of
lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business
properties and residential properties maintained in condominium and/or
common ownership. However, an "institutional applicator" shall not include
an owner of individual parcels of land used for a single-family dwelling or
agricultural purposes in any residential district under the terms of Chapter
390, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake.
A. Based upon scientific studies and general knowledge, the Village
Council has determined that phosphorus, which is contained in most
manufactured fertilizers, when used within the Village, enters into the
Village water resources, resulting in excessive and accelerated growth
of algae and aquatic plants. The Village Council has therefore
determined that it is necessary and in the public interest to regulate the
application of manufactured fertilizers containing phosphorous within
the Village.
B. It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to require licensure of
commercial and institutional applicators of manufactured fertilizers
within the Village.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:63
MANUFACTURED FERTILIZER — A commercially manufactured
substance, which enriches the soil and contains elements desirable for turf
growth.
TURF — A covering of grass vegetation, which has both aesthetic and
functional benefits, maintained at a given level of management.
§ 168-3. Prohibition on phosphorus fertilizers in Village.
No manufactured fertilizer containing any amount of anhydric phosphoric
acid shall be applied on lawns or other turf areas within the Village.
However, this section shall not apply to the application of fertilizer for the
purpose of improving the yield of crops for other purposes pertaining to
agricultural production on a farm.
§ 168-4. Exceptions.
§ 168-5. License required for commercial and institutional
applicators; procedures.
A. The prohibition of phosphorus fertilizers shall not apply to any lots or
parcels of land for which the State Department of Agriculture has
determined, based on tests and soil samples, that anhydric phosphoric
acid is required to maintain turf in a healthy condition. Any commercial
or institutional applicator or homeowner who claims this exception
shall submit a copy of the determination made by the Department of
Agriculture to the Village Zoning Administrator.
B. Regardless of any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, a
homeowner, or a commercial applicator working for a homeowner, may
obtain approval to use phosphorous fertilizer on the homeowner's
property, provided the homeowner or applicator submits to the Village
Zoning Administrator and the Village Zoning Administrator approves a
laboratory analysis of the soil on the property, indicating that the soil
requires phosphorous fertilizer in order to be usable for turf-growing
purposes.
(1) Lab analysis conducted for this purpose shall be performed by an
independent source, such as, but not limited to, the Michigan State
University Extension Service.
(2) If the use of phosphorous fertilizer is approved under this
subsection, the resulting application of the phosphorous fertilizer
shall be conducted so as to use only that amount of phosphorous
fertilizer indicated in the lab analysis as being sufficient to render
the soil usable for turf-growing purposes.
C. Approvals granted under this section shall be valid for one growing
season only.
§ 168-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 168-5
1:64
§ 168-6. Violations and penalties; enforcement.28
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.29
A. All commercial and institutional applicators shall be licensed in good
standing by the Village before they apply manufactured fertilizers on
any lands in the Village.
B. A license issued under this chapter shall be valid until expiration,
suspension, or revocation. Licenses shall expire two years from the date
of issuance but may be renewed for additional two-year periods.
C. To secure a license, a commercial or institutional applicator shall
complete and submit to the Village Clerk/Treasurer a license
application. The license application shall include the following:
(1) Legal and business name, address, telephone number and contact
person of the applicant;
(2) Name, address, and description of institutional applicator property,
if applicable, including the use, area and dimensions of the
property; and
(3) A copy of the applicant's material safety data sheet (MSDS).
D. The applicant shall sign the application where indicated, and the
signature shall serve as an attestation that the applicant has read this
chapter in its entirety and agrees to comply with all of its provisions.
E. Upon submission of an application, the applicant shall pay any fee
established by the Village Council.
F. The Village Zoning Administrator shall review the completed
application and determine whether the manufactured fertilizers to be
used comply with the provisions of this chapter.
G. If the application is complete, and if the proposed use of manufactured
fertilizer would comply with the terms of this chapter, a numbered
license shall be issued. The license shall expire two years from the date
of issuance.
H. The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a list of all currently licensed
commercial and institutional applicators.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-7
1:65
§ 168-7. Appeals.
Any homeowner or applicator of manufactured fertilizer aggrieved by a
decision made by the Zoning Administrator under this chapter shall have
the right to appeal to the Village Council.
Chapter 177
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Cost recovery — See Ch. 152.
Fireworks — See Ch. 183.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 196.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
A. The appeal shall be commenced by filing with the Village Clerk a
written statement containing the specific reasons for the appeal within
30 days following the date of the decision being appealed. The timely
filing of an appeal shall have the effect of staying any license issued
under this chapter pending the outcome of the appeal.
B. The Village Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting. The
Council shall affirm, affirm with conditions or reverse the decision or
determination being appealed, consistent with the terms of this
chapter.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 168-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 168-7
1:66
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-18-2013 by Ord. No. 33230 (Ch. 34, Art. III, of the 2000
Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 9-17-2018 by Ord. No.
349]
§ 177-1. Adoption of standards; availability of document.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer, being marked and designated as the International
Fire Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters B through I (see
International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the
International Code Council, and the NFPA 303, Fire Protection Standard
for Marinas and Boatyards, 2016 Edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, Inc., are adopted as the fire code of the Village,
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the fire code on file in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer
are referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any
prescribed in this article.
§ 177-2. Amendments to standards.
The following sections of the fire code are revised as indicated.
A. Section 101.1, Title: "the Village of Spring Lake" shall be inserted.
B. Section 105.1.1 is amended as follows:
105.1.1. Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be
obtained from the fire code official, or other Village official designated
by the fire code official. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to
issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for
inspection by the fire code official.
C. Section 108.1 is amended as follows:
30.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided that this article and the adopted fire
code should not be construed to affect any pending suit or proceeding nor to affect or
impair any just or legal right or remedy. A complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 177-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-2
1:67
108.1. Board of Appeals established. In order to hear and decide
appeals of orders, decisions or terminations made by the fire code
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there
shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals appointed by the Village
pursuant to the Michigan Building Code. The fire code official shall
be an ex official member of said Board but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board.
D. Section 108.2 is amended as follows:
108.2. Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall
be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or
safety is proposed.
E. Section 108.3, Qualifications, shall be eliminated.
F. Section 109.4 is amended as follows:
109.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or resist the enforcement of this
article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
§ 1-2. Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations,
which means the second or subsequent municipal civil infraction
violation committed by a person within any twelve-month period and
for which a person admits responsibility or is determined to be
responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth in
§ 1-2.
G. Section 111.4, Failure to comply: "$250" and "$500" shall be inserted.
H. Section 307, Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor
Fireplaces, shall be eliminated in its entirety, and said open burning
shall be subject to this Code (specifically Chapter 135, Burning, Open,
as amended).
I. Sections 315.3.1 and 315.3.2 shall be eliminated.
J. Section 315.4 is amended as follows:
315.4. Outside storage. Outside storage of combustible material
shall not be located within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of a property line or
within 20 feet (6,096 mm) or any structure.
K. Section 5704.2.9.61 is amended as follows.
§ 177-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 177-2
1:68
5704.2.9.61 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
(Geographical limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids
in above ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): within any
residential zoning district in the Village, or any nonagricultural zoned
lot upon which a dwelling is located.
L. Section 5706.2.4.4 is amended as follows:
5706.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
(Geographical limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids
in above ground tanks is prohibited): within any residential zoning
district in the Village, or any nonagricultural zoned lot upon which a
dwelling is located.
M. Section 5806.2 is amended as follows:
5806.2 Limitations. (Geographical limits in which the storage of
flammable Cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited):
within any residential zoning district in the Village, or any
nonagricultural zoned lot upon which a dwelling is located.
N. Section 6104.2 is amended as follows:
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits.
(Geographical limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas
is restricted from the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas): within any residential zoning district in the Village, or any
nonagricultural zoned lot upon which a dwelling is located.
§ 177-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-2
1:69
Chapter 183
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 249.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 183-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — That term as defined in Section 1d of the Michigan
Vehicle Code, being Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.1, et seq.).
APA STANDARD 87-1 — 2001 APA Standard 87-1, standard for construction
and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical
pyrotechnics, as published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of
Bethesda, Maryland.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Fireworks that are designed to produce visible
effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United
States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and
1507, as amended, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1: 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or
3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — That term as defined in section 8b of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1, et
seq.).
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device, except a starting pistol, a flare
gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing visible or audible
effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — "Ground and handheld sparkling devices" as
that phrase is defined in APA standard 87-1: 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
§ 183-2. Ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks.
A. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks except
on the following days after 11:00 a.m.:
(1) December 31 until 11:00 a.m. on January 1.
(2) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day
until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
§ 177-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 183-2
1:70
§ 183-3. Possession of consumer fireworks by a minor.
A minor shall not possess, ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks.
§ 183-4. Prohibited conduct.
§ 183-5. Determination of violation; seizure.
If a law enforcement officer determines that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the
violation.
§ 183-6. Local, state, and federal requirements.
Nothing contained within this chapter shall be construed to relieve a person
of any duties and obligations imposed under any local, state, or federal laws,
rules, regulations, licenses, or permit requirements.
§ 183-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction with a civil fine of $1,000 for each violation of the
(3) June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
(4) July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.
(5) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
B. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks if the
environmental concerns based on the Department of Natural Resources
Fire Division criteria are elevated to extreme fire conditions or if the
environmental concerns based on the Department of Natural
Resources, Fire Division criteria are elevated to very high for 72
consecutive hours and the commanding officer of the Fire Department,
in consultation with the department of natural resources, enforces a no
burning restriction that includes a ban on the ignition, discharge, and
use of consumer fireworks. If a no burning restriction is instituted
under this section, the commanding officer of the Fire Department
enforcing the restriction shall ensure that adequate notice of the
restriction is provided to the public.
A. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on
public property, school property, church property, or the property of any
another person without that organization's or person's express
permission to use those consumer fireworks on those premises.
B. A person shall not use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks
while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or
a combination thereof.
§ 183-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:71
article. $500 of the fine collected under the chapter shall be remitted to the
local law enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the chapter.
Chapter 189
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Historic conservation — See Ch. 215.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 189-1. Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the Village are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures
for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood
losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains,
causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in
flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood or hazardous to other lands
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damages.
§ 189-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to significantly reduce hazards to persons
and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in the Village,
and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and subsequent enactments and all
applicable rules and regulations promulgated in the furtherance of this
program as they may be further amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 189-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
§ 183-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-3
1:72
§ 189-4. Definitions.
For purposes of interpretation, administration and enforcement of this
chapter only, and in order to comport with the federal regulations
designated in § 189-2, the terms below shall be defined as follows:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
the Village, as determined by the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in
§ 189-6 subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as determined by the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 189-6.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An Official Map of the Village on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
Village.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well
as the Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface
waters from any source.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and most often undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in floodplains;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 189-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:73
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that will discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the Village's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which construction started after
May 25, 1978.
SAND DUNES — The naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above the
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
§ 189-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-4
1:74
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repairs, reconstruction or
improvement, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure, either before the improvement or repair is started or, if
the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does
not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure
required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter; a modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
when the strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship
owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the
variance is granted, the crucial points of variance being undue hardship,
unique circumstances, and applying to property. A variance is not justified
unless all these elements are present in the case. A variance shall not be
considered an exception.
§ 189-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village.
§ 189-6. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas.
[Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 325]
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Ottawa
County, Michigan (all Jurisdictions)" and dated December 16, 2011. This
study, along with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
panel numbers 26139C; 0079E, 0083E, 0087E, and 0091E and dated
December 16, 2011, and the Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps, are adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter and part of Section
1612.3 of the State Building Code, and declared to provide the content
of the "flood hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the State Residential
Code. The Flood Insurance Study, Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary-Floodway Maps are on file at the Village Hall at 102 West Savidge
Street, Spring Lake, Michigan.
§ 189-7. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 189-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-8
1:75
§ 189-8. Compliance.
No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
§ 189-9. Abrogation and greater restriction.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 189-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 189-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and may occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights can be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village or any officer, employee or agent of the Village for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made under this chapter.
§ 189-12. Designation of administrator.
The Village Manager or the designee of either the Village Manager or the
Village Council shall administer and implement and enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 189-13. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
The duties of the administrator shall include but are not limited to:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the Village Council;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. Reviewing all development permits to ensure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
§ 189-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-13
1:76
B. Reviewing permits for proposed development to ensure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
C. Notifying adjacent communities and the department of natural
resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
D. Ensuring, through administration and enforcement of this chapter, that
the altered or relocated portion of a watercourse is properly maintained
so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
E. Verifying and recording the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or of
substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures
contain a basement;
F. Verifying and recording the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed;
G. Obtaining certification of proper floodproofing from a registered
professional engineer or architect when floodproofing is utilized for a
particular structure;
H. Making the necessary interpretation as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions); and the person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this chapter;
I. Reviewing the base flood elevation data submitted with all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which
contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less;
J. Obtaining, reviewing and reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source,
including data developed pursuant to Subsection I of this section, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements
or other developments meet the standards of §§ 189-19 and 189-20 and
for administering the provisions of §§ 189-19 and 189-20;
K. Maintaining the records of all appeal actions and reporting any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request; and
L. Maintaining all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter in
the Village Hall and keeping such records open for public inspection.
§ 189-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-14
1:77
§ 189-14. Permit procedures.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 189-6.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator
on forms furnished by the administrator and must include, but are not
limited to, the following plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 189-15. Variance procedures.
A. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
B. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential
structure has been floodproofed;
C. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing
criteria of this chapter; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Village, shall hear
and decide all requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
B. In passing upon applications for variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and shall further
consider:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands creating
further destruction and injury to persons or property;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the Village;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
§ 189-14 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-15
1:78
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
C. Upon consideration of the 11 factors listed in Subsection B of this
section and the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
D. Generally, variances may, in the discretion of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, be issued for new construction and substantial improvements
to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the 11 factors listed in Subsection B have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
E. Variances shall not be issued within any floodway that would result in
an increase of greater than 9/10 of a foot in flood levels during the base
flood discharge.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
G. Variances shall only be granted, in addition to the guidelines contained
in § 189-15B, upon:31
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public; or conflict with other laws or
ordinances.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-15
1:79
§ 189-16. Appeals procedure.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, upon receipt of a written appeal by an
aggrieved person, shall hear and decide all appeals when it is alleged
that there is an error in any requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination made by the administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the County Circuit
Court.
§ 189-17. Enforcement procedures.
The Village Council, the duly authorized attorney for the Village, the
prosecuting attorney for the county, or any owner or occupant of any real
estate within the Village may institute an injunction, mandamus, abatement
or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or
remove any violation of this chapter. The rights and remedies provided in
this section are accumulative in addition to all other remedies provided by
law.
§ 189-18. Violations and penalties.32
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.33
§ 189-19. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following general provisions shall
apply and shall be required:
H. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
I. Variances may, in the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, be
issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory
of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this
section.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
33.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 189-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-19
1:80
§ 189-20. Specific standards for flood hazard reductions.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 189-6 or 189-13I, the following specific
provisions shall apply and shall be required:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the compartments during conditions of flooding.
E. For all new construction and substantial improvements, any fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
F. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
G. All new and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharges from the system into floodwaters.
H. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 189-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-20
1:81
A. Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural designs, specifications and plans
for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction satisfy the standards of this subsection. A record of such
certification, including the specific elevation in relation to mean sea
level to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be provided to
and maintained by the administrator.
C. Manufactured homes. No manufactured home shall be placed in a
floodway, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
All developers of manufactured home parks or subdivisions located
within an area of special flood hazard shall file an evacuation plan
indicating alternative access and escape routes with the Federal
Disaster Assistance Administration. All manufactured homes to be
placed or substantially improved within such existing manufactured
home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or
above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system. All manufactured homes shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by
providing over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors or by other
anchoring techniques provided for in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency manual entitled "Manufactured Home Installation
in Flood Hazard Areas." Specific requirements shall be as follows:
(1) If over-the-top ties are used, they shall be provided at each of the
four corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties per
side at intermediate locations. Manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require only one additional tie per side.
(2) If frame ties are used, they shall be provided at each corner of the
manufactured home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate locations. Manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
require only four additional ties per side.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
§ 189-20 SPRING LAKE CODE § 189-20
1:82
(4) Any additions to the manufactured home shall be anchored in the
same manner and to the same extent as the principal manufactured
home.
D. New manufactured home parks and subdivisions and expansions to
existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. With respect to
new manufactured home parks and subdivisions, with respect to
existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions where the repair,
reconstruction, expansion or improvement of the streets, utilities, and
pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction, expansion or improvement has
commenced, and with respect to manufactured homes not being placed
in a manufactured home park and subdivision, specific requirements
shall be as follows:
(1) Stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, on pilings or by
other elevation techniques provided for in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency manual, entitled "Manufactured Home
Installation in Flood Hazard Areas," so that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood level.
(2) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be
provided.
(3) Where pilings are used for elevation purposes, lots shall be large
enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable
soil no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement shall be
provided for pilings more than six feet above ground level. With
respect to existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions
which are being expanded or improved, these requirements shall
apply only in the expanded or improved portion.
E. Subdivision proposals. All subdivision proposals (including proposals
for new manufactured home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following
specific requirements:
(1) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision parcels shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
F. Designated floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 189-6 are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area because of the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
§ 189-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-20
1:83
Chapter 196
FURNACES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 196-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Village of Spring Lake due to the air pollution from
outdoor wood-burning furnaces.
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING FURNACE —
potential, encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be prohibited unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachment will not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
G. Undesignated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in § 189-6 are areas in which elevation has been
designated but no floodway has been delineated. In such areas, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than 9/10 foot at any point
within the Village.
Any device or structure that:
Is designed, intended, or used to provide heat and/or hot water to
any residence or other structure;
(1)
(2) Operates by the burning of wood or other solid fuel; and
Is not located within a residential or other structure for which it
provides heat.
(3)
A.
§ 189-20 SPRING LAKE CODE § 196-2
1:84
§ 196-3. Outdoor wood-burning furnaces prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to install or operate an outdoor wood-burning furnace,
and to cause or permit the installation or operation of an outdoor woodburning
furnace within the Village.
§ 196-4. Conflict with other provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed as an exemption or exception to any
other provision of this Code, including the construction codes, property
maintenance code, fire prevention codes,34 Chapter 390, Zoning, or any
other code or ordinance. In the event of a conflict between the provisions
of this chapter and any other ordinance or other provision of law, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
§ 196-5. Existing uses.
This chapter shall not apply to any outdoor wood-burning furnace that was
installed, connected, and operating as of the effective date of this chapter.
However, this chapter shall not be deemed as specific authorization for
the use of any preexisting outdoor wood-burning furnace and shall not be
deemed to bar, limit, or otherwise affect the rights of any person to take
private legal action regarding damage to nuisance caused by the use of
an outdoor wood-burning furnace. If a preexisting outdoor wood-burning
furnace is converted, moved to a new location within the same property, is
adapted to service additional structures or is otherwise changed, it will be
construed to be a newly installed furnace, and this chapter shall apply in its
entirety.
§ 196-6. Violations as nuisance.
Any outdoor wood-burning furnace installed or operated in violation of this
chapter is hereby declared to be nuisance per se.
§ 196-7. Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisances.
Excluded from the definition of an "outdoor wood-burning furnace" is
any device which is not designed or used to heat a structure other than
the structure in which it is located.
B.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity
which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject
to fines, costs, and other relief as provided for in Chapter 25, Municipal
Civil Infractions, of this Code. Each day that a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate and additional violation.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 127, Building Regulations; Ch. 263, Property Maintenance; and
Ch. 177, Fire Prevention.
§ 196-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-7
1:85
Chapter 202
GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Fertilizers — See Ch. 168.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 202-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
NOXIOUS GROWTH — The growth of grass, weeds, brush, noxious weeds
or other rank vegetation to a greater height than 10 inches on the average,
or an accumulation of dead weeds, grass, brush or leaves.
NOXIOUS WEEDS — Includes Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders
(any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian
mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carata),
B. In addition to any other penalties or remedies available, the Village is
authorized and empowered to direct the property owner to remove or
otherwise abate the nuisance. If such notice is given, it shall be in
writing, addressed to the property owner as it appears on the latest ad
valorem property tax assessment roll, or current owner if such is
different and known to the Village, and be mailed via first class or
posted at the property in violation, and shall inform the property owner
of the nature of the violation/nuisance and the date by which the
violation/nuisance must be abated.
C. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, the Village or its authorized contractor, or
other designee, is authorized and empowered to enter the property
owner's property to abate the nuisance, or to provide and to make
payment for the abatement of the nuisance maintained.
D. When the Village abates a nuisance as provided herein, the cost of any
abatement, including legal expenses and the authorized administrative
fee will be billed to the property owner. The cost and fee will be a debt
of the property owner to the Village, which shall constitute a lien
against the property, including interest, until paid, and enforced and
collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes.
§ 196-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 202-1
1:86
bindweed (Convolvulus arvenis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvenis),
hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), giant hogweed (Heracleum
mantegazzianum, ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus
toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicondendron vermis), oxeyes daisies,
ragweed, goldenrod, or other plant which is recognized as deleterious to
health, safety, or public welfare and recognized as common nuisance.35
OWNER — Any natural person, firm, or corporation, as determined by the
last local tax assessment records.
RECEIPT OF WRITTEN NOTICE — The date on which a notice was
deposited in the United States Mails bearing proper address and postage.36
§ 202-2. Unlawful to permit noxious growth; nuisance.
No owner, or the agent of an owner, of any real property within the Village
shall cause or permit to grow on such real property, or upon any sidewalk
abutting the property, or upon that portion of any street or alley adjacent
to the property between the property line and the curb or traveled portion
of such street or alley, any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation
to a greater height than 10 inches on the average or any accumulation of
dead weeds, grass, or brush, being a noxious growth. The presence of such
noxious growth upon the real property is deemed to be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, and shall constitute a public nuisance.
§ 202-3. Notice to destroy.
Upon a determination that a violation of this chapter exists, the Village
Manager or the Village Manager's designated representative is authorized
and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner or the agent of the owner
of any real property within the Village that such owner or agent is deemed
to be in violation of this chapter and that such owner or agent is required
to cut, destroy, trim and/or remove any noxious weeds or noxious growth
within five days after receipt of written notice. Such notice shall be by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or agent of
the owner of any real property where noxious weeds or noxious growth are
found to be growing at the owner's or agent's last known address, and shall
be accompanied by a copy of this chapter.
§ 202-4. Action upon noncompliance; costs.
A. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent notified
pursuant to § 202-3 to cut, destroy, trim and/or remove noxious weeds
or noxious growth growing upon such owner's property or upon any
sidewalk abutting the property, or upon that portion of any street or
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
36.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 30-112, Unlawful to permit noxious weeds; nuisance, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 263, § 263-7D, regarding Section 302.4, Weeds, of
the International Property Maintenance Code.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-4
1:87
§ 202-5. Violations and penalties.37
In addition to any other charges, fines or penalties for which a person
may be liable under § 202-4 or applicable law or local ordinance, any
violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, subject
to § 1-2, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day during
which any violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense. Increased civil fines may be imposed for “repeated
violations,” which means a second or subsequent municipal civil infraction
violation committed by a person within any twelve-month period and for
which a person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The
increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth in § 1-2.
§ 202-6. Authorized Village official.
The Village Manager or his or her designee, the Chief of Police of the Village
of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg Police Department, officers of the Police
Department, and any other individuals who may be appointed by resolution
of the Village Council are designated as authorized Village officials to issue
municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear
in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged
alley adjacent to the property between the property line and the curb or
traveled portion of any street or alley within five days after the receipt
of the written notice provided for in § 202-3, the Village Manager
or the Village Manager's designated representative is authorized and
empowered to enter upon such lands to effect the cutting, trimming,
destruction and/or removal of such noxious weeds or such noxious
growth.
B. When the Village has effected the cutting, trimming, destruction and/or
removal of such noxious weeds or noxious growth, the Village shall have
a lien upon the real property in the minimum amount of $100 per lot or
its equivalent; and the actual costs shall be a lien against the real
property and shall be reported to the Assessing Officer of the Village,
who shall assess the costs against the property from which the noxious
weeds or noxious growth were cut, trimmed, destroyed and/or
removed.
C. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears
upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the
amount of such costs by first-class mail, at the owner's and/or party's in
the interest last known address. If such owner or party fails to pay the
costs within 30 days after mailing by the Deputy Clerk/Treasurer of the
notice in the amount of costs, the Deputy Clerk/Treasurer shall add the
costs to the next tax roll of the Village; and the costs shall be collected
in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection
of taxes by the Village.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 202-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 202-6
1:88
violators to appear at the Village Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) as
provided by Chapter 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
Chapter 208
GROUNDWATER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Water — See Ch. 373.
§ 208-1. Findings.
The Village Council finds that the use of certain groundwater wells and
water supplies from such wells for human consumption or other purposes
may constitute a public health risk and endanger the safety of the residents
of the Village. The identified public health risk affects premises that are
located on or in the vicinity of sites that are the source or location of
contaminated groundwater, or where there is a known and identified threat
of contaminated groundwater from a release. The Village has determined it
is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to prohibit
certain uses of groundwater from wells at properties located in the vicinity
of such contaminated sites.
§ 208-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this chapter.
AFFECTED PREMISES — A parcel of property any part of which is located
within a restricted zone.
APPLICANT — A person who applies for the establishment of a restricted
zone and accompanying regulations pursuant to this chapter.
CONTAMINATED GROUNDWATER — Groundwater in which there is
present concentrations of materials that exceed the residential drinking
water criteria established by the MDEQ in operational memoranda or rules
promulgated pursuant to Part 201, Environmental Remediation (MCLA
§ 324.20101 et seq.), or Part 213, Leaking Underground Storage Tanks
(MCLA § 324.21301a et seq.), of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, MCLA § 324.101 et seq.,
dependent upon whether the release is regulated pursuant to Part 201 or
Part 213.
GROUNDWATER — Underground water within the zone of saturation.
§ 202-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-2
1:89
MDEQ — The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or its
successor agency.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, corporation, association, club,
joint venture, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a
unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
RELEASE — A "release" as defined in Part 201, Environmental Remediation
(MCLA § 324.20101 et seq.), or Part 213, Leaking Underground Storage
Tanks (MCLA § 324.21301a et seq.), of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, MCLA § 324.101
et seq., dependent upon whether an underground storage tank is involved.
RESTRICTED ZONE — An area or areas described within §§ 208-3 and
208-4 within which the prohibition of groundwater wells and the use of
groundwater applies.
RRD — Remediation and Redevelopment Division of MDEQ.
WATER BUREAU — The Drinking Water and Radiologic Protection Division
of the MDEQ, or its successor agency.
WELL — An opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing
freshwater through nonmechanical or mechanical means for any purpose
other than a public emergency or conducting response actions that are
consistent with the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,38 or other
applicable statute.
§ 208-3. Established restricted zones.
The following described areas in the Village shall be restricted zones under
this chapter. They may be referred to by reference to the names provided in
the caption preceding their descriptions.
A. West End Redevelopment Area Restricted Zone. An area described as
commencing at the point of intersection of the northerly bank of the
Grand River with the easternmost edge of the east bank of Spring Lake,
then northerly along that east bank to the east right-of-way line of Rex
Street, then southerly along the east right-of-way line of Rex Street to
the northerly right-of-way line of Liberty Street, then easterly along the
northern right-of-way line of Liberty Street to the east right-of-way line
of Cutler Street, then southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of
Cutler Street to the northern bank of the Grand River and then westerly
along the northern bank of the Grand River to the southernmost edge of
the east bank of Spring Lake, to the point of commencement.
(Corrected 10-18-2004)
B. Barbers Addition Area Restricted Zone. An area described as
commencing at the north line of Liberty Street and the east line of
38.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.101 et seq.; 42 U.S.C.A. § 9601 et seq.; 42 U.S.C.A. § 6901 et
seq., respectively.
§ 208-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 208-3
1:90
§ 208-4. Adding new restricted zones.
The Village Council may amend this chapter to add new restrictive zones in
accordance with the following procedure.
Cutler Street, thence east to the east line of Park Street, thence south
to the north line of Savidge Street, thence east to the east line of
Division Street, thence south to the Grand River, thence westerly along
the Grand River to the east line of Cutler Street, thence north to the
point of beginning.
A. An applicant shall first file a request with the Village Manager advising
the Village of the applicant's interest in establishing a restricted zone
pursuant to this chapter. The notice shall describe the proposed
boundaries of the proposed restricted zone, the reason for the proposed
restricted zone, a preliminary map of the proposed restricted zone, the
proposed time schedule for implementing the proposed restricted zone,
and the proposed groundwater use restrictions to be applicable within
the restricted zone. The Village Manager will, after notifying the Village
Council of the notice of intent, respond to the applicant with a
preliminary and nonbinding indication of the Village's willingness to
consider the proposed restricted zone. The Village Manager or other
designated Village officer may also be an applicant for purposes of
initiating this procedure.
B. The applicant shall seek and obtain the MDEQ's approval of the
proposed restricted zone and proposed groundwater use restrictions to
be applicable therein prior to filing an application with the Village. In
order to be considered by the Village, the restricted zone must
minimize or eliminate the need for restrictive covenants on property
that is not owned or operated by and is not subject to remediation by a
party responsible for the contaminated groundwater. The creation of a
restricted zone should have the effect of eliminating the need for
nonresponsible parties to impose environmental restrictive covenants
on their property or otherwise be beneficial to the owners or occupants
of property that was not the site of a release.
C. If any premises, which will be subject to the new restricted zone, are
not already served by Village water service, the applicant shall assure
such service is, if it is possible from any engineering perspective to do
so, served with Village water service at no cost to the property owners
or occupant. The applicant shall have to assure such service is
provided. The applicant shall also provide for the abandonment and
plugging of nonconforming wells on any affected premises without cost
to the owners or occupants of the premises and in compliance with
§ 208-8. Proof of the provision of such service and plugging/
abandonment of such wells shall be required or an escrow account shall
be established therefor in an amount and form acceptable to the Village
Council.
§ 208-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-4
1:91
D. After the MDEQ approves the proposed restricted zone as an
alternative to restrictive covenants on property on which no release has
occurred, an applicant shall file with the Village Manager a formal
request to the Village including, at a minimum, the following
information, together with an escrow deposit as required under this
section. The information can be in the form of a proposed remedial
action plan (RAP), corrective action plan (CAP), or other similar
document if appropriate cross-references are made for ease of
reference.
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant, as well as
each person having an interest as owner, tenant, easement holder
or mortgagee in the real property which is the source or site of the
contaminated groundwater, if known.
(2) The street address and legal description of the real property which
is a source or site of the contaminated groundwater, if known, and
the nature of the applicant's relationship to that property and
involvement concerning the contaminated groundwater.
(3) The nature and extent of the contaminated groundwater and the
contamination causing it, both in summary form in plain English,
and in detail in technical terms, stating the types and
concentrations of contaminants; a map or survey showing their
current location; a statement of their likely or anticipated impact
on groundwater and the nature of the risks presented by the use of
the groundwater, as well as the likely or anticipated path of
migration if not remediated or corrected and a detailed statement
of any plan to remediate, correct, and/or contain the
contamination.
(4) A detailed map and legal description of the proposed restricted
zone.
(5) The street addresses and general description of all affected
premises.
(6) The names, addresses (mailing and street), and phone numbers (if
readily available) of all persons with an interest as owner, tenant,
easement holder or mortgagee of all affected premises,
(7) The location, current status, and usage characteristics of all
existing groundwater wells within the proposed restricted zone.
(8) A detailed statement or description of the proposed regulation or
prohibition of the use of existing and future wells within the
restricted zone needed to adequately protect the public from the
potential health hazards associated with the contaminated
groundwater, including a description of permissible uses of such
wells, together with the written consent of the MDEQ to such uses
of groundwater.
§ 208-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 208-4
1:92
(9) A description and time schedule for any actions the applicant will
take to implement any remediation plan, mitigate the adverse
impact of the restricted zone (e.g., providing substitute water
service), and to properly close and abandon any existing wells
subject to the use prohibition within the proposed restricted zone.
(10) A copy of the information submitted to the MDEQ concerning the
proposed restricted zone, along with a written statement from an
MDEQ representative with approval authority stating that the
proposed restricted zone and use regulations have received MDEQ
approval as part of the response actions for the groundwater
contamination. The MDEQ approval may be contingent upon the
Village's establishment of the proposed restricted zone pursuant to
this chapter.
(11) Copies of the notice provided to the County Health Department
concerning the restricted zones established herein, as well as
restricted zones that may be created in the future. This
documentation, accompanying regulations, and the Health
Department's written acknowledgment that it will not issue permits
for prohibited wells within the restricted zone(s) must be provided.
(12) Copies of the notices provided to the owners of affected property
together with a sworn statement that such notices were provided to
all such owners with the details of the manner in which such
notices were provided. At minimum, the notice must:
(a) Identify the sender of the notice including the sender's name,
address, contact person and telephone number;
(b) Identify the owner of the property which is the source of the
contamination or who is seeking the restricted zone including
the owner's name and the property address;
(c) State what the effects of the restricted zone will be, i.e. how
use of the groundwater will be restricted;
(d) Who can be contacted at the Village, the MDEQ and the
applicant for more information;
(e) A description of the groundwater plume and a brief description
of the nature of the contamination; and
(f) Any other information reasonably requested by the Village
Manager.
(13) A statement that the applicant agrees to pay all costs incurred by
the Village in the establishment of the proposed restricted zone,
including without limitation, reimbursement for staff time, the fees
of environmental consultants and legal counsel, the cost of
publication, any per diem or other amounts paid to public officials
for attending any special meetings, etc. This statement shall also
§ 208-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-4
1:93
consent to the placement of a lien on the applicant's premises if
the amounts due under this section are not timely paid (i.e., paid
within 30 days of the issuance by the Village of an invoice therefor).
That statement shall be in a form acceptable to the Village's legal
counsel and shall be in a form so as to be recordable in the records
of the county register of deeds.
E. Along with the application, the applicant shall pay a deposit for escrow
of the amount estimated by the Village Manager to be the costs
incurred by the Village for the establishment of the proposed restricted
zone, including without limitation reimbursement for staff time, the
fees of environmental consultants and legal counsel, the cost of
publication, any per diem or other amounts paid to public officials for
attending any special meetings, etc. The deposit shall not bear interest,
and the Village may use funds from it to pay the costs as they are
incurred, requiring the applicant to maintain a minimum balance of
$500 in that escrow account. Any failure by the applicant to maintain
the escrow as required by this provision may result in the Village's
discontinuance of its processing of the request to establish a restricted
zone and can result in the filing of a lien against the premises of the
applicant.
F. Once the Village Manager or his or her designee is satisfied that the
application is complete, the Village Manager shall place the matter on
the Village Council agenda to set a time, date, and place for a public
hearing on the application.
G. After the Village Council sets the public hearing, the applicant shall
cause a written notice of the hearing to be sent by first class mail to all
persons having an interest as owner, tenant, easement holder, or
mortgagee in any of the affected premises. The notice shall include a
brief statement regarding the application fairly designed to inform the
recipients of its main features and potential impact on the recipients in
general. The notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
The notice of hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least seven days before the hearing. The
notice shall also be mailed to the MDEQ representative who gave the
approval of the proposed restricted zone and use regulations and the
MDEQ district supervisor for the MDEQ regulatory program with
jurisdiction over the contaminated site. A copy of the notice, an affidavit
of publication and an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the Village
Manager before the hearing.
H. Upon the establishment of a new restricted zone, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall publish notice of the amendment to this chapter in the
manner required by law for ordinance amendments. The applicant shall
give notice to the owners and occupants of all property on which wells
are located of the need to close and abandon wells under this chapter as
amended.
§ 208-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 208-5
1:94
§ 208-5. Wells and groundwater use prohibited.
Except as provided in § 208-6, no person shall install or utilize, or allow,
permit, or provide for the installation or utilization of a well in any restricted
zone. Except as provided in § 208-6, no person shall use any groundwater
from any property located within a restricted zone.
§ 208-6. Exceptions to prohibition.
A person may install or utilize, or allow, permit, or provide for the
installation or utilization of, a well within the Village if any of the following
exceptions applies and the requirements of the exception are complied with:
A. Water service unavailable. If Village water service is unavailable to a
premises in the Village, any well on that premises shall be tested
annually by a laboratory that is acceptable to and for chemical
parameters specified by the Water Bureau of the MDEQ. The results of
that test shall promptly be submitted to the Water Bureau of the MDEQ
or the County Health Department for review. If the Water Bureau of the
MDEQ or the County Health Department determines that the well is
safe and suitable for use, and proof of that determination is delivered
annually to the Village, that well may be used. No split or conveyance or
property shall be effective to render Village water service unavailable.
For purposes of this provision, Village water service is unavailable only
if it is reasonably impossible from an engineering perspective to serve
the premises with Village water. This subsection shall apply only to
wells existing on the effective date of this chapter.
B. Proof of no influence. If the MDEQ determines that the use of a well is
not influenced or potentially influenced by contaminated groundwater
and further determines the use of that well will remain permanently
unaffected by the future migration of contaminated groundwater, and
proof of those determinations is delivered to the Village, the Village
Manager may execute a waiver allowing the use of the well. For
example, it is likely that wells may be installed within a restricted zone
in the Marshall Formation, which is the deep aquifer below the geologic
aquitard now known as the "Michigan Formation" provided that the
person proposing to install such a well:
(1) Uses well construction techniques (e.g., double casing) that will
maintain the integrity of the Michigan Formation and prevent the
migration of contaminants from the Glacial Outwash Aquifer
through the Michigan Formation and into the Marshall Formation;
and
(2) Submits to the Village Manager, the OCHD and RRD the proposed
well construction techniques for review and approval, prior to the
installation of the well.
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-6
1:95
§ 208-7. Water sources for human consumption.
Except as provided in § 208-6, water supply for human consumption in any
restricted zone shall be delivered only from the Village water system or
by the use of bottled water delivered or purchased in containers under
conditions approved by the State Department of Agriculture or other
appropriate agency. For the purposes of this section, the term "human
consumption" means use in food or drink intended for human ingestion,
use in food preparation or food service, use in the interior of a dwelling or
dwelling unit for household purposes, and use in any building for personal
washing.
§ 208-8. Nonconforming wells.
Any existing well, the use of which is prohibited by § 208-5, shall be plugged
or abandoned in conformance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
C. Groundwater monitoring. A well may be used for groundwater
monitoring and/or remediation as part of response activity approved by
the MDEQ.
D. Construction de-watering. A well may be used for construction dewatering,
if the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The use of the de-watering well will not result in unacceptable
exposure to contaminated groundwater, possible crosscontamination
between saturated zones, or hydrogeological effects
on contaminated groundwater plumes; and
(2) The water generated by that activity is properly handled and
disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws, rules,
regulations, permit and license requirements, orders and directives
of any governmental entity or agency of competent jurisdiction.
Any exacerbation caused by the use of the well under this exception
shall be the responsibility of the person operating the de-watering
well, as provided in Part 201 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, being MCLA § 324.20101 to
324.20142.
E. Processing activities. If the RRD of the MDEQ determines that the use
of a well for noncontact heating, cooling or processing activities will not
cause the future migration of contaminated groundwater, and proof of
that determination is delivered to the Village, the Village Manager may
execute a waiver allowing the use of the well for the permitted purposes
upon such terms and conditions that the MDEQ identifies.
F. Public emergencies. A well may be used in the event of a public
emergency.
G. Surface irrigation. Upon review and approval by the RRD of the MDEQ,
existing wells may be used for surface irrigation in restricted zones if
also permitted by Village ordinance.
§ 208-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 208-8
1:96
permit and license requirements, orders and directives of any governmental
entity or agency of competent jurisdiction, or, in the absence of an
applicable law, rule, regulation, requirement, order, directive, in
conformance with the protocol developed consistent with the American
Standards for Testing and Materials Standard No. D5299-92, as amended.
§ 208-9. Wells affecting contaminated groundwater.
Except as provided in § 208-6, no well may be used or installed at any
place in the Village if the use of the well will have the effect of causing
the migration of contaminated groundwater or a contaminated groundwater
plume to previously unimpacted groundwater, or adversely impacting any
groundwater treatment system, unless the well is part of an MDEQ or
United States Environmental Protection Agency approved groundwater
monitoring or remediation system.
§ 208-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 208-11. Building or improvement permit.
No permit for building, alteration or other required permit for a premises or
improvement thereon shall be issued by the Village for any premises found
in violation of this chapter, or where it is proposed to install or use a well in
violation of this chapter.
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any
twelve-month period and for which a person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat
violations is set forth in § 1-2.39
B. In addition, the Village may seek an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction to restrain any person from violating this chapter, including
the collection of costs and attorney fees associated with such
enforcement action. Any well in violation of this chapter is hereby
declared and deemed a nuisance, subject to abatement, and shall be
immediately taken out of service and properly and lawfully abandoned.
Any person found to be responsible for installing, permitting,
maintaining, or using such well is subject to being ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction to properly and lawfully remove or abandon
such well.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 208-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-12
1:97
§ 208-12. Notice of proposed amendment.
At least 30 days prior to any amendment or repeal of this chapter in whole
or in part, the Village shall notify the MDEQ of its intent to so act.
Chapter 215
HISTORIC CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown development — See Ch. 18.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 215-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 215-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADDITION — Any construction which increases the height or floor area of
or adds to an existing district resource.
ALTERATION — Construction, replacement or remodeling within or to a
district resource, resulting in exterior change to the structural parts, the
location of openings or the location or appearance of the district resource,
but not increasing the overall dimensions.
A. Safeguard the heritage of the Village by preserving landmarks and sites
which reflect elements of the Village's cultural, social, economic,
political or architectural history;
B. Stabilize and improve property values;
C. Foster civic beauty;
D. Strengthen the local economy;
E. Identify and promote the use of historic resources for the education,
pleasure and welfare of citizens of the Village;
F. Provide advice and/or management of public historical properties and
resources; and
G. Unify historic preservation efforts in this area.
§ 208-12 SPRING LAKE CODE § 215-2
1:98
DEMOLITION — The destruction, in whole or in part, of a district resource.
HISTORIC CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A geographically defined area
including a landmark or a group of landmarks or property which will
become a landmark if the necessary written consent is given by the owners,
created by the Village Council for the purpose of historic preservation. The
Village Council may establish more than one such historic conservation
district. Landmarks within the boundaries of an historic conservation
district are related by historical, architectural or archaeological
significance. For the purpose of clarification, however, an historic
conservation district may also consist of a single landmark unrelated to its
surroundings in historical, architectural or archaeological significance, if so
designated.
HISTORIC CONSERVATION DISTRICT COMMISSION and COMMISSION
— The member body created by the Village Council for the purpose of
fulfilling the purpose of this chapter.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION — The protection, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, repair or restoration of landmarks of historical, architectural
or archaeological significance.
LANDMARK — A site, building, structure, object, open space or feature to
be found individually or in a related group within an historic conservation
district.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Planned landmarks that are to be constructed
or placed within a designated historic conservation district. Such planned
SITE — A landmark related to important historical events, a prehistoric
or historic occupation, activity, institution or historic architectural
landmark or organization, or an architectural landmark that is ruined
or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or
archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing
architectural landmarks. Examples: historic marker, commemorative
plaque, archaeological site.
A.
BUILDING — A residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
landmark created to shelter any form of human activity. Examples:
house, courthouse, jail, barn, church, theater, hospital, office building.
B.
STRUCTURE — A landmark made up of interdependent and
interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization, often reflective
of an engineering design. Examples: bridge, dam, water tower, bell
tower.
C.
OBJECT — A landmark of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical,
architectural, archaeological or scientific value that may by nature of
design be movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.
Examples: statue, fountain, lighting fixture, sign, sundial.
D.
OPEN SPACE — A prominent or distinctive aspect, quality or
characteristic of an historic conservation district. Examples:
landscaped boulevard, brick paving, tree-lined street.
E.
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-2
1:99
new construction, because it will have a significant effect on the overall
appearance of an historic conservation district and because it will play
a role in the evolutionary growth of an historic conservation district's
streetscape, shall be treated as historic by the Commission the same as
older, existing landmarks.
PROTECTION — The act or process of applying measures designed to affect
the physical condition of a landmark by defending or guarding it from
deterioration, loss or attack, or to cover or shield it from danger or injury.
RECONSTRUCTION — The process of reproducing by new construction the
exact form and detail of a vanished landmark, or part of such landmark, as
it appeared at a specific time.
REHABILITATION — The revitalization of a landmark through the
introduction of modern mechanical systems, structural elements and
decorative features. Such modern improvements, however, should be
sympathetic to the landmark's original style, size, color and texture, and
should be reversible.
REPAIR — The maintenance of or the return to a state of utility of a
landmark.
RESTORATION — The process of accurately recovering the form and detail
of a landmark as it appeared at a particular period of time by removing later
work, replacing missing elements, and enhancing original work.
§ 215-3. Creation of Historic Conservation District Commission;
members; meetings.
A. An Historic Conservation District Commission is established. The
Commission shall consist of seven members of legal age who reside in
the Village. Members shall be appointed by the Village Council and
shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual
expenses incurred in Commission activities. Members shall be
appointed for three-year staggered terms. Subsequent appointments
shall be for three-year terms, and members shall be eligible for
reappointment.
B. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. In the absence of a quorum, any number less
than a quorum may adjourn a meeting to a later date.
C. The Commission shall take action by the affirmative vote of a majority of
its members present at a Commission meeting, provided that no motion
shall pass without at least three affirmative votes.
D. The members of the Commission shall annually select a Chairman from
among themselves. One member of the Commission shall be a duly
registered architect if one is eligible and willing to serve. Neighborhood
associations, merchants' groups, duly organized and existing
preservation societies or historical groups, and other groups with
preservation interests may also submit names to the Village Council.
§ 215-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 215-3
1:100
§ 215-4. Duties and authority of Historic Conservation District
Commission.
E. In the event of a vacancy on the Commission, an interim appointment
shall be made by the Village Council to complete the unexpired term of
such position.
F. The Commission shall meet monthly at the call of the Chairman and
shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business. All meetings of the
Commission shall be conducted in accordance with Public Act No. 267
of 1976 [MCLA § 15.261 et seq., MSA § 4.1800(1) et seq.].
A. Power to designate and protect generally. The Village Council has the
authority to designate by ordinance historic conservation districts.
Historic preservation shall be practiced in historic conservation
districts through several measures. Such measures shall include the
Commission's review of permit requests for additions, alterations,
demolitions, protection, new construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, repair, restoration and any other type of action proposed
with regard to a landmark which requires a permit. The Commission
shall be consulted prior to the moving of any landmark. The
Commission shall be given copies of all permit applications pertaining
to properties within historic conservation districts that are landmarks,
and shall offer information and assistance on historic preservation to
property owners and people living within historic conservation
districts.
B. Designation of historic conservation districts. The Commission may
investigate and recommend to the Village Council those geographical
areas in the Village it deems valuable for designation as historic
conservation districts. When and if designation of an historic
conservation district is approved by the Village Council, the
Commission shall notify the affected property owner in writing of such
designation. The designation of historic conservation districts shall be
accomplished according to § 215-5.
C. Designation of landmarks. The Commission shall designate appropriate
property within historic conservation districts as landmarks; however,
no property shall be designated as a landmark without the written
consent of the owner of record. Furthermore, once such written
consent is given, it may not be revoked unless the landmark is first
removed from the historic conservation district according to the
procedure set forth in § 215-5.
D. Erection of historic markers. The Commission shall have the authority,
with the written consent of the property owner of record, to erect
historic markers or commemorative plaques on a landmark.
E. Commendation and recognition. The Commission may issue
appropriate commendation and recognition to individuals, firms or
areas promoting historic preservation. The Commission may also
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:101
§ 215-5. Designation or removal of historic conservation districts.
recognize potential landmarks of the future by commending good
examples of contemporary buildings.
F. Maintenance of historic roster. The Commission shall maintain a roster
of historic conservation districts and landmarks within the Village.
G. Advisory capacity. It shall be the duty of the Commission to render
advice and guidance with respect to any proposed work to landmark
property within historic conservation districts in the Village for which a
permit is required. In rendering advice and guidance, the Commission
shall promote historical consciousness in educational programs and
shall undertake any advisory duty deemed appropriate by the Village
Council.
H. Acceptance of gifts or grants. The Commission may accept public or
private gifts for historic preservation purposes and/or may accept
grants from the governments of the state or the United States for
historic preservation purposes. The Village Council may empower the
Commission to administer on its behalf grants and gifts for such
purposes.
I. Review of permit applications. The Commission shall review all
applicable permit applications and plans for landmarks in historic
conservation districts. No permit with regard to a landmark in an
historic conservation district shall be granted until, pursuant to § 215-6,
the Commission has granted its approval or the Commission's denial
has been reversed on appeal.
J. Budget. The Commission expenses for stationery, clerical services,
historic markers and other appropriate activities shall be provided in a
budget submitted to and approved by the Village Council.
A. Designation or removal of designation as an historic conservation
district may be initiated by the Commission or by the written request of
an owner of property within the proposed or current historic
conservation district. Such a request shall designate clearly the land
proposed to be included or excluded.
B. Upon receipt of a request or upon its own motion, the Commission shall
conduct studies and research and make a report on the landmarks
within the historic conservation district, or on the sites, buildings,
structures, objects, open spaces and/or features which would be
landmarks if the area were designated as an historic conservation
district. The report shall contain recommendations concerning the
inclusion or exclusion of geographical areas in or from an historic
conservation district.
C. Copies of the Commission's report shall be transmitted for review to the
Village Planning Commission, the State Historical Commission, the
State Historical Advisory Council, and the Village Council.
§ 215-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 215-5
1:102
§ 215-6. Certificate of approval for historic conservation districts.
D. The Commission shall hold a public hearing 60 days after the
transmittal of its report to the Planning Commission, the State
Historical Commission, the State Historical Advisory Council, and the
Village Council, and shall give due notice of such public hearing. The
notice for the public hearing shall include written notice sent by firstclass
mail with postage prepaid to the owner of record of property
proposed for designation or removal of designation as an historic
conservation district.
E. After the public hearing, the Commission shall submit a final report to
the Village Council stating its recommendations, together with a draft
of any proposed ordinance change.
F. The Village Council shall consider the Commission's final report and
may amend this chapter to designate or remove from designation
property previously excluded from or included in an historic
conservation district.
G. Upon application from the owner of record of any income-producing
property to designate such property as an historic conservation district,
such property owner shall pay an application fee which shall be
established by resolution of the Village Council. For purposes of this
subsection, the term "income-producing property" shall be defined as
property used in a trade or business held for the production of income.
H. After initial adoption of this chapter, the Commission shall have all the
authority and duties of an historic district study committee pursuant to
Public Act No. 169 of 1970 [MCLA § 399.201 et seq., MSA § 5.3407(1)
et seq.], as limited by the terms of this chapter.
A. Application and plans. Application for a permit for addition, alteration,
demolition, protection, new construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, repair, restoration and/or any other type of action
proposed with regard to a landmark which requires a permit shall be
accompanied by an historical preservation permit application and
plans. Plans shall describe the proposed changes, showing the
landmark in question and also showing its relationship to adjacent
landmarks and other buildings or structures. The application shall be
made by the owner of the landmark in question or any person
authorized to act on behalf of the owner.
B. Notification. Upon the filing of an application, the Building Inspector for
the Village shall immediately notify the Commission of the receipt of
such application and shall transmit it together with accompanying
plans and other information to the Commission.
C. Review.
(1) The Commission shall meet within 30 days after notification by the
Building Inspector for the Village or by the Village Council, unless
§ 215-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:103
otherwise mutually agreed by the applicant and the Commission. In
reviewing the plans and the application, the Commission shall give
consideration to:
(a) The historical or architectural value and significance of the
landmark and its relationship to the historical value of the
surrounding area;
(b) The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the
landmark to the rest of the landmark and to the surrounding
area;
(c) The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used on the landmark;
(d) Any major investment program;
(e) The economic feasibility of preserving the landmark; and
(f) Any other factor, including aesthetics, which the Commission
deems pertinent and within the purpose of this chapter.
(2) In proposing its review, the Commission shall use the United States
Secretary of the Interior's Standard for Rehabilitation, 36 CFR 67,
or similar successor regulations. In reviewing the plans, the
Commission may confer with the applicant and shall have the
power to call in experts to aid in its deliberations.
D. Action.
(1) The Commission shall approve or disapprove such application. If
the Commission gives its approval, the Commission shall issue a
certificate of approval, which is to be signed by the Chairman,
attached to the application and immediately transferred to the
Building Inspector for the Village. The Chairman shall also stamp
all plans submitted to the Commission, signifying approval or
disapproval.
(2) If the granting of an application would result in the moving,
alteration or demolition of a landmark, or have any other type of
adverse impact upon a landmark, and if the Commission considers
such landmark so valuable that its loss would adversely affect the
public purpose of the Village, the state, or the United States, the
Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the
landmark an economically feasible plan for its historic preservation
and/or protection.
(3) Any application shall be approved by the Commission if any of the
following conditions prevail, and if the proposal will materially
improve or correct these conditions:
(a) The landmark constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or
the occupants;
§ 215-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 215-6
1:104
(b) The landmark is a deterrent to a major improvement program
which will be of substantial benefit to the Village;
(c) Retention of the landmark would cause undue financial
hardship to the owner; or
(d) Retention of the landmark would not be in the interest of the
majority of the Village.
E. Conditions. The Commission may impose reasonable conditions upon
its approval of an application. Standards for imposing such conditions
are as follows:
(1) Any condition imposed must be reasonable and economically
feasible;
(2) Any condition imposed must be designed to protect the health,
safety, welfare, social well-being and economic well-being of those
who will use the landmark, residents of the Village, adjacent
landowners and the community as a whole;
(3) Any condition imposed must be reasonably related to the valid
exercise of police power and to the purposes affected by the
proposed action concerning the landmark; and
(4) Any condition imposed must also be necessary to meet the
purposes of this chapter, be reasonably related to the standards
established in this chapter for historic preservation, and be
necessary to ensure compliance with those standards.
F. Disapproval. If the Commission disapproves an application, it shall state
its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a written record of its actions
and specific objections to the Building Inspector of the Village and to
the applicant. Thereafter, the Commission shall endeavor to agree with
the applicant on an economically feasible plan for the historic
preservation and/or protection of the landmark which would allow the
applicant to still accomplish the applicants' purposes. The applicant
may make modifications to the application and/or plans and shall have
the right to resubmit the application at any time. If the application is
disapproved, no certificate of approval and no permit shall be issued.
G. Appeal. If the Commission disapproves an application, the applicant
may appeal the disapproval through arbitration (upon procedures
agreed to by the parties) or through the established appeal procedures
granted to an applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
H. Failure to act upon request. Failure of the Commission to approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove an application within 60 days of the
filing of the application, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the
applicant and the Commission, shall constitute approval. In that event,
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:105
§ 215-7. Historic conservation district area designated. [Amended
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 253]
The following historic conservation district is established:
Beginning in the center of Spring Lake at the east line of section 15, T8N,
R16W, this point also being the northeast corner of the Village limits as
established by Charter dated April 7, 1930; thence south along the east line
of section 15 to the south line of the former Grand Trunk Railroad; thence
northeasterly along the south line of the former Grand Trunk Railroad to
a point 272.60 feet east of the north and south quarter line of section 14,
T8N, R16W; thence south to the north line of State Highway M-104; thence
west 240.90 feet along the north line of Highway M-104 to the east line
of Roseland Subdivision extended north; thence south to the center line of
Lloyd's Bayou; thence southwesterly along the center line of Lloyd's Bayou
to the east and west quarter line of section 23, T8N, R16W; thence west
to the west quarter corner of section 23; thence south along the west line
of section 23 to the center of the Grand River; thence westerly along the
center of the Grand River, also being the north boundary of the City of
Grand Haven, to the center line of the channel extending into the waters of
Spring Lake; thence northerly and easterly along the center line of Spring
Lake to the place of beginning.
Chapter 240
OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2. Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
the Building Inspector shall proceed to process the application without
regard to a certificate of approval from the Commission.
I. Inspection and compliance. After the issuance of any certificate of
approval and permit, the Building Inspector shall, according to
established procedures, periodically inspect the landmark in question.
The Building Inspector shall take such action as necessary to ensure
that the applicant and those acting under the applicant conform with
the certificate of approval, the approved application, the accompanying
plans, and any conditions imposed.
J. Ordinary maintenance; prior permits. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent ordinary maintenance of a landmark. Neither shall
this chapter be construed to prevent an addition to or alteration,
demolition, protection, new construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, repair or restoration of a landmark, or any other permitrequiring
action to a landmark, under a permit duly issued by the
Building Inspector prior to the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived.
§ 215-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 215-7
1:106
ARTICLE I
General Offenses
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. I, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-1. Illegal occupation.
No person shall engage in an illegal occupation or business.
§ 240-2. Use of false identification.
No person shall give false identification to any person lawfully requesting
identification.
§ 240-3. Giving or lending false identification.
No person shall give or lend their identification to another for an illegal
purpose.
§ 240-4. Owners and occupants responsible for violations on
premises.
No person owning, renting, or occupying any premises in the Village and no
proprietor or keeper of the premises shall knowingly or intentionally permit
on such premises:
A. An act which constitutes a violation of this chapter;
B. An act which constitutes indecent or obscene conduct;
C. The operation of a house of prostitution or place of assignation; or
D. The illegal sale, use or possession of a controlled substance by any
person. For purposes of this subsection, the term "controlled
substance" shall mean any substance defined as a controlled substance
under MCLA § 333.7101 et seq., MSA § 14.15(7101) et seq.40
40.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 46-5, Horses on right-of-way, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:107

ARTICLE II
Offenses Affecting Governmental Functions
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-5. Resisting officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct, hinder, or oppose
any police officer or other law enforcement agent while in the discharge or
apparent discharge of the officer or agent's duty, or in any way interfere
with or hinder the officer or agent in the discharge of their duty.
§ 240-6. Obeying officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey the lawful command
of any police officer, or fail to disperse when directed to do so by a police
officer or other law enforcement agent.
§ 240-7. Impeding police investigation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to partake in, give countenance to or aid
in willfully acting in a belligerent or boisterous manner so as to disrupt a
police investigation.
§ 240-8. Hindering police investigation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, aid, give countenance to or
assist in the making of any statement or report that individual knows to be
false, to a police officer or other law enforcement agent in the course of a
lawful investigation. A person shall not refuse to provide identification upon
the request of a police officer or other lawful agent in the course of a lawful
investigation.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8
1:109

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Public Peace
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. III, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-9. Noise control.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit persons on their property or on
property under their control to make, continue or cause to make any loud,
raucous or jarring noise, congregation, disturbance or party, particularly
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, repose or peace of persons in any
office or in any dwelling or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity; any noise which is clearly audible more than 50 feet from a person's
property, or property under their control, shall be deemed a disturbance
under the provision of this section.
§ 240-10. Breach of peace.
No person shall make, aid, participate in, give countenance to or assist
in making any noise, disturbance, fight, quarrel, trouble or improper
diversion, or any rout, riot or other unlawful congregation or melee, by
which the peace and good order of the Village are disturbed.
§ 240-11. Permitting gathering of disorderly persons.
No person shall permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by that
individual to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons, to the
annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace.
§ 240-12. Public intoxication.
No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and act so as to directly
endanger the safety of another person or of property, or in any manner
that causes a disturbance; nor shall any person be under the influence of
a controlled substance. For purposes of this section, the term "controlled
substance" shall mean any substance defined as a controlled substance
under MCLA § 333.7101 et seq., MSA § 14.15(7101) et seq.
§ 240-13. Disturbing religious worship.
No person shall disrupt or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for
religious worship by making any noise or profane discord or engaging in
any behavior at or near the place of worship so as to disturb the solemnity
of the meeting.
§ 240-14. Jostling.
No person shall jostle or roughly crowd any person or persons unnecessarily
in a public place.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-15
1:111
§ 240-15. Fighting.
No person shall assault another or engage in or abet in any disturbance,
fight, quarrel, or act of physical violence in a public place.
§ 240-16. Indecent or obscene conduct.
No person shall engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in a public
place, or solicit, assault or accost any person in a public place for the
purpose of committing an unlawful, indecent or obscene act.
§ 240-17. Urinating or defecating in public places.
No person shall urinate or defecate in any public street, park, public beach
or any other area open to the public.
§ 240-18. Mufflers.
No person shall gun or race the engine of any motor vehicle, including
every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle, or run or operate a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle without a muffler in good working order
and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise or annoying
smoke. A person shall not remove, destroy or damage any of the baffles
contained in the muffler, nor shall a person use a muffler cutout, bypass, or
similar device upon the motorcycle or motor-driven cycle.
§ 240-19. Loud barking.
No person shall permit any dog, when under that individual's control or
when on that individual's premises or on premises under their control, to
become a nuisance to others by loud barking, howling or yelping, provided
that any complaint on this fact shall be made by not less than two persons
from two separate households.
§ 240-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 240-19
1:112
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Against Persons
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. IV, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-20. Assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt or offer, with force or violence,
to do a corporal hurt to another or assault and/or batter the person of
another.
§ 240-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-20
1:113

ARTICLE V
Offenses Against Public Safety
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. V, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-21. Playing games in roadway prohibited.
No person while on a public roadway or any area open to public vehicular
traffic shall engage in roller skating or skateboarding, or shall participate in
the playing of any game of football, basketball, baseball, stickball, kickball,
volleyball, tag or any other similar activity or game.
§ 240-22. Discharge of weapons. [Amended 9-17-2007 by Ord. No.
298]
A. Generally. No person shall discharge any firearm, airgun, spring gun,
crossbow, slingshot or any other dangerous weapon, nor engage in any
hunting activity except as provided in this section.
B. Shooting ranges. It shall not be a violation of this section for target
shooters to discharge firearms at a shooting range approved by the
Village Council and the Chief of Police.
C. Police officers. It shall not be a violation of this section for police
officers to discharge firearms in the legal exercise of their duties.
D. Defense. It shall not be a violation of this section for persons to
discharge firearms lawfully acting in the defense of person or property.
E. Killing injured animals, rodents. It shall not be a violation of this section
for persons over 21 years of age, after having obtained the permission
of the Village Manager or Chief of Police, to discharge firearms for the
purposes of killing sick or injured animals or noxious or destructive
rodents.
F. Discharge of firearms while hunting. It shall not be a violation of this
section for individuals to discharge a firearm when engaged in the
activity of hunting, as long as said activity is in conformity with
regulations approved by the State Department of Natural Resources, is
permitted by the provisions of this article, and as long as such activity
occurs within a specific area of the Village between School Street on
the west and Lloyd's Bayou on the east, southward to the boundary of
the Village on the south and bounded on the north by a line 200 feet
south of the most southerly public streets in the Village (the
"designated area").
G. Hunting. Hunting shall only occur within the designated area set forth
in Subsection F above; shall only be lawful during the small game and
waterfowl seasons; and shall only be permitted if in conformity with the
regulations prescribed by the State Department of Natural Resources.
§ 240-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-23
1:115
§ 240-23. Use of BB guns by minors.
No person under 17 years of age shall use or possess any handgun or rifle
designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BBs not exceeding
0.177 caliber by means of a spring, gas or air outside the curtilage of the
individual's domicile unless such person is accompanied by a person over
17 years of age.
§ 240-24. Abandoning of airtight containers.
No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, or in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, trunk, chest, cooler, cabinet, or any other container of any kind
which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening
from the inside without first removing the locks or doors from the container.
§ 240-23 SPRING LAKE CODE § 240-24
1:116
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Against Public Morals
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. VI, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-25. Indecent dress; public nudity. [Amended 10-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 259]
A. Restricted. No person shall engage in public nudity, except where such
conduct is:
(1) Part of, or done in connection with, an educational program or
course conducted by an institution of higher education on property
controlled by such institution and in an area where such conduct is
not visible to persons outside of the program or course; or
(2) Part of a theatrical or dramatic performance held in a theater or
auditorium where such conduct is not visible to people outside of
the theater or auditorium.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the definitions ascribed to them in this subsection.
PUBLIC NUDITY — Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public
place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including,
but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee,
any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering,
or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of the nipple and areola. Public nudity shall not include any of the
following:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any real property or an appurtenance to real
property that is owned or leased by the State of Michigan, any local unit
of government of the State of Michigan, a public agency, or by a college
or university of the State of Michigan and may include a structure,
enclosure, facility, or complex, including a court, mall, park, or other
area, feature, or element; a "public place" shall also mean a business
or an educational, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, health, or
transportation facility, or institution of any kind, whether licensed by
any agency of government or not, whose goods, services, facilities,
privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold,
or otherwise made available to the public.
A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or
areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;
(1)
Material as defined in Section 2 of Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of
1984, being § 752.362 of the Michigan Compiled Laws;
(2)
Sexually explicit visual material as defined in Section 3 of Act No.
33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being § 722.673 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
(3)
§ 240-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-26
1:117
§ 240-26. Gambling prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain any common gambling house or gaming
room, or permit, on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such
person, any apparatus or device used for a gaming or gambling purpose.
No persons shall possess any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks or any
paper which is marked additionally with any kind of notation indicating any
form of gambling unless said paper is specifically licensed by the state. The
position of such writing or device shall constitute prima facie evidence of an
intention to use the device for a gambling purpose.
§ 240-27. Drug paraphernalia.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any equipment, product, material or
combination of equipment, products or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as
defined by the State Public Health Code or the laws of the state,
including but not limited to, all of the following:
An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled substance.
(1)
Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or
in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of a controlled
substance.
(2)
A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing
or measuring a controlled substance.
(3)
A diluent or adulterant, including but not limited to quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, specifically
designed for use with a controlled substance.
(4)
A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing
twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marihuana.
(5)
An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body.
(6)
A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
(7)
§ 240-26 SPRING LAKE CODE § 240-27
1:118
A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
(8)
A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of
at least a razor blade and a mirror.
(9)
A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed
to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.
(10)
A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically
designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the
user's nose.
(11)
A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is
specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance
in an automobile, including but not limited to a can used for brake
fluid, oil or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for
carrying and concealing controlled substances.
(12)
A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a smalldiameter
bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the
human body.
(13)
B. Prohibited use. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a drug or controlled substance in violation of
the State Public Health Code or the laws of the state.
(2) Deliver or possess with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that it would be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug or
controlled substance in violation of the State Public Health Code or
the laws of the state.
(3) Place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication
any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or
intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
C. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
§ 240-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-27
1:119
(1) An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed under Article
1541 or under the Occupational Code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980
[MCLA § 339.101 et seq., MSA § 18.425(101) et seq.], or any intern,
trainee, apprentice or assistant in a profession licensed under
Article 15 or under Public Act No. 299 of 1980 [MCLA § 339.101 et
seq., MSA § 18.425(101) et seq.] for use in that profession.
(2) An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium,
clinical laboratory or other health care institution, including a
penal, correctional or juvenile detention facility, for use in that
institution.
(3) An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental,
surgical or pharmaceutical supplies.
(4) Equipment, a product or materials which may be used in the
preparation or smoking of tobacco or smoking herbs other than a
controlled substance.
(5) A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device not specifically
designed for a use described in § 240-27A.
(6) A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the
purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other
animals.
(7) An object sold, offered for sale or given away by a state or local
governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by a
state or local governmental agency to prevent the transmission of
infectious agents.
D. Violation; penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished in accordance with § 1-2. The Village may also seek injunctive
relief as may be appropriate.
41.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.16101 et seq.
§ 240-27 SPRING LAKE CODE § 240-27
1:120
ARTICLE VII
Offenses Against Property
[Adopted as Ch. 46, Art. VII, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 240-28. Trespassing.
No person shall enter upon the lands and premises of another without
lawful authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or
occupant of such lands or premises or by the agent or servant of such owner
or occupant; no person being upon the lands or premises of another without
authority, upon being notified to depart by the owner or occupant of such
lands or premises, shall neglect to depart.
§ 240-29. Littering. [Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 279]
§ 240-30. Malicious destruction of property.
No person shall maliciously and/or willfully destroy, enter, deface, tamper
with, or in any way interfere with or hinder the use of a public building or
property, or any private building or property.
A. No person shall knowingly, without the consent of the public authority
having supervision of public property or the owner of private property,
dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping,
depositing, placing, throwing or leaving litter on public or private
property or water, other than property designed and set aside for such
purposes. The term "public or private property or water" includes but is
not limited to the right-of-way of a street or highway; a body of water or
watercourse, or its shore or beach, including ice above the water; a
park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area;
and residential properties or timberlands. It is unlawful for a person
who removes a vehicle wrecked or damaged in an accident on a
highway, road, or street to fail to remove all glass and other injurious
substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the
accident. The term "litter" as used in this section means all rubbish,
refuse, waste materials, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles,
trash, debris, or other foreign substances of every kind and description.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any
twelve-month period and for which a person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat
violations is set forth in § 1-2.42
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-31
1:121
§ 240-31. Fraud, larceny, or false pretenses.
No person shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain
money in an amount less than $200 or other valuable thing which has a
value of approximately $200, or shall commit a larceny, or shall obtain
money in an amount less than $200 or other valuable thing which has a
value of less than $200 under false pretenses, or aid, abet, or in any manner
be concerned in such action.
§ 240-32. Marihuana establishments. [Added 3-27-2019 by Ord. No.
356]
§ 240-33. Prohibition of sale and consumption of marihuana in
public places. [Added 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 356]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation
and Taxation of Marihuana Act43 (the "Act"), marihuana establishments,
as defined by the Act, are completely prohibited within the boundaries
of the Village.
B. Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marihuana
establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of the
Village shall be deemed to be not in compliance with this section or with
this Code.
C. This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to
the transportation of marihuana through the Village to the extent
provided by the Act, and does not supersede rights and obligations
under Michigan law allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical
use.
A. In conformance with Sections 4.1(e) and 6.2(b) of the Act,44 the sale or
consumption of marihuana in any form and the sale or display of
marihuana accessories, as defined by the Act, is prohibited in any public
places within the boundaries of the Village.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of
$500, plus court-imposed costs.
C. This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to
the transfer and consumption of marihuana on private property to the
extent authorized by the person who owns, occupies, or operates such
property, as provided in and authorized by the Act, and does not
supersede rights and obligations with respect to the use of marihuana
for medical purposes as provided by any law of the State of Michigan
allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical use.
43.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27951 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27951 et seq.
§ 240-31 SPRING LAKE CODE § 240-33
1:122
Chapter 249
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90.
Animals — See Ch. 103.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Fireworks — See Ch. 183.
Offenses — See Ch. 240.
Tourist park — See Ch. 351.
§ 240-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-33
1:123

ARTICLE I
Mill Point Park
[Adopted 5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 215; amended in its entirety
6-7-1993 by Ord. No. 216 (Ch. 50, Art. III, of the 2000 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 249-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FEE — A designated sum of money to be paid by someone for entering Mill
Point Park with a boat trailer attached to a motor vehicle or a mechanism
on a motor vehicle designed or capable of carrying a boat, whether or not
there is a boat located on such trailer or carrier.
MILL POINT PARK — Includes all of the designated areas within the Village
known and identified as "Mill Point Park" adjacent to the waters of the
Grand River and situated southerly of Exchange Street, including
designated parking areas.
PERMIT — The approval granted by the Village on a daily basis or as
otherwise determined by the Village to enter Mill Point Park with a motor
vehicle towing a boat trailer or having attached to the motor vehicle a
mechanism capable of carrying a boat for the fee assessed and paid by such
person to the Village.
§ 249-2. Permit.
Each person entering Mill Point Park with a boat trailer attached to a motor
vehicle or a mechanism located on a motor vehicle designed or capable of
carrying a boat, whether or not there is a boat located on such trailer or
carrier, shall be required to pay for and secure a permit to enter Mill Point
Park.
§ 249-3. Fee schedule and terms.
The Village Council by resolution shall determine the fees to be assessed
to obtain a permit to enter Mill Point Park, and such resolution may also
determine the conditions for issuance of a permit. All fees and charges
connected with the issuance of such permit shall be payable as provided
in the permit and the resolution adopting the fee schedule and terms and
conditions by the Village Council. Any permit shall provide that it may be
terminated by the Village at any time without cause, in its sole discretion.
The Village Manager, pursuant to such resolution of the Village Council,
may give such orders and directions relative to the use and occupancy of
Mill Point Park for purposes of launching a boat into or retrieving from the
waters of the Grand River as are consistent with the resolution of the Village
Council and the permit, and this article and the laws of the state, and as
§ 249-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-3
1:125
may be necessary to promote health, safety and good order within Mill Point
Park.
§ 249-4. Violations and penalties.45
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 249-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 249-4
1:126
ARTICLE II
Parks Board; Regulations
[Adopted 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 324 (Ch. 50, Art. IV, of the 2000
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 249-5. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Village of Spring Lake Parks Ordinance"
or the "parks ordinance."
§ 249-6. Citizen participation; Parks Board established.
§ 249-7. Parks Board; scope of duties.
A. To afford citizen participation in the affairs of the Village government
for the purpose of determining community needs and means of meeting
such needs through the government of the Village, a Parks Board is
hereby established. For the purposes of this article, the Parks Board
shall be referred to as the "Board."
B. The Board shall be comprised of seven citizens of the Village who have
qualifications required by Village Charter for elective offices of the
Village, and may specifically include a person holding office on the
Village Council. The terms of members of the Board shall be for three
years, and shall be so arranged that the terms of two members of the
Board shall expire in one year, the terms of the two other members of
the Board shall expire in two years, and the term of the other three
members shall expire in three years. The members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Village Council, and they shall receive no
compensation for their services to the Village, unless otherwise
expressly provided by the Village Council. The members of the Board
shall be allowed reasonable and actual expenses when incurred on
behalf of the Village and approved by the Village Council. The Village
Council may appoint such additional nonvoting members to the Board
as the Village Council deems desirable.46
C. The Board shall hold at least two meetings per year, and the minutes of
each meeting shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a public record. If
any member of the Board fails to attend four consecutive Board
meetings, that member's membership on the Board shall be subject to
immediate termination by the Village Council, in which case the
vacancy for the balance of the member's term shall be filled as set forth
in Subsection B above. The Village Council may remove any member of
the Board for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance.
A. The Board shall consider the problems and functions of the Village. The
Board shall, from time to time, on its own motion or at the request of the
Village Council, make investigations, reports, and recommendations to
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 249-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-7
1:127
§ 249-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPER WRITTEN PERMISSION — A written permit issued by the Board.
§ 249-9. Parks and places of recreation; miscellaneous unlawful
acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation except as authorized by proper
written permission.
the Village Council. If the Village Council desires that any matter be
investigated by more than one board or commission of the Village, such
referrals may be made for the purpose of giving the Village Council the
benefit of a full investigation of all aspects of any matter. In performing
its duties and functions, the Board shall be entitled to the benefit of
the facilities and experience of the Village administrative staff, the
Village Planning Commission, and all other sources of information in
the Village bearing upon the scope of such duties and functions.
B. The Village Council shall provide in each annual budget of the Village
for the operation and conduct of Village's parks and recreation
properties, facilities, and programs. The Village Council shall
appropriate for that purpose those amounts which will assure the
operation and maintenance of the Village's parks and recreation
properties, facilities, and programs in a manner consistent with the
needs and the financial resources of the Village.
C. The Village Council may join and cooperate with local school districts
and with any other unit of government in the operation, maintenance,
and improvement of park and recreation property and facilities, and in
the conduct of recreational programs.
A. No person may enter, use, or occupy Village parks or places of
recreation for any purposes when the lands are posted against such
entry, use, or occupancy, as determined and posted by the Board.
B. No person may enter or remain in a Village park or place of recreation
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. unless otherwise
permitted by posted notice.
C. No person may consume liquor in a Village park or place of recreation
unless otherwise permitted by posted notice. Any person who shall be
found in or upon any such public place having in the person's
possession an open receptacle or container containing any alcoholic
liquor shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this subsection. For
purposes of this section, the phrase "alcoholic liquor" means any
spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds,
whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever
§ 249-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 249-9
1:128
§ 249-10. Motor vehicles; miscellaneous unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation except as authorized by proper
written permission.
name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume which
are fit for use for beverage purposes.
D. No person may peddle or systematically solicit business of any nature,
distribute handbills or other advertising matter, post signs, or establish
a base of commercial operations in a Village park or place of recreation
without proper written permission. In considering whether or not
permission shall be granted, the following will be considered by the
Board:
(1) Interference with the safety, health and welfare of the public;
(2) Need for the service; and
(3) Whether the service will be a duplication of services available.
E. No person may use a loudspeaker, public address system or soundamplifying
equipment of any kind without proper written permission.
Permission will not be granted if the system is capable of interfering
with the use and enjoyment of a Village park or place of recreation by
others. No person may operate any motorboat, motor vehicle, radio,
television, or any device in such a manner that it produces excessive
noise.
F. No person may engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar,
lewd, wanton, obscene, or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to
create a breach of the peace, or disturb or annoy others, or obstruct the
free passage of others by lounging, sitting, or laying upon walks,
passages, steps, or porches.
G. No person may build a fire except in designated places or in approved
stoves or grills, unless otherwise approved by an authorized
representative of the Board.
H. No person may deposit refuse or waste material which has originated
outside a Village park or place of recreation in receptacles provided for
users of the Village park or place of recreation, set fire to the contents
of a refuse basket or trash container, or place or burn garbage in a fire
ring or stove.
I. No person may store or leave a boat in a nondesignated area without
first obtaining proper written permission. Permission for nondesignated
areas will be granted only in cases of emergency.
J. No person may operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle in
excess of five miles per hour.
§ 249-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-10
1:129
§ 249-11. Animals, miscellaneous unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation except as authorized by proper
written permission.
§ 249-12. Firearms and hunting; miscellaneous unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation except as authorized by proper
written permission:
§ 249-13. Unlawful assembly; permit required.
A. No person may operate or park a motor vehicle except on roads or
designated parking areas; operate a motor vehicle on a park road or
parking lot at a speed or exceeding five miles per hour, in an unsafe
manner, at a speed greater than that posted, or in disobedience of
traffic signs. When a motor vehicle is found parked in a Village park or
place of recreation, the registration plate displayed on the motor
vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the
vehicle was the person who parked it on the location where found.
B. No person may operate an off-the-road, motor-driven vehicle such as a
minibike, motorcycle, dune-mobile, snowmobile, converted
snowmobile, amphibious vehicle, or any motored device except an
designated roads, trails, or areas posted for such use.
A. No person may posses a dog or other animal unless the same shall be
under immediate control on a leash not exceeding six feet in length;
bring a dog or other animal into an enclosed park building, or leave a
dog or other animal unattended at any time; permit a dog or other
animal to run loose or create a disturbance; or fail to properly control a
dog or other animal without the specific authorization of the Village
Manager. Any dog or other animal found not in the possession or under
the immediate control of its owner, or the owner's agent, or any dog
creating a nuisance or disturbance, may be removed from the Village
park or place of recreation.
B. No person may ride, permit or allow horses or other riding animals,
except on bridle trails designated by the Board.
A. No person may possess a firearm of any kind or description.
B. No person may shoot and/or discharge an air gun, gas gun, springloaded
gun, slingshot, or archery equipment.
C. No person may hunt, trap, kill, wound, or capture any bird, animal, or
other wildlife.
A. Proper written permission is required for any of the following in Village
parks and places of recreation:
§ 249-10 SPRING LAKE CODE § 249-13
1:130
§ 249-14. Injury to property; miscellaneous unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation:
§ 249-15. Injury to plants and trees; miscellaneous unlawful acts.
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and are expressly prohibited
in Village parks and places of recreation:
§ 249-16. Violations and penalties.47
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
(1) A gathering of 30 or more persons;
(2) Any play, performance, or demonstration open to the general
public;
(3) Any public meeting or public assembly open to the general public;
and
(4) Any parade.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute an
unlawful assembly of persons.
A. No person who is not an employee or agent of the Village shall write on,
mutilate, deface, damage, remove, or destroy in any manner, any
building, equipment, structure, fountain, fence, bench, masonry, statue,
ornament, or any other property, real or personal, or any appurtenances
thereto, owned or operated by the Village, and located in any Village
park or place of recreation, or belonging to any person and rightfully in
such park or place of recreation.
A. No person who is not an employee or agent of the Village, or who is not
authorized to do so, shall pull, pluck, break, trample, climb into,
remove, injure, mutilate, or destroy any trees, shrubs, plants, vines,
hedge, flowers, or fruit, whether wild or cultivated.
B. No such person shall cut, break down, bend, damage the bark, or trim
any sapling, tree, shrub, or plant, or any limb, branch, twig, or leaf
thereof, that is growing and located in any Village park or place of
recreation.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 249-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-16
1:131
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 249-16 SPRING LAKE CODE § 249-16
1:132
Chapter 256
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 249-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-16
1:133

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 256-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONDUCT BUSINESS — Being open for and/or ready to do business as well
as the occurrence of any monetary or barter transaction.
LARGE-UNIT PEDDLER — Any peddler utilizing a motor vehicle, cart or
other device in excess of 42 inches and/or 72 inches long.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes about from place to place, traveling
by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, selling or offering
for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, including, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, any person selling or offering for sale by sample,
catalog, list or otherwise any magazine or any other publication or any
goods, wares or merchandise. The term "peddler" includes any person
selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise from a trailer,
temporary shelter, or temporary location.
SMALL-UNIT PEDDLER — Any peddler utilizing a motor vehicle, cart or
other device not in excess of 42 inches and/or 72 inches long.
UNIT — Any motor vehicle, cart or other device including other types of
conveyance, signboards, etc., whose chief purpose of the housing, display
for sales of any goods, wares, or merchandise.
§ 256-2. Violations and penalties.48
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 256-3. Exemptions.
Persons engaging in business as a peddler on behalf of a religious,
charitable or noncommercial corporation, organization or enterprise shall
not be required to obtain a license and shall be completely exempt from the
terms and provisions of this chapter. This exemption shall include persons
engaging in business as a peddler whose services have been contracted
for by a religious, charitable or noncommercial corporation, organization
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-3
1:135
or enterprise in connection with a festival or similar activity. The term
"noncommercial" means that such corporation, organization or enterprise is
exempt from income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code. In addition, any person engaging in business as a peddler
selling the individual's own work or production shall not be required to
obtain a license and shall be completely exempt from the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
§ 256-4. Street operations.
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets or other public areas. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to operate
in a congested area where the peddler's operations might impede
pedestrian or vehicle traffic or inconvenience the public.
§ 256-5. Business hours.
No peddler shall engage in any business, or make any call for business
purposes, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
§ 256-6. Congestion.
No peddler shall conduct business in a congested area. No peddler shall
occupy a station or a location on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, park,
parking lot, or any other public property which is used by pedestrians or
persons operating motor vehicles. A peddler shall be presumed to have
occupied a stationary location if the individual has conducted business in
any such public place for a period in excess of 10 minutes.
§ 256-7. Loud noises and speaking devices; lights.
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person on the licensee's
behalf to shout, cry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device
including loud speakers or sound amplifiers, on any of the streets,
alleys, parks, or other public places of the Village, or upon any private
premises, for the purposes of attracting attention to any goods, wares
or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person on the licensee's
behalf to use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle or any other
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
§ 256-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 256-7
1:136
ARTICLE II
License
§ 256-8. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
without first having obtained a license from the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 256-9. Application for license.
Application for a license pursuant to this article shall be filed with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer in the form and manner required by the Clerk/
Treasurer. Such application shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
§ 256-10. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license.
A. The name and a physical description of the applicant;
B. The address (permanent and/or temporary) of the applicant;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or other
items to be sold;
D. If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the applicant's
employer, together with credentials establishing such relationship;
E. The length of time for which a license is desired;
F. If a vehicle, vehicle trailer, temporary shelter or temporary location is
to be used, a description, together with the license number and other
information that may be required;
G. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall be two
inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
H. The fingerprints of the applicant;
I. The names of two or more residents within the Village who will certify
as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant;
J. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance, and, if so, full
particulars as to the nature of the offense, the court before whom
conviction was had or a plea of guilty entered, and the punishment or
penalty assessed; and
K. A waiver signed by the applicant granting officials of the Village
authority to verify the information provided by the applicant regarding
the applicant's criminal history.
§ 256-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-10
1:137
§ 256-11. Fees.
Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this article, the applicant
shall pay a fee as established by Village Council resolution. The license fee
provided in this article for an annual license shall be the same whether for
a full year or only a portion of a year.
§ 256-12. Term length.
Licenses may be issued under this article for a specified term not to exceed
one year.
§ 256-13. Display.
Each peddler licensed pursuant to this article shall conspicuously and
prominently display the license granted to the peddler when the peddler is
engaged in the business of peddling.
A. The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall forward the application to the Chief of
Police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's
character and business responsibility. After such investigation is
completed, the Chief of Police shall endorse upon such application the
Chief of Police's recommendation for approval or disapproval and
forward the application to the Village Manager. If the Chief of Police
recommends disapproval of such application, the Chief of Police shall
provide the Village Manager with a statement of reasons for such
recommendation of disapproval.
B. If the Village Manager shall be satisfied that the applicant complies
with the provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent ordinances of
the Village and the results of the investigation by the Chief of Police
indicate that the moral character and business responsibility of the
applicant justifies the granting of such license and that any proposed
location is compatible with surrounding land uses, the Village Manager
shall return the application for license to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
with instructions that a license be issued. On receipt of such
instructions and upon payment of the fee required in § 256-11, the
Village Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the applicant a peddler's license.
C. If the Village Manager is not satisfied that the applicant complies with
the provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent ordinances of the
Village or if the results of the investigation by the Chief of Police do not
indicate moral character or business responsibility which justifies the
granting of such license or if the proposed location is not compatible
with surrounding land use, the Village Manager shall deny the license
and give notice of such denial to the applicant with a copy to the Chief
of Police specifying the cause of such denial.
§ 256-10 SPRING LAKE CODE § 256-14
1:138
§ 256-14. Nontransferability.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable
or assignable. No license granted under the provisions of this article shall
be used at any time by any person other than the original licensee.
§ 256-15. Revocation of license.
§ 256-16. Appeals.
Any person believing they have been aggrieved by the Village Manager in
the denial or revocation of a license may, within 10 days after receipt of
notice of denial or revocation, file a written request for a hearing with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer. The Village Council shall then set a time and place
for a hearing, and notice shall be given to the appellant. Upon such hearing,
the Village Council shall determine whether the license should be denied or
revoked; and such determination shall be final and conclusive.
A. A license may be revoked by the Village Manager for any of the
following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made when engaging
in business as a peddler;
(3) Any violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the
Village;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
or
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
B. Whenever the Village Manager shall revoke any license, a notice
specifying the cause of such revocation shall be given to the peddler.
§ 256-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-16
1:139
Chapter 263
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 177.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 196.
Historic conservation — See Ch. 215.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 256-16 SPRING LAKE CODE § 256-16
1:140
ARTICLE I
Unwholesome Substances
[Adopted 5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 192 (Ch. 30, Art. II, of the 2000 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 263-1. Legislative findings.
The Village Council determines, in connection with this article, that the
materials and items defined as unwholesome substances are things
detrimental to the health, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Village; and, therefore, unwholesome substances may be prohibited by
the Village Council by ordinance. The Village Council further determines
that, unless screened from view, accumulations of unwholesome substances
on property in the Village have a negative effect on property values and
are also harmful to the general appearance of the Village. In addition, in
certain circumstances, the accumulation of unwholesome substances can be
harmful to the public health of the residents of the Village.
§ 263-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING MATERIAL — All items used or useful in the construction of a
building or structure, including but not limited to lumber, bricks, concrete
blocks, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring and equipment,
heating ducts and equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete, cement, sand and
gravel.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle which:
JUNK — Parts of machinery, vehicles or boats, used stoves or other
appliances, plumbing fixtures, furniture stored in the open, iron, steel and
other ferrous or nonferrous materials, batteries, remnants of wood, and, in
general, any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not they could
be put to any reasonable use.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY — Any motor vehicle which is unable to be driven
upon a highway under its own power and/or which lacks all of the necessary
component parts to make it operative and serviceable as a motor vehicle
or which is not currently licensed, to the extent required, for use upon the
highways of the state.
Lacks all of the necessary component parts to enable the vehicle to be
driven upon a street under its own power;
A.
Lacks all the necessary component parts to make it operable and
serviceable as a vehicle; and/or
B.
Is not currently licensed, to the extent required, for use upon the
highways of this state.
C.
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-2
1:141
TRASH — All of the following:
UNWHOLESOME SUBSTANCE — Any trash, motor vehicle body, inoperable
vehicle, stone, junk, offal, refuse, rubbish, debris, animal wastes, filth,
building material (unless there is in force a valid building permit for
construction on the property where the building materials are located
and the building materials are to be used as part of that construction
or the building materials are for sale as part of a commercial business),
inoperable boat, trailer body or any other material which constitutes a
threat or menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or driven upon a highway.
§ 263-3. Prohibition.
Except as is provided in § 263-4, no unwholesome substance shall be
deposited, dumped or accumulated by any person on any place or premises,
private or public, situated in the Village unless such place or premises
is a landfill fully licensed as required by law for the receipt and disposal
of the unwholesome substance or unless the unwholesome substance is
completely shielded from public view and view from adjoining properties by
being housed within a building or structure or by being enclosed by a fence;
however, any such fence shall be erected and maintained in compliance with
Chapter 390, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake, and any
other applicable Village ordinance.
§ 263-4. Exception for placement of yard debris.
A. Garbage, i.e., all organic refuse and rejected food waste;
Ashes, i.e., the residue left from burning of paper, leaves, weeds, wood
and coal;
B.
Kitchen rubbish, i.e., all types of food containers and wrappings,
including cans, bottles, jars, broken glass, crockery, paper and wood
boxes, and metal objects;
C.
Household rubbish, i.e., all types of household materials commonly
discarded such as newspapers, magazines, books, wrappings, cartons,
boxes, crates, excelsior, rags, clothing, bedding, floor covering,
wallpaper, leather objects and sweepings; and
D.
Yard rubbish, i.e., all materials which grow on the property such as
grass clippings, weeds, leaves, plants, garden trash, clippings from
hedges and shrubs, branches, limbs, roots and stumps.
E.
A. Notwithstanding § 263-3, it shall not be unlawful to deposit grass
clippings, weeds, leaves, plants, garden trash, clippings from hedges
and shrubs and other yard debris and products adjacent to the street
right-of-way at any time after 6:00 p.m. local time on the day preceding
a scheduled garbage pickup or collection by a garbage carrier licensed
§ 263-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 263-4
1:142
§ 263-5. Cleanup and elimination of substance required.
Any unwholesome substance existing on any place or premises within the
Village in violation of the provisions of this article shall either be
immediately cleaned up and eliminated by removal from the place and
premises where located or be immediately completely shielded from public
view and view from adjoining properties by being housed within a building
or by being enclosed by a fence; however, such fence shall be erected
and maintained in compliance with Chapter 390, Zoning, and any other
applicable Village ordinance.
§ 263-6. Violations and penalties.49
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
to pick up garbage in the Village pursuant to Chapter 300, Solid Waste,
or a Village-sponsored brush, leaf or trash pickup. Grass clippings,
weeds, leaves, plants, garden trash, clippings from hedges and shrubs
and other yard debris and products to be collected by licensed waste
haulers shall be enclosed or boxed in such a manner to prevent the
debris and products from dispersing, scattering or littering in any
manner whatsoever. Such debris and products shall be contained in
disposable plastic bags and containers only and shall not be housed in
any permanent container or can. Materials to be picked up as part of a
Village-sponsored program shall be placed adjacent to the street in the
manner specified by the Village.
B. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to materials deposited for
Village collection, which materials may be deposited no more than
seven days in advance of a scheduled collection date.
49.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 263-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-6
1:143

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 310 (Ch. 18, Art. VI, of the 2000
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 263-7. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended (MCLA
§ 125.1501), the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as
may be amended from time to time, and as published by the International
Code Council, three copies of which are on file with the office of the Village
Zoning Administrator, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code
of the Village of Spring Lake, Ottawa County, State of Michigan, for the
purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use by
providing for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures; and by
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. All
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code, which is on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator,
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 263-8 of this article.
§ 263-8. Amendments.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
amended as follows:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by inserting the "Village of Spring
Lake" for the name of the jurisdiction.
B. Section 103.5 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out the responsibilities under this code shall be
established by resolution of the Village Council.
C. Section 106.3 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:50
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 263-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-8
1:145
106.3 Penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of this article
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2.
Increased civil fines may be imposed for “repeated violations,” which
means a second or subsequent municipal civil infraction violation
committed by a person within any twelve-month period and for which
a person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The
increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth in § 1-2.
D. Section 302.4 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds and plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious
weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers in gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to
cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they
shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and
as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to
comply with the notice of violation, a duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized
to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property.
E. Section 304.14 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to September
30, every door, window, and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas, or areas where products to be included or utilized in food
for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or
stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen
door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.
Exception. The screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
F. Section 602.3 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:
§ 263-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 263-8
1:146
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from November to April to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
(a) When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating
system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in
Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
(b) In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°
F. (-1° C.) a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
G. Section 602.4 shall be amended to state in its entirety as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to March 31
to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
(1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(2) Areas in which persons are primarily engage in vigorous physical
activities.
§ 263-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-8
1:147
Chapter 271
RENTAL UNITS, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 271-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LANDLORD — Any person who owns or controls a rental unit and rents such
unit, either personally or through a designated agent, to any other person.
OWNER — The legal or equitable title holder of a rental unit or the premises
within which the rental unit is situated.
RENTAL UNIT — Any dwelling unit containing one or more sleeping units,
including but not limited to hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast
establishments, boardinghouses, or sleeping rooms, which are rented
pursuant to an oral or written agreement, for monetary or other
consideration, by the owner or the responsible local agent to any other
person, whether by day, week, month, year, or any other term, when the
renter is not acquiring an ownership interest in the rental unit.
RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT — A person or other representative of an
owner; the agent's place of residence shall be within 60 miles of the Village.
The agent shall be designated by the owner as responsible for operating the
rental unit in compliance with the ordinances adopted by the Village. All
official notices of the Village may be served on the responsible local agent,
and any notice so served shall be deemed to have been served upon the
owner. An owner may be the responsible local agent if the owner meets the
residency requirement.
§ 271-2. Fees.
Fees for registration of rental units, inspections, and certificates of
compliance shall be as established by resolution of the Village Council.
§ 271-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for "repeated violations," which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelve-
§ 263-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 271-3
1:148
month period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 271-4. Registration and designation of responsible local agent
required.
No owner shall lease, rent, or otherwise allow a rental unit to be occupied
unless the rental unit is registered with the Village, unless the rental unit
has been issued a certificate of compliance per this chapter, and unless a
responsible local agent is designated for the rental unit. The responsible
local agent shall be legally responsible for operating the registered rental
unit in compliance with the ordinances adopted by the Village, shall be
responsible for providing access to the rental unit for the purpose of making
any and all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the ordinances
adopted by the Village, and shall accept all legal notices or service of
process with respect to the rental unit. The responsible local agent shall
maintain a list of the names and number of occupants of each rental unit for
which the agent is responsible.
§ 271-5. Registration term and renewal of existing rental units.
Owners shall register any and all rental units within the Village and shall
designate a responsible local agent. Registration shall be completed
immediately for each rental unit, before it is rented out, and renewed before
each following January 1. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
reregister the rental unit. Upon registration, a certificate of compliance
shall then be obtained pursuant to § 271-10.
§ 271-6. Change in registration information.
The owner shall reregister a rental unit within 60 days after any change
occurs in registration information. A new owner shall immediately
reregister the rental unit as provided in this chapter.
§ 271-7. Reregistration.
An owner shall reregister a rental unit for each calendar year.
§ 271-8. Application for registration.
An application for registration of a rental unit shall be made in such form
and in accordance with such instructions as may be provided by the Village
Manager or his or her designee and shall include at least the following
information:
A. The address of the rental unit;
B. The names and addresses of all owners;
C. The name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized to
collect rent from the individuals occupying the rental units;
§ 271-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-8
1:149
§ 271-9. Inaccurate or incomplete registration information.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner or a responsible local
agent to provide inaccurate information for the registration of rental units
or to fail to provide information required by the Village for such
registration. In those cases, in which the owner is not a natural person,
the owner information shall be that of the president, general manager,
or other chief executive officer of the organization. Where more than one
natural person has an ownership interest, the required information shall be
provided for each such owner.
§ 271-10. Certificate of compliance required.
D. The name, local address, and telephone number of the responsible local
agent;
E. The number of rental units in each building;
F. The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by both
the owner and the responsible local agent;
G. The name, business address, and telephone number any person who
holds a lien on the rental unit or the real property on which the rental
unit is located;
H. The length of the lease for the rental units; and
I. Verification that all state and local taxes levied and assessed against the
rental unit that are due and payable at the time of the application have
been paid (if not, the application shall be denied).
A. No person shall own, operate, lease, rent, or occupy a rental unit unless
there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the Village Manager
or his or her designee, which certificate of compliance shall be issued in
the name of the owner and issued for the specific rental unit. The
certificate shall be issued for each building containing a rental unit. The
certificate of compliance shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in
each rental unit at all times. The certificate of compliance shall be
issued only after both of the following are completed:
(1) Registration of the rental unit with the Building Department; and
(2) Inspection by the Village Manager or his or her designee
demonstrating compliance with all ordinances adopted by the
Village and state law.
B. The certificate of compliance shall be valid for the current year and the
following calendar year, unless otherwise revoked pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 271-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 271-11
1:150
§ 271-11. Biennial inspections.
Subsequent to the registration of a rental unit as required in § 271-4, the
Village Manager or his or her designee shall commence an inspection of
the rental unit. However, the inspection shall not be required if the rental
unit was inspected during the prior calendar year, was found to be in
compliance, and the Village has no information to indicate that the rental
unit is no longer in compliance. Once the rental unit is deemed to be in
compliance with all ordinances adopted by the Village and state law, per
an inspection in the current calendar year or the prior calendar year, a
certificate of compliance shall be issued.
§ 271-12. (Reserved)
§ 271-13. Prerequisites for issuance of certificate of compliance.
The Village Manager or his or her designee shall not issue a certificate
of compliance unless a current rental unit registration is in effect, the
responsible local agent is properly designated, any fees for registration
plus any penalties are paid in full, and inspection as required in §§ 271-11
and 271-14 has determined that compliance has been secured with the
minimum standards and other provisions of the ordinances adopted by the
Village and with state law.
§ 271-14. Inspections.
All facilities, areas, and units governed by this chapter shall be inspected.
All facilities, areas, and units inspected shall comply with the standards of
the ordinances adopted by the Village and with state law. If an inspection
is scheduled and the owner or responsible local agent fails to appear, an
inspection fee shall be assessed against the owner or the responsible local
agent or both. No inspection shall be completed until the fee is paid in full.
§ 271-15. Posting.
The following information shall be posted in a conspicuous place either
within each rental unit or in a common area shared by all occupants of a
building:
§ 271-16. Revocation of certificate of compliance.
If the Village Manager or his or her designee shall discover the failure
of any owner to comply with a notice of violation issued pursuant to the
provisions of the ordinances adopted by the Village or pursuant to state law,
the certificate of compliance may be revoked.
A. A copy of the current certificate of compliance; and
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the responsible local
agent.
§ 271-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-17
1:151
§ 271-17. Appeal of denial of registration or revocation.
Any owner whose rental unit registration has been denied or whose
certificate of compliance has been revoked may file an appeal to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 271-18. Circumstances requiring vacation of unit.
Upon revocation of a certificate of compliance and a determination by the
Zoning Board of Appeals that a rental unit is not in compliance with this
chapter or state law, the owner or responsible local agent of the rental unit
shall immediately vacate it. No person shall thereafter occupy the rental
unit for sleeping or living purposes until it complies with this chapter and
has been reissued a certificate of compliance.
§ 271-19. Expiration of certificate of compliance.
A certificate of compliance shall expire at the end of the next calendar year
or on the repair date stated on a notice to repair, whichever comes first.
Sixty days after such expiration date, it shall be unlawful for the rental
unit in question to be occupied unless a new certificate of compliance has
been issued. A rental unit which has not been previously certified shall be
deemed to have an expiration date on the date the responsible local agent
is notified to register the rental unit.
§ 271-20. Notification of expired certificate.
§ 271-21. Renewal of certificate of compliance.
At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a certificate of compliance, the
Village shall notify the owner or the responsible local agent or both to
reregister the rental unit and to arrange for a compliance inspection. The
owner shall be responsible for reregistering a rental unit and arranging
A. Sixty days after expiration of a certificate of compliance, the Village
may issue a notice of expired certificate to the owner, any responsible
local agent, and the occupant of the rental unit. The notice shall state
that:
(1) The rental unit does not have a valid certificate of compliance;
(2) It is unlawful for any vacant rental unit to be reoccupied or rented;
(3) Current tenants may no longer occupy the rental unit lawfully; and
(4) Current tenants may be entitled to escrow rent moneys as provided
for under state law.
B. A placard containing this information will be posted on the rental unit.
The placard may not be removed until a new certificate of compliance is
issued.
§ 271-17 SPRING LAKE CODE § 271-21
1:152
a compliance inspection prior to the expiration date on the certificate of
compliance.
§ 271-22. Exceptions to requirement of certificate of compliance.
A certificate of compliance shall not be required for living or sleeping
accommodations in jails, hospitals, nursing homes, school dormitories,
convalescent homes, retirement homes, foster homes, or temporary group
shelters provided by legal not-for-profit agencies which are inspected,
certified, and/or licensed by other governmental agencies.
§ 271-23. Basis for inspections.
Inspections of rental units may be made to obtain and maintain compliance
with the standards of this chapter and state law, based upon one of the
following:
§ 271-24. Complaint-initiated inspections.
If an inspection is initiated by a complaint and no violation is found to exist,
no inspection fees will be assessed against the owner. In all other situations
the owner shall be responsible for inspection fees.
A. A complaint received by the Village indicating that there is a violation of
the standards or the provisions of the ordinances adopted by the Village
or state law or both;
B. An observation by the Village of a violation of the standards or the
provisions of the ordinances adopted by the Village or state law or both;
C. A report or observation of a rental unit that is unoccupied and
unsecured or a rental unit that is fire damaged;
D. The registration, reregistration and certification of a rental unit as
required by this chapter;
E. The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued by
the Village;
F. Designation by the Village Council of an area where all dwellings,
accessory buildings, or yards are to be inspected uniformly or
intensively or for specific violations;
G. An emergency observed or reasonably believed to exist;
H. A request for an inspection by the owner; or
I. As required by law when a rental unit is to be demolished by the Village
or ownership is to be transferred to the Village.
§ 271-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-25
1:153
§ 271-25. Reinspection.
For every inspection and reinspection of a rental unit performed to ensure
conformity with this chapter, the owner will be charged a separate fee
except as provided in § 271-24.
§ 271-26. Inspection upon transfer of ownership.
Chapter 280
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Groundwater use — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Water — See Ch. 373.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
A. If there is a transfer of ownership for any rental unit, even if owneroccupied,
and a current certificate of compliance exists, an inspection
by the Village Manager or his or her designee shall be waived;
B. If there is a transfer of ownership for any rental unit, even if owneroccupied,
and a current certificate of compliance does not exist, an
inspection by the Village Manager or his or her designee shall be
required per this chapter. If the rental unit is not in compliance with
this chapter and state law, a notice of violation shall be issued to both
the transferor and the transferee;
C. If ownership of any rental unit is transferred contrary to Subsection A
or B of this section, the certificate of compliance and rental unit
registration shall be deemed to expire within 60 days of the transfer
unless appropriate steps are taken to obtain a rental unit registration
and certificate of compliance;
D. If there is a transfer of ownership where violations are found during the
inspection, the rental unit registration shall become invalid. The new
owner shall register the rental unit within 10 days of the date of
transfer of the rental unit. Every person holding the registration prior
to the transfer shall notify the Village Manager or his or her designee in
writing of the change in the ownership of the rental unit; or
E. The transferring owner of a rental unit whose ownership is transferred
shall notify the individuals residing in that rental unit, including an
owner-occupied rental unit, before any transfer of ownership occurs.
§ 271-25 SPRING LAKE CODE § 271-26
1:154
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
[Adopted as Ch. 78, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 207]
§ 280-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTHORITY — The Grand Haven-Spring Lake Sewer Authority.
BOD5 (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per
million by weight or in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drain
system which receives discharge from drainage pipes inside the walls of a
building and conveys it to and is connected with the building sewer. The
building drain shall be deemed to end five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension of the building drain which begins five
feet outside the inner face of the building wall and continues to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COD (denoting CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic and inorganic matter under
standard laboratory procedure at 20° C., expressed in parts per million by
weight or in milligrams per liter.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Liquid waste from industrial processes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL SANITARY SEWAGE — Wastewater having a strength which is
less than: 200 parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand or 250 parts
per million by weight of suspended solids.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer owned or controlled by the Village as well as
the portion of any sewer owned or controlled by any other public body
corporate which is located within the Village boundaries.
SANITARY SEWER — A public sewer which carries wastewater and in
which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-1
1:155
SEWER — A pipe or conduit carrying wastewater and/or stormwaters,
surface waters and groundwater.
STORM SEWER and STORM DRAIN — A public sewer which carries
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters but excludes wastewater.
UNCONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL PROCESS WATER — Wastewater which
does not come into contact with any substance used in or incidental to
industrial processing operations and to which no chemical or other
substance has been added.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into a public sewer.
WASTEWATER — Water-carried waste from residences, business buildings,
industrial establishments and/or other premises together with such
infiltration as may be present.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM — The wastewater treatment plant; all facilities
of the Authority and the Village for collecting, sampling, monitoring and
pumping wastewater; and all facilities for collecting, sampling, monitoring
or pumping wastewater that are owned or controlled by any other public
body corporate whose wastewater is treated by the wastewater treatment
plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — The Authority wastewater treatment
plant, 1525 Washington Street, Grand Haven, Michigan.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 280-2. Purpose and policy.
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater
system and enables the Village and the Authority to protect public health
in conformity with all relative applicable local, state and federal laws. The
objectives of this article are to:
A. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system
which will interfere with its normal operation or contaminate the
resulting municipal sludge;
B. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system
which do not receive adequate treatment in the wastewater treatment
plant, and which will pass through the wastewater system into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with
the wastewater system;
C. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the wastewater system; and
D. Meet the requirements of the EPA and the State Department of Natural
Resources.
§ 280-1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-3
1:156
§ 280-3. Discharge of wastewater.
The discharge or depositing of waste and wastewater shall be restricted and
regulated as follows:
A. No person shall place, deposit or discharge any waste or wastewater
upon any public or private property in the Village.
B. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet in the Village any
wastes or wastewater unless such discharge is specifically permitted
and approved in writing by the state, county or other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction.
C. No person shall construct, maintain or use any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater unless the facility is specifically permitted and approved in
writing by the state, county or other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction.
D. For reasons of public health, any structure in which wastewater
originates lying within the Village shall be connected to any available
sanitary sewer within 18 months after written notice is given to the
owner by certified mail by the Village of availability of a sanitary sewer
and compliance with any notice or other requirements specified by
state law. For purposes of this subsection, a sanitary sewer shall be
considered to be available when it is located in a right-of-way,
easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts
upon the property in question and passes not more than 200 feet at the
nearest point from a structure in which wastewater originates. For
purposes of this subsection, the phrase "structure in which wastewater
originates" shall mean a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry,
bathing or other facilities that generate wastewater are used or are
available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other
purposes. If the structure in which wastewater originates has not been
connected to an available sanitary sewer within such eighteen-month
period, the Village shall proceed in accordance with applicable state
law to require connection to be made forthwith. In so proceeding, the
Village shall have the rights and remedies provided in the applicable
state law, as well as all rights and remedies provided by this Code.
E. Any structure in which wastewater originates which is not connected to
an available sanitary sewer as provided in Subsection D of this section
shall, in addition to the remedies provided for in Subsection D, entitle
the Village, at the option of the Village Manager, to begin to assess a
readiness-to-serve charge, quarter-annually, of such sum as may be
established by resolution of the Village Council. Such charge shall be
added to the water statement if the structure in which wastewater
originates is serviced by public water, or if not serviced by public water,
by a separate billing to the person who owns such structure as
disclosed by the Tax Assessor's record for the Village. Such separate
billing shall be due and payable forthwith; however, if not paid, in
§ 280-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-3
1:157
§ 280-4. Private sewage disposal.
Private sewage disposal shall be restricted and regulated as follows:
§ 280-5. Building sewers and connections.
All building sewers, building drains and connections to the public sewer
shall be restricted and regulated as follows:
addition to any other lawful remedies the Village shall have for its
nonpayment, the unpaid portion shall be accrued and added to the cost
assessed to such person for tapping into the sanitary sewer.
F. All discharges of waste or wastewater and actions by or against a user
in relation to such discharges shall be subject to the requirements and
provisions of the Authority's rules and regulations, as well as the
provisions of this Code.
A. If a house, building or other premises used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes is not connected to a
sanitary sewer, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system permitted and approved by the County
Health Department and, where appropriate, the State Health
Department and/or State Department of Natural Resources.
B. At such time as connection is made to a sanitary sewer, all septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
disconnected and abandoned.
C. All persons shall operate and maintain private wastewater disposal
facilities in a safe and sanitary manner at all times at no cost to the
Village.
D. This section shall not be construed to preclude additional requirements
that may be imposed by the Authority, or state or county government, or
to excuse compliance with such requirements.
A. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance of such sewer
without first obtaining a written permit from the Village. No connection
shall be made to a public sewer which will result in the discharge of
industrial waste without the prior written approval of the Authority. No
building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected and
approved as being adequate and acceptable construction, size and
location by the Village.
B. The owner shall be financially responsible for the installation,
connection and maintenance of the building sewer to its connection
with the public sewer.
C. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each
building or premises, provided that where one building or premises
§ 280-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-5
1:158
§ 280-6. Use of public sewers.
The use of public sewers shall be restricted as follows:
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer
is available or can be constructed to the rear building or premises
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear buildings or
premises.
D. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings and
premises only when they are found on inspection by the Village to be of
adequate construction, size and location.
E. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of buildings or
premises, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 127, Article I, Building Construction, and
Article III, Plumbing Regulations, of the Code of the Village of Spring
Lake.
F. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by a building drain shall be lifted by a pump or
other suitable device and discharged to the building sewer.
G. The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Village building and plumbing codes
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, and the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society for Testing and Materials and the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from these prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the Village before
installation.
H. The applicant for a sewer construction permit shall notify the Village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Village. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected
and approved by the Village.
I. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to their prior
condition.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer any stormwater, surface water or groundwater. If an industry
makes adequate provision for the disposal of its industrial wastes other
§ 280-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-6
1:159
§ 280-7. Dilution.
Except as expressly authorized under applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, no user shall increase the use of potable or process water nor
mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge, or
than by discharging such wastes into the public sewer, and if such
disposal is approved by the State Department of Environmental Quality,
the Authority and all other governmental agencies having jurisdiction,
the Village may, by resolution, excuse such industry from depositing its
industrial wastes into the public sewer.
B. Stormwater, groundwater, surface water, and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged only to storm sewers, dry wells or a
natural outlet. The discharge of cooling water or uncontaminated
industrial process water to a natural outlet shall only be permitted
when permitted and approved in writing by the state, county or other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
C. No person who is required by the Authority pursuant to its rules and
regulations to have a discharge permit shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any wastewater or waste unless such permit is currently in
force and the discharge is in full compliance with all conditions or
restrictions which are contained in such permit. In addition, no person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater or waste
which prevents effective operation of the wastewater system; will pass
through the wastewater treatment plant or otherwise be incompatible
with the wastewater treatment plant; is prohibited by any federal or
state law, rule, regulation, permit requirement or standard which is
applicable to the Authority or the wastewater system; or is prohibited
by the Authority's rules and regulations. With respect to such
wastewater or waste, the Village and/or the Authority shall have the
option to:
(1) Reject the waste or wastewater;
(2) Require satisfactory pretreatment as provided in the Authority's
rules and regulations; and/or
(3) Require, pursuant to the provisions of this article and/or the
Authority's rules and regulations, the payment of extra charges to
the Village and/or the Authority to pay for the added costs of
handling and treating the waste or wastewater.
D. The Village shall have the right, at any time, by resolution to exclude
from the wastewater treatment plant all or a portion of the industrial
waste or wastewater of Village customers; however, no such action
shall be taken by the Village until it shall have first determined that
such action is necessary in order to permit nonindustrial waste or
wastewater in the Village to be treated by the wastewater treatment
plant.
§ 280-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-7
1:160
otherwise dilute a discharge in any way, as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth
in this article.
§ 280-8. Disclosure by nondomestic users.
All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute wastewater
or waste to the wastewater system shall submit such information as the
Village and/or the Authority shall reasonably request on their processes
and wastewater before connecting to or contributing to the wastewater
system. All existing nondomestic users connected to or contributing to
the wastewater system shall promptly submit such information on their
processes and wastewater as the Village and/or the Authority shall
reasonably request. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the
Village and the Authority to determine the impact of the user's discharge on
the wastewater system and the need for pretreatment and shall be signed
by an authorized representative of the user. Without limiting the generality
of the foregoing disclosure requirements, the information which may be
required pursuant to this section may include any or all of the information
required pursuant to the Authority's rules and regulations, or to applicable
state or federal law.
§ 280-9. Preliminary treatment facilities.
A. Where the waste or wastewater is required to be pretreated by the
provisions of this article and/or the Authority's rules and regulations,
the user shall provide, at the user's expense, such preliminary
treatment as required pursuant to the Authority's rules and regulations
and/or as shall be necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics
or constituents of the waste or wastewater or control the quantities and
rates of discharge of the waste or wastewater so that the wastewater
system can operate effectively and in conformance with all federal and/
or state laws, rules, regulations, permit requirements or standards
which are applicable to the wastewater system. Plans, specifications
and other pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be prepared and submitted by a registered
engineer for approval by the Village and the Authority; and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is
given in writing by both the Village and the Authority. Review of the
submitted plans, specifications and other information shall be
completed within a reasonable time. Where preliminary treatment is
required by this section, and the user is already discharging waste or
wastewater into the wastewater system, the user shall, at the request of
the Village and/or the Authority, agree to a compliance schedule which
shall specify by date those items which are to be accomplished by the
user to complete all necessary preliminary treatment facilities and to
bring the waste and wastewater being discharged into compliance with
all requirements of this article and the Authority's rules and
regulations.
§ 280-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-9
1:161
§ 280-10. Sampling facilities.
When required by the Village and/or the Authority to assure adequate
monitoring and control of the waste or wastewater discharge, the user of
any building or premises served by a building sewer shall install a suitable
control vault or station in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the waste or wastewater being discharged.
Such control vault or station shall be equipped by the user with a suitable
composite sampler and continuous flow recorder. Such vault or station shall
be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved in writing by the Authority. Such vault or station shall
be installed by the user at the user's cost and shall be maintained so as to
be safe and accessible at all times. The person operating and maintaining
such facilities shall, at the request of the Authority or the Village, submit
to the requesting party records or true copies of the wastewater or waste
discharged and such other reports and information as shall be necessary to
assess and assure compliance with this article and with the Authority's rules
and regulations.
§ 280-11. Industrial surveillance fee.
B. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any wastewater
or waste, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the user at the user's cost. The person
operating and maintaining such facilities shall, at the request of the
Authority and/or the Village, submit to the requesting party records or
true copies of the samplings taken from wastewater and waste
discharged and such other reports and information as shall be
necessary to assess and assure compliance with this article.
A. With respect to all users that are required to maintain preliminary
treatment facilities or sampling facilities pursuant to the provisions of
this article and/or the Authority's rules and regulations, the Village,
acting by itself or through the Authority, shall institute a program
pursuant to which Village or Authority personnel, as the case may be,
periodically check and assess, through the taking of their own
samplings, the accuracy and completeness of the sampling records and
other reports and information provided to the Village and the Authority.
The cost and expense incurred by the Village in conducting this
program of periodic review or having the Authority conduct the
program on its behalf shall be recovered from an industrial surveillance
charge to be established by the Village or the Authority by resolution.
The amount of this charge shall be determined for each sewer customer
or class of sewer customers to which it applies and shall be billed by the
Village as part of each affected sewer customer's periodic sewer billing.
B. If based upon such review the Village or the Authority determines that
the sampling records or other reports and information provided to it by
a user are not substantially accurate, the Village and/or the Authority
may institute such sampling, laboratory analysis and other procedures
§ 280-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-11
1:162
§ 280-12. Surcharges.
§ 280-13. Pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of any final federal or state pretreatment standards
or discharge limits for a particular industrial category or subcategory, such
standards or limits, if more stringent than the requirements of this article
or the Authority's rules and regulations, shall be automatically incorporated
as part of this article; shall be considered to supersede the requirements of
this article; and shall become effective when specified by the promulgating
agency. The Authority, on behalf of the Village, shall notify all affected users
of the applicable standards or limits.
§ 280-14. Pretreatment compliance reporting.
Users shall submit reports to the Authority as required by or pursuant to its
rules and regulations. Upon request by the Village, a user shall provide a
copy of any such report to the Village.
§ 280-15. Containment facilities.
as are determined necessary to accurately sample and measure the
waste and wastewater being discharged. All expenses and charges
incurred by the Village itself or by the Authority for such sampling,
review and analysis shall be charged by the Village or the Authority to
the affected sewer customer.
A. All nondomestic users of the public sewers shall pay a surcharge for the
discharge of wastewater or waste containing more BOD5, COD,
phosphorus or suspended solids than the threshold amount, with the
exception that a surcharge can be made for either BOD5 or COD,
whichever is the greater dollar cost, but not for both.
B. The threshold for and amount of such surcharge shall be established
periodically by the Authority. The surcharge shall be calculated and
billed quarterly by the Village as part of the affected sewer customer's
periodic sewer billing.
A. When required by the Village and/or the Authority to assure adequate
protection for the wastewater system from accidental spills of critical or
hazardous materials, the user shall develop and submit to the Village
and the Authority an adequate spill prevention plan as required by and
subject to the provisions of the Authority's rules and regulations. The
adequacy of such plan shall be determined by the Authority. The Village
and/or the Authority may require, as part of such plan, that the user
provide, at the user's expense, suitable containment facilities within a
time period specified by the Village and/or the Authority. Plans,
specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed
containment facilities shall be prepared and submitted for approval by
the Authority; and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until approval by the Authority is given in writing. Such containment
§ 280-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-15
1:163
§ 280-16. Annual publication.
The Village or the Authority shall annually publish in the Grand Haven
Tribune a list of the users which significantly violated any National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated by the EPA or which
otherwise has been determined by the Authority to be in significant
noncompliance during the 12 previous months. This notification shall also
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same
12 months. In addition, a list of all industrial users which were the subject
of enforcement proceedings pursuant to this article and/or the Authority's
rules and regulations during the 12 previous months shall be published
annually by the Village and/or by the Authority in the Grand Haven Tribune.
This notification shall summarize the enforcement actions taken against
those users which during the previous 12 months had violations that
remained uncorrected 45 or more days after notification of noncompliance,
or which have exhibited a pattern of noncompliance over that twelve-month
period, or which involve failure to accurately report noncompliance.
§ 280-17. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, equipment or other part of the wastewater system.
§ 280-18. Inspection.
The Village, its employees and agents, and the Authority, its employees
and agents, when bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted, with or without advance notice, to enter in and upon buildings
and premises as may be necessary for the purposes of inspection,
surveillance, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance
with this article, or to take any actions reasonably necessary to protect the
wastewater system or the health, safety and welfare of employees of the
wastewater treatment plant or the public.
§ 280-19. Legal action.
If any person discharges wastewater or waste into the wastewater system
contrary to the provisions of this article, the Village, or the Authority on
its behalf, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief.
facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition by
the user at the user's cost.
B. In the case of an accidental spill, the user shall give such notice and
take such other actions as required by the Authority's rules and
regulations.
§ 280-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-20
1:164
§ 280-20. Emergency action.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Authority and/or
the Village may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment
service to a user when it appears to the Authority and/or the Village that
an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or
substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or a substantial
danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the wastewater
system, or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article. Any
user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service shall, within
a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Authority and/or the
Village, whichever has given the notice, cease all discharges. If the user
fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified
time, the Village, or the Authority on its behalf, may commence judicial
proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the user's compliance with
such order. The Village and the Authority shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service and terminate judicial proceedings upon proof by the user
of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the
threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth in this section.
§ 280-21. Falsification of information; violations and penalties.
Any person who knowingly makes any false representation, statements or
certification in any application, report, record, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring or sampling
device shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 280-22. Recovery of costs.
Any user violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or
causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage
to or impairs the wastewater system shall be liable to the Village and/or
the Authority for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or
discharge. The Village and/or the Authority shall bill the user for the costs
incurred by the Village and/or the Authority, as the case may be, for any
cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge.
Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article,
enforceable as provided in this article and also by appropriate legal action.
§ 280-23. Public nuisance.
Any violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance per se.
Accordingly, the court shall, by injunction, order such nuisance abated; and
the user shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se.
§ 280-24. Conflict with other provisions.
Where provisions of any state or Authority law, rule or regulation or any
other part of this Code impose greater restrictions or higher standards than
§ 280-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-24
1:165
contained in this article, the provisions of such law, rule, regulation or other
part of this Code shall control.
§ 280-25. Other rules and regulations authorized.
The Village may adopt by resolution rules and regulations governing
operational, maintenance and technical matters relating to the public sewer
system. Violation of any such rule or regulation shall constitute a violation
of this article and shall be subject to the penalties and other remedies
prescribed in this article.
§ 280-24 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-25
1:166
ARTICLE II
Rates
[Adopted as Ch. 78, Art. III, Div. 3, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 280-26. Declaration of necessity.
It is determined and declared necessary and conducive to the protection of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents of the
Village to levy and collect sewer charges from all premises, properties and
customers served by the sanitary sewer system of the Village.
§ 280-27. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer of the system which owns
property situated within the following zoning classifications as defined in
Chapter 390: Community Commercial District; Eastern Entryway District;
Central Business District; Office District; Public and Semi-Public District;
and Light Industrial District.51
CUSTOMER —
INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer of the system which
manufactures or produces a product or which works on a product.
OPERATING YEARS — The period from July 1 through June 30. The
operating year shall be divided into the following quarterly intervals: July 1
through September 30, October 1 through December 31, January 1 through
March 31, and April 1 through June 30.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer of the system who is not a
commercial customer or industrial customer.
SYSTEM — The Village sanitary sewage system as now or hereafter
constituted.
Any person either inside or outside the corporate limits of the Village
who is connected to the system; and
A.
The owner of any piece or parcel of land in the corporate limits of the
Village which:
Is adjacent to any street or public right-of-way containing a Village
sewer line accessible for service;
(1)
Is used for any private or public purpose involving the discharge of
sewage; and
(2)
(3) Is not connected to the system.
B.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 280-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-28
1:167
§ 280-28. Connection charges, fees and use rates. [Amended
6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 291]
The following connection charges, fees and use rates shall apply to all
connections and users of the system:
§ 280-29. Penalty charges.
When sewage which is discharged to the system has a strength which
exceeds 200 parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand or 250 parts
per million by weight of suspended solids, an added charge shall be made
to the customer discharging such sewage in accordance with the strength
of the sewage discharged. The strength of the sewage shall be determined
by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to ensure a
representative sample. The extra charges shall be as established by the
Village Council.
A. Stub charge. If a sewer stub line has not already been installed, a stub
charge, in an amount to be established and adjusted by Village Council
resolution, for the installation and use of a sewer stub line from the
sewer line to the property line shall be charged for connection to the
system. The payment of the stub charge shall be made in cash at the
time application is made for a permit to connect to the system.
B. Sewer use rates. Rates for sewer service for each premises connected
to the system shall be established and adjusted by Village Council
resolution. No free service shall be furnished by the system to the
Village or to any person. The Village shall pay for sewer service
supplied to it or any of its departments or agencies at the rates
established pursuant to this section.
C. System equity charge.
(1) A system equity charge shall be payable by each premises
connecting to the Village system and each premises, already
connected to the Village system, that requests a larger water
meter. The system equity charge for each new connection shall be
as adopted from time to time by Village Council resolution.52
(2) In the case of a premises already connected to the system which
requests a larger water meter, the system equity charge shall be
the difference between the system equity charge then in effect for
the existing water meter and the system equity charge for the
requested larger meter.
(3) The system equity charge shall be paid by each premises
connecting to the system in cash at the time application is made for
a permit to connect to the system or, in the case of a request for a
larger meter, at the time that request is made.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 280-28 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-30
1:168
§ 280-30. Customers outside Village.
The Village Council shall establish by resolution charges for those
customers of the system located outside the corporate limits of the Village.
§ 280-31. Billing and enforcement. [Amended 4-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 322]
Charges for sewer services shall be billed quarterly. Bills shall be mailed
by the 15th day of the month following the quarter for which the bills are
rendered and shall be due and payable on or before the 15th day of the
next month. If the bill is not paid within five days after the due date, if the
premises are served by public water, a water shutoff notice shall be mailed.
If the bill is not paid within 10 calendar days after the date of mailing
of the water shutoff notice, if the customer has public water service, the
customer's public water service shall be turned off immediately and without
further notice. Water service shall not be restored until the entire amount of
the water and sewer service bill has been paid. Charges for sewer services
shall constitute a lien on the property served. On or before May 1 of each
year, the Village Clerk/Village Treasurer shall prepare a certified statement
of all sewer services and penalty charges then three months or more past
due and unpaid. The Village Clerk/Village Treasurer shall then place such
charges on the next tax roll and they shall be collected, and such lien shall
be enforced in the same manner as is provided for general Village taxes.
§ 280-32. Annual report.
The Village shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record
and account, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the operation of the system. Not less than six
months after the close of each fiscal year of the system, the Village shall
cause to be prepared a statement in reasonable detail showing the cash
income and disbursements of the system at the beginning and the close
of the operating year, and such other information as shall be necessary
to enable any taxpayer of the Village, user or beneficiary of the service
provided by the system, to be fully informed as to all matters pertaining to
the financial operation of the system during such fiscal year. Such annual
statement shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, where it
shall be open to public inspection. These books of record and account shall
be audited annually by a certified public accountant to be designated by
the Village Council, and a certified copy of this audit shall be filed with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 280-33. Disruption of service.
The Village shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the operation
of the system, whether occasioned by maintenance or repair of the system
or any other cause.
§ 280-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-33
1:169
Chapter 285
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90. Zoning — See Ch. 390, Art. IV.
§ 280-33 SPRING LAKE CODE § 280-33
1:170
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions; Prohibited Acts; Penalties
§ 285-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to minimize the negative
secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses, and thereby
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the patrons of and
performers at sexually oriented businesses and the citizens and residents of
the Village, through licensing and regulating sexually oriented businesses
and related activities. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any expressive activity or communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Mich. Const. 1963, Art. I, § 5, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent or effect of this chapter to legitimize activities
prohibited by Village ordinance or by county, state or federal law.
§ 285-2. Definitions.
A. Terms used in this chapter that are defined in Chapter 390, Zoning,
Article IV, Sexually Oriented Businesses, shall have the meaning as
specified in that chapter for the purposes of interpreting and enforcing
this chapter.
B. In addition, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this chapter unless otherwise specifically stated:
OPERATOR — Any person who engages in the practice of or performs a
nontherapeutic massage.
SEMINUDITY or STATE OF SEMINUDITY — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. "Seminudity"
includes showing the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall
not include merely showing any portion of the cleavage of the female
breast, as exhibited by the wearing of a bathing suit, blouse, dress,
leotard, skirt or other apparel provided the areola is not exposed in
whole or part.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — An offense involving any of the
following activities for the specified time periods:
Dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of sexually
explicit or otherwise harmful material to a minor; possession or
distribution of child pornography; sexual performance by a child;
child molestation; indecency with a child; indecent exposure;
public lewdness; prostitution or assignation (accosting, promoting
or soliciting for purposes of prostitution); sexual assault; engaging
(1)
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-2
1:171
§ 285-3. Sexually explicit performance and acts prohibited.
§ 285-4. Violations and penalties.53
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
in organized criminal activity; gambling; distribution of a
controlled substance; or any offense under the criminal or penal
code of any other state or country similar to those described in this
subsection.
"Specified time periods" means that:
Less than two years have passed since the date of the
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever
is later, if the conviction is for a single misdemeanor offense;
(a)
Less than five years have passed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is later, if the convictions are for
two or more misdemeanor offenses or any combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within a twenty-four-month
period; or
(b)
Less than five years have passed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement, whichever is later, if the
conviction is for a felony offense.
(c)
(2)
A pending appeal of a conviction shall have no effect on the
definition of specified criminal activity.
(3)
A. No person shall dance, entertain, display or otherwise engage in any
exhibition or performance in such a manner as to expose to the view of
any person within a sexually oriented business, or in any other
commercial establishment, any specified anatomical areas, or any
device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates
any specified anatomical areas.
B. No person shall engage in any specified sexual activities on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly promote the
commission of any of the unlawful acts listed in Subsection A or B of this
section.
53.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 285-2 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-4
1:172
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-4
1:173

ARTICLE II
Operation
§ 285-5. Restrictions on operation; underage persons.
§ 285-6. Businesses offering live entertainment.
In addition to following the requirements of § 285-5, any sexually oriented
business offering live entertainment shall comply with all of the following:
A. All sexually oriented businesses shall comply with all of the following:
(1) No person younger than 18 years of age shall enter or be on the
premises of a sexually oriented business at any time during which
the sexually oriented business is open for business.
(2) No person under the age of 18 shall be employed by a sexually
oriented business or contracted with a sexually oriented business
for the provisions of services to patrons.
(3) No employee of a sexually oriented business shall sell or provide
goods, merchandise or services to persons under the age of 18 on
the premises.
(4) No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted within the premises of a
sexually oriented business at any time, unless specifically allowed
pursuant to a license duly issued by the state liquor control
commission.
(5) No loitering shall be allowed on the premises of any sexually
oriented business at any time.
(6) No sexually oriented business shall allow its building, place or
premises to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution.
(7) No sexually oriented business shall be open to do business before
10:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or after 10:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday. No sexually oriented business shall be open to do
business on any Sunday or legal holiday.
(8) At least one bouncer or security guard employed by the sexually
oriented business shall be present at all times when the sexually
oriented business is open to do business. The bouncer or security
guard shall patrol the premises, including the parking lot, to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article.
B. A violation of Subsection A(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall be grounds
for criminal prosecution of both the underage person and of any
licensee, owner, operator and employees who permitted the violation of
this section by the underage person.
§ 285-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-6
1:175
A. A dressing area for performers must be provided with direct access to
the performance area or stage, with direct access back from the
performance area or stage to the dressing area such that the performer
may enter and leave the performance area or stage without entering
the area from which patrons view the performance.
B. Access to the performance area, stage and dressing room must be
handicap accessible to the extent required by law.
C. The performance area or stage must be elevated at least 18 inches
above the area from which patrons will view the performance.
D. The dressing area for performers must be separate and not freely
accessible from areas of the business accessible to patrons.
E. The performers' dressing area must have hot and cold running water
and adequate toilet facilities.
F. An employee, owner, independent contractor or performer of any type
shall not engage in any physical contact with, or be within six feet of,
patrons during performances or when in a state of nudity or seminudity;
neither shall any such person receive tips or gratuities from patrons for
performances.
§ 285-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-6
1:176
ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 285-7. Inspection.
An applicant or licensee shall allow the Village of Spring Lake/City of
Ferrysburg Police Department, the Village Manager or his or her designee,
and/or any other law enforcement official, individually or jointly, to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time it is occupied or
open for business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter;
Chapter 390, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake; all other
local ordinances; and all other statutes, laws, rules or regulations of the
county, state and federal government.
§ 285-8. Licenses required.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:
§ 285-9. Operating licenses.
A. Own or operate a sexually oriented business within the Village unless
that sexually oriented business is licensed and is in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 390, Zoning, Article IV,
Sexually Oriented Businesses;
B. Employ an individual to work for the sexually oriented business in any
capacity when that individual is not licensed as a sexually oriented
business employee by the Village pursuant to this chapter; and
C. Obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having
first secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter.
A. An application for a license to operate a sexually oriented business
within the Village shall be made on a form provided by the Village. The
application may require the applicant to provide any and all information
and documentation (including fingerprints and photographs) necessary
to enable the Village to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications and requirements established in this chapter. An
application shall not be deemed complete until all such information and
documentation has been provided to the Village by the applicant or the
applicant's agents and/or representatives.
B. If the sexually oriented business is intended to be operated as a sole
proprietorship by an individual, the individual is deemed the applicant
and shall sign the application for a license.
C. Where the sexually oriented business is intended to be operated in any
capacity other than as a sole proprietorship, each individual who has a
significant or controlling interest in the business is deemed to be an
applicant; and each such person shall sign the application for a license.
The application shall further provide the following information:
§ 285-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-9
1:177
(1) Where the business entity is a partnership, the partnership shall
state:
(a) Its complete name;
(b) The names of all partners; and
(c) The status of the partnership as a general or limited
partnership; and shall include a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any agreement exists.
(2) Where the business entity is a corporation (C-corporation, Scorporation,
professional corporation, or any other corporation),
the corporation shall state:
(a) Its complete name;
(b) The date of its incorporation;
(c) The state of its incorporation;
(d) Evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the
laws of its state of incorporation;
(e) The names and capacities of each office holder, director and
principal stockholders in the corporation; and
(f) The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered office for service of process.
(3) Where the business entity is a limited liability company (membermanaged,
manager-managed, professional, or any other limited
liability company), the limited liability company shall state:
(a) Its complete name;
(b) The date of its organization as a limited liability company;
(c) The state in which it was organized as a limited liability
company;
(d) Evidence that the limited liability company is in good standing
under the laws of the state in which it is organized;
(e) The names of and capacities of each member in the limited
liability company; and
(f) The name of the manager and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
D. If the sexually oriented business is intended to be operated under a
name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the
fictitious name of the sexually oriented business and submit the
required registration documents.
§ 285-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-9
1:178
E. An application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the
following information and shall be accompanied by any necessary
documentation for each applicant:
(1) The application shall state the applicant's legal name and all prior
names and aliases (including stage names) by which the applicant
has ever been known, and submit proof that the applicant is at least
18 years of age.
(2) The application shall state the applicant's current mailing address
and residential address.
(3) The application shall state the applicant's driver's license number,
social security number, and state or federally issued tax
identification number.
(4) The application shall include the applicant's fingerprints on a form
provided by the Village of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg Police
Department, the County Sheriff's Department, or the Department
of State Police, and two color photographs of the applicant clearly
showing the applicant's face. Any fees required to produce the
fingerprints and photographs shall be paid by the applicant.
(5) The application shall state whether the applicant, or a person
residing with the applicant, has ever been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or pleaded no contest to a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter. In the event of an affirmative response, the
applicant shall state each specified criminal activity involved, along
with the date, place and jurisdiction of each offense.
(6) The application shall state whether the applicant, or a person
residing with the applicant, has ever had a previous license under
this chapter or any other similar sexually oriented business
ordinance of another municipality or county denied, suspended or
revoked. In the event of an affirmative response, the applicant shall
state the name and location of each sexually oriented business that
had its license denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
and reason for the denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) The application shall state whether the applicant, or a person
residing with the applicant, has ever been a partner in a
partnership, or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation, or a member or manager of a limited liability company,
or otherwise had a significant or controlling interest in any
business entity that is or was licensed under this chapter, or any
other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of another
municipality or county, whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked. In the event of an affirmative response, the
applicant shall state the name and location of the sexually oriented
business that had its license denied, suspended or revoked, as well
as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.
§ 285-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-9
1:179
(8) The application shall state whether the applicant, or a person
residing with the applicant, currently holds any other licenses
under this chapter or any other similar sexually oriented business
ordinance of another municipality or county. In the event of an
affirmative response, the applicant shall state the names and
locations of each licensed sexually oriented business.
(9) The application shall state the location of the proposed sexually
oriented business, including a legal description of the property, the
street address, and the telephone number, if any.
(10) Site plan.
(a) The application shall include a site plan prepared by a land
surveyor who is licensed by the state. The site plan shall show
all the salient features of the proposed sexually oriented
business premises and the surrounding area, including but not
limited to the:
[1] Property lines of any established sexually oriented
business within 500 feet of the property to be licensed;
[2] Current zoning districts of all property within 1,000 feet of
the property to be licensed;
[3] Property lines of any established Village or county or state
park, school, library, licensed child-care facility,
playground, church or place of worship within 1,000 feet
of the property to be licensed; and
[4] Property lines of any established residence within 1,000
feet of the property to be licensed.
(b) A use shall be deemed established if it is in existence at the
time the application for license is submitted to the Village.
(11) The application shall include a sketch or a diagram, drawn to a
designated scale with marked dimensions, which shows the
proposed interior configuration of the sexually oriented business
premises.
F. The Village shall grant or deny the requested operating license within
30 days after receiving the completed application for an operating
license. The Village shall grant the operating license to an applicant
unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or
more of the following is true:
(1) The applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) The applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, is
currently overdue in payment to the Village of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or a
person with whom the applicant is residing.
§ 285-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-9
1:180
§ 285-10. Employee licenses.
(3) The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application.
(4) The applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has
previously been denied a license by the Village to operate a
sexually oriented business during the preceding 12 months.
(5) The applicant, or any person with whom the applicant is residing,
has had a license to operate a sexually oriented business within the
Village revoked during the preceding 12 months.
(6) The applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has
been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or pleaded no contest to a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter.
(7) The premises of the sexually oriented business have not been
approved by the Spring Lake Township Fire Department and the
Village Manager or his or her designee as being in compliance with
all applicable laws and ordinances.
(8) The applicant has failed to pay the application and investigation fee
required by § 285-11.
(9) The existing or proposed sexually oriented business is in violation
of or is otherwise not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter or any other ordinance of the Village, including but not
limited to Chapter 390, Zoning, or any other statute, law, rule or
regulation of the county, state or federal government.
G. The Fire Department and the Village Manager or his or her designee
shall complete their certification that the premises of the proposed
sexually oriented business is in compliance or is not in compliance
within 20 days of the Village's receipt of the application.
H. A license shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is
granted, the expiration date of the license, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that
they may be easily read at any time.
A. An application for a license to work as an employee of a sexually
oriented business located within the Village shall be made on a form
provided by the Village. The application shall not be deemed complete
until all of the following information and documentation has been
provided to the Village by the applicant:
(1) The application shall state the applicant's:
(a) Current legal name and all other names and aliases (including
stage names) by which the applicant has ever been known.
§ 285-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-10
1:181
(b) Age, date and place of birth, along with a copy of the
applicant's birth certificate or other proof that the applicant is
at least 18 years of age.
(c) Height, weight, hair color and eye color.
(d) Current residence address and telephone number.
(e) Current business address and telephone number.
(f) Driver's license number or other identification card
information.
(g) Social security number.
(2) The application shall include a copy of the applicant's fingerprints
on a form provided by the Village of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg
Police Department, the County Sheriff's Department, or the
Department of State Police, and a color photograph of the applicant
clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees required to produce
the fingerprints and photograph shall be paid by the applicant.
(3) The application shall include a written statement detailing whether
the applicant has ever been convicted of, pled guilty to, or pled no
contest to a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter. In
the event of an affirmative response, the applicant shall state the
specified criminal activity involved, along with the date, place and
jurisdiction of each offense.
B. The Village shall issue a temporary employee license to the applicant
upon the applicant filing a complete application for an employee
license. The Village will verify the information provided by the
applicant. The investigation and application process shall be completed
within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed. At the
end of that thirty-day period, the Village shall issue an employee license
to the applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following is true:
(1) The application is incomplete, in that it does not contain the
necessary information required under this chapter, or in that the
applicant has failed to pay the application and investigation fee
required by § 285-11.
(2) The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(3) The applicant is under 18 years of age.
(4) The applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or pled no
contest to a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter.
(5) The license is to be used for employment in a business that is
prohibited by any applicable law, statute, rule or regulation, or is
§ 285-10 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-10
1:182
§ 285-11. Fees.
§ 285-12. Transfer of license prohibited.
Any license granted under this chapter shall be nontransferable. A licensee
shall not transfer any license to another individual or business, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application for
the license.
§ 285-13. Expiration and renewal of license.
specifically prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter or
Chapter 390, Zoning.
(6) The applicant has had an employee license revoked by the Village
within two years of the date of the current application.
C. If the employee license is denied, the temporary license previously
issued shall immediately be deemed null and void.
A. Operating licenses.
(1) Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether
for a new license or for a renewal) shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application and investigation fee to be established
by resolution of the Village Council to cover the expense of
considering, investigating and making a decision on the
application.
(2) In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
Subsection A(1) of this section, every sexually oriented business
that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall, within 30 days of
the grant of a new or renewed license, pay to the Village an annual
nonrefundable license fee to be established by resolution of the
Village Council.
B. Employee licenses.
(1) Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal) shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable application and investigation fee to be established
by resolution of the Village Council to cover the expense of
considering, investigating and making a decision on the
application.
(2) In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
Subsection B(1), every applicant who is granted a sexually oriented
business employee license (new or renewal) shall, within 30 days of
the grant of a new or renewed license, pay to the Village an annual
nonrefundable license fee to be established by resolution of the
Village Council.
§ 285-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-13
1:183
§ 285-14. Suspension of license.
The Village shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has refused to allow
an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this chapter, or has otherwise violated any section of this chapter.
§ 285-15. Revocation of license.
A. Each license granted under this chapter shall expire one year from the
date the license is granted and may be renewed only by making a new
application for a license as provided in this chapter. A complete
application for renewal of a license shall be made at least 30 days
before the expiration date of the license. If the completed application is
made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the prior license will
still expire one year from the date the license was granted; and the
sexually oriented business must remain closed from the date of the
expiration of the prior license until the date the new license is granted
under this chapter.
B. If the Village denies the renewal of a license, the applicant shall be
prohibited from reapplying for a new license for a period of one year
from the date of the denial.
A. The Village shall revoke a license if the license has been suspended
more than two times within a twelve-month period.
B. The Village shall revoke a license if the Village determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that any one or more of the following
have occurred:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application.
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed the possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed assignation or prostitution on the
premises of the sexually oriented business.
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
(5) The licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act, including
any specified sexual activity, to occur in or on the licensed premises
of the sexually oriented business.
(6) The licensee is delinquent in payment to the Village, county or state
for any taxes or fees.
§ 285-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-15
1:184
§ 285-16. Appeals.
Any denial of an initial application or renewal for a license under this
chapter, or any suspension or revocation of any license under this chapter,
may be appealed in writing within 10 days of the decision to the Village
Council. The Village Council shall hold a hearing within 30 days of receiving
the written appeal. The Village Council shall make its decision upholding
or overturning the denial, suspension or revocation within 30 days of the
hearing. The decision of the Village Council shall be deemed a final decision
by the Village. The applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review
of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The
administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
§ 285-17. Abatement of business as public nuisance.
A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance,
which may be enjoined or abated. Nothing within this chapter shall preclude
the state attorney general, the county prosecuting attorney, or any citizen
of the county from maintaining an action to enjoin and abate a sexually
oriented business as a nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No.
236 of 1961 (MCLA § 600.101 et seq., MSA § 27A.101 et seq.).
C. Any revocation of a license shall continue for one year, and the licensee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for a period of
one year from the date the revocation became effective.
§ 285-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-17
1:185
Chapter 300
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 196.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 285-17 SPRING LAKE CODE § 285-17
1:186
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Trash Collection
[Adopted as Ch. 62, Art. I, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 300-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GARBAGE — Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable.
TRASH — Nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard
clippings, ashes, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building
materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health
or safety.
§ 300-2. Violations and penalties.54
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 300-3. Garbage and trash collection. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 309]
The occupant of a residential, commercial, or industrial building or
structure having garbage, trash, or yard waste pickup service furnished
by a person licensed to render such service pursuant to Article II of this
chapter shall place all the garbage or yard waste in a closed, watertight
bag or container; shall place all of the trash in a dumpster, vessel, or
box suitable for storing and carrying trash; shall bundle all brush, twigs,
and tree limbs. The foregoing sentence shall apply only to garbage, not to
trash, brush, or yard waste on days designated by the Village as cleanup
days during which Village employees pick up trash, brush, or yard waste.
All of the bags, containers, vessels, boxes, and bundles shall be placed in
a location where they are readily accessible for collection. The occupant
of any residential structure shall not knowingly place any of the bags,
containers, vessels, boxes, bundles, or any garbage or trash, on a street,
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:187
parkway, or sidewalk prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day of
collection established by the garbage and trash collector; nor shall the
occupant knowingly permit the bags, containers, vessels, boxes, bundles,
or any garbage, yard waste, or trash to remain on a street, parkway, or
sidewalk after 6:00 p.m. on the date of collection.
§ 300-4. Duties of owner.
When a residential building or structure contains more than two dwelling
units, the owner or landlord shall have the duty to provide suitable trash
cans, containers or dumpsters for the use of the occupants or tenants.
Failure to do so constitutes a violation of this article.
§ 300-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 300-4
1:188
ARTICLE II
Haulers
[Adopted as Ch. 62, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 300-5. Exemptions from article.
This article shall not be applicable to any person carting trash or garbage
when such is done on a gratuity basis and no charge is made.
§ 300-6. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting
or hauling garbage or trash within the Village unless such person shall first
have obtained a license, except as provided in § 300-5.
§ 300-7. Application for license.55
Any person desiring to engage in the business of collecting or hauling
garbage or trash within the limits of the Village shall make application
to the Village Council or its designated representative. Such application
shall include the type of service to be rendered, the proposed rates to
be charged and a description of all equipment to be used, and shall have
attached copies of certificates of insurance coverage limits. In addition, the
application shall contain at a minimum the following information:
§ 300-8. Requirements for issuance of license. [Amended 7-5-1988
by Ord. No. 181]
No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of collecting or
hauling garbage and trash unless the applicant is able to demonstrate the
ability to comply with the following requirements:
A. The name and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of all the directors, officers and
shareholders owning a ten-percent interest or more in the corporation
shall be given. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of each partner shall be given.
B. The place where it is proposed to maintain the applicant's business and
the proposed hours of operation of the business.
C. A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which the applicant
intends to do business.
D. Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or managing the
applicant's business has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or pled no
contest to a crime or municipal civil infraction. In the event of an
affirmative response, the applicant shall state the activity involved,
along with the date, place and jurisdiction of each offense.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8
1:189
§ 300-9. Collection standards and requirements; recycling.
[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 203; 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 309]
All persons licensed to collect or haul garbage, trash, or yard waste
pursuant to this article shall comply with the following standards and
requirements during the term of the license:
A. To provide pickup service at least once each week to every person in the
Village desiring such service and to provide at least one backup vehicle
to ensure prompt pickup in case of equipment failure.
B. To insure each truck or piece of equipment against injury to person or
property for damage to property, for injury or death to any person, and
for injury or death to any person in any single accident in amounts as
required by the Village Council. Certificates of such insurance shall be
filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer before any license shall be issued.
A. Maintain service standards and insurance coverage required for
issuance of the license as provided in § 300-8 and include the Village
and its officers and employees as additional insureds on such insurance
policies and indemnify and hold the Village harmless from any liability
claims that may arise as a result of the licensee's operations for
collection or hauling of garbage or trash within the limits of the Village.
B. Provide all dumpsters, receptacles, and vehicles used for collection or
hauling garbage, trash, or yard waste with bins so as to prevent spillage
and reduce noxious odors. No open equipment shall be permitted
unless it is used under emergency conditions, and each such emergency
use shall be approved by the Village Manager prior to its use.56
C. Compliance with all applicable federal and state statutes and
regulations concerning the utilization of garbage and waste hauling
equipment in compliance with such statutes and regulations, including
appropriate licensing and registrations.
D. Provide a sufficient number of trucks, equipment, and personnel to
perform all services in a prompt and efficient manner so as to not delay
the collection of household trash or garbage within the limits of the
Village.
E. At all times identify on the equipment and vehicles utilized to collect
garbage, trash, or yard waste in the Village in an open, prominent, and
visible manner the name and address of the licensee and a telephone
number where customers of the licensee can contact the licensee or the
representative of the licensee in the local calling area without
additional charge for long distance rates.
F. For residential customers, the licensee shall collect from each of the
licensee's customers in the Village all garbage and refuse placed in
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 300-9
1:190
containers or dumpsters approved by the Village, or in conventionaltype
trash cans with a capacity not exceeding 26 gallons or 60 pounds
for each container in weight. Except as set forth in this article, there are
no limits as to the number of containers in use at each customer pickup
location. The service will be provided not less than once each week for
garbage and refuse and not less than two times per month for recycling.
Trash and recycling receptacles shall be located by the customer either
in front of the garage or at the corner of a house, whichever is closer to
the street line, but not exceeding a maximum distance of 50 feet from
the street line. The licensee may reserve the right to refuse to climb
steps and drive up steep driveways. Leaves, grass clippings (which shall
have a five-bag limit), Christmas trees, and other bulky refuse must be
placed on the curb for pickup on the designated day of service; and
the following standards shall be complied with in connection with such
service:57
(1) The following items need not be picked up by the licensee unless
special arrangements are made with it by the customer and should
not be included in the definition of "household garbage or refuse":
tree trunks and stumps, unbagged brush, motor vehicles, motor
vehicle parts, large machines, furniture, appliances, bulkier
building materials, or any other items which due to bulk will be
unusually difficult for the personnel of the licensee to load or haul
away.
(2) The licensee will serve any customer that desires a special pickup
service at a quoted cost based upon the level of service to be
provided by the licensee to the customer.
(3) The collection day for the residential pickup in the Village limits
shall be designated by the licensee to be one day each week. The
licensee shall not operate its vehicles for purposes of collection of
such trash or refuse from its customers before the hour of 6:00
a.m., local time, or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. local time. If the
designated collection day falls on a holiday, the pickup is scheduled
for the next following day.
(4) Provide back-door pickup service to any customer that is physically
unable to bring the trash containers to the front corner of the
house, without additional charge, the determination of physical
incapacity to be made by the licensee; except if the customer
disagrees with the licensee's determination, the Village Manager,
after consultation with the customer and with the licensee, will
make such determination based on information submitted by the
licensee and the customer.
G. For commercial and industrial customers, the licensee shall collect from
each of the licensee's customers in the Village, all garbage and refuse
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9
1:191
placed in containers or dumpsters approved by the Village. The service
shall be provided not less than once each week for garbage and refuse
and not less than two times per month for recycling. The licensee shall
not operate its vehicles for purposes of collection of such garbage and
refuse from its customers before the hour of 6:00 a.m. local time or
after 7:00 p.m. local time. If the designated collection day falls on a
holiday, the pickup is scheduled for the following day.58
H. Develop, implement, maintain, and provide a comprehensive curbside
recycling program for the Village. The recycling program shall be
developed with the assistance of a recycling committee designated by
the Village and shall be approved by the Village before implementation.
The Village Manager is further vested with full power to develop,
supervise and implement the recycling program pursuant to the
following standards.
(1) The recycling program shall be carried out on the same day as the
licensee provides its curbside collection of household garbage and
refuse from residential customers.59
(2) Curbside recycling will be provided by the licensee through the use
of a bag, bin, box, or other collection method provided by the
licensee as part of its monthly service fee to a residential customer
and as approved by the Village Manager.
(3) The licensee in providing this service is deemed to warrant to the
Village that all materials collected for recycling will be recycled to
the fullest extent possible and as required by the rules and
regulations implemented by the Village's recycling program.
(4) The recycling program, along with the collection of household
garbage and refuse, may utilize cart-type containers with a
capacity not exceeding 96 gallons in addition to the designated
recycling bags, bins, or boxes.60
(5) In addition to compliance with the provisions of this subsection, the
licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions of the standards
set forth in Subsection F of this section; except no tree trunks or
stumps need be picked up by a licensee, whether intended as trash
or garbage, or a recyclable item, unless otherwise agreed to by the
licensee and the Village Manager.61
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 62-64(8)(f), regarding collected recycling materials in
conditions unfit for recycling, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 300-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 300-10
1:192
§ 300-10. Rates and rules. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 203]
§ 300-11. License fees.62
The fee for a license issued pursuant to this article shall be set by the Village
Council by resolution and amended by resolution of the Village Council.
§ 300-12. License procedures; renewal, denial, display and
transfer.63
The application for renewal, suspension, revocation, display and transfer of
a license required shall be as follows:
A. All persons licensed to collect or haul garbage, trash or yard waste
pursuant to this article shall only charge such rates and will be subject
to such additional rules as are set forth in a rate schedule approved by
the Village Council based upon a proposed rate schedule which shall
initially be filed by the licensee with its application for license and as
evidenced by the resolution which establishes approved rates as
adopted by the Village Council. No increase of rates shall be permitted
after a license is issued pursuant to this article and a resolution
approving the rates has been adopted unless the increase has been
approved by the Village Council by subsequent resolution. The
proposed rates shall bear a proper relation to the cost of the licensee's
operation of its waste and trash hauling business within the Village
limits, including the cost of similar services being offered by other
licensed operators within the Village limits.
B. The recycling program implemented by the Village pursuant to
§ 300-9H will be subject to such additional rules and regulations as are
set forth by the Village Council pursuant to resolution.
A. Renewal. An application for renewal of a license shall be considered in
the same manner as an original application.
B. Denial, revocation or suspension.
(1) A license application may be denied, and a license previously
issued may be revoked or suspended by the Village Manager at any
time for any of the following reasons:
(a) An intentional or negligent misrepresentation or false
statement made on the license application.
(b) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article.
(c) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Village
ordinance.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12
1:193
§ 300-13. Number of licensees.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or regulations or the provisions of
this article, there shall be no more than one license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article for each $10,000,000 of assessed valuation of real
property within the Village limits, such assessed valuation determined by
the Assessor of the Village; provided, if the assessed valuation exceeds an
increment of 1/2 of $10,000,000 and licenses have been issued pursuant to
this article for the previous increments of $10,000,000 each, an additional
license shall become available at such time. Licenses once issued shall not
be revoked in the event of a decline in assessed valuation; however, all other
(d) Conducting a business in an unlawful manner in such manner
as to constitute a public nuisance.
(2) Unless otherwise specifically provided in other Village ordinances,
the Village Manager has exclusive power to make decisions
regarding the granting, denial, suspension or revocation of
licenses. However, the Village Manager may decline to decide such
a matter and refer the decision to Village Council. A written notice
of the denial of the license application, or suspension or revocation
of a previously granted license, stating the grounds for such
actions, shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to
the address as shown in the application for license.
(3) Within ten days of delivery or mailing of a written notice of denial,
suspension or revocation of a license by the Village Manager, a
licensee or applicant may appeal such action to the Village Council
by filing with the Clerk/Treasurer a written objection to the action
and requesting a hearing before the Council. The time of the
hearing and conduct of the hearing shall be established in
accordance with the procedures adopted by the Council.
C. Display requirements.
(1) No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle, or
machine required to be licensed by the article, such tags, stamps or
insignia as may be required by Village ordinance.
(2) No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license,
or license for which a duplicate has been issued.
D. Transferability. The license issued under this article shall not be
transferable from person to person, nor from place to place, without the
approval of the Village Council. The person requesting such transfer
shall file an application for transfer of license with the Village Clerk/
Treasurer containing the same information required for a license
application. The approval of such person or body shall be evidenced by
the written endorsement of the Village Clerk/Treasurer upon the face of
the license showing to whom the license has been transferred and the
date of such transfer.
§ 300-12 SPRING LAKE CODE § 300-13
1:194
provisions of this article and the regulations issued under this article shall
continue to be complied with by a licensee.
§ 300-14. Determination of violation; revocation of license.64
In addition to the provisions of this article, if an alleged violation has
occurred with respect to the provisions of this article wherein a licensee is
alleged to have violated the article or any rules and regulations provided
in this article, the following procedures may be implemented by the Village
Council, or, if deemed appropriate by it, the Village Manager, to investigate
such alleged violation to determine the appropriate action to be taken to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village:
A. A preliminary determination shall be made by the Village Manager that
a violation has or has not occurred.
(1) If it is determined that the alleged violation has occurred in the
reasonable judgment of the Village Manager or Village Council, but
has not or will not cause an immediate or direct threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village, a letter
of reprimand stating the violation shall be forwarded to the
licensee. Such letter of reprimand shall then be part of the
consideration as to whether a license will be renewed. If more than
three letters of reprimand have been forwarded to a licensee
during the term of any license, the license shall be deemed revoked
30 days after mailing of such third letter unless the licensee shall
request a hearing in writing before the Village Council.
(a) If a hearing is requested by a licensee, the Village Council shall
permit the licensee to show cause why its license should not be
revoked, the hearing to be held at the next public meeting,
regular or special, after receipt of the licensee's request for a
hearing.
(b) After the hearing, the Village Council may determine whether
to uphold such revocation, or to reinstate the license of the
licensee. Such determination shall be made at the same
meeting as the public hearing is held.
(2) If it is determined that the alleged violation will or could cause an
immediate or direct threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village, then in addition to the other penalties
provided for in this article, the Village Manager or the Village
Council shall forward a letter to the licensee revoking the license
forthwith. The licensee shall have 15 days after revocation of its
license within which to request in writing a hearing as provided in
Subsection A(1)(a) of this section, and the Village Council after
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:195
such hearing shall make the determination provided for in
Subsection A(1)(b).
B. If such preliminary determination provided for in Subsection A results
in a finding that no apparent violation has occurred, a written summary
of such determination shall be placed in the licensee's file maintained
by the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 300-14 SPRING LAKE CODE § 300-14
1:196
Chapter 307
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Improvements and assessments — See
Charter, Art. XI.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 326.
Taxation — See Ch. 334.
§ 307-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COST — When referring to the cost of any local public improvement,
means the cost of services, plans, specifications, estimates, condemnation,
spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, acquisition of land or
other property, construction, legal fees, interest on special assessment
bonds not to exceed one year and all other costs incident to the making of
such improvement, the special assessments for and the financing of such
improvement.
LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any public improvement or repair
which is of such a nature as to benefit especially any real property or
properties within a district in the vicinity of such improvement or repair.
§ 307-2. Authority to assess.
The whole cost or any part of the cost of any local public improvement
may be defrayed by special assessment upon the real property specifically
benefited by the improvement in the manner provided in this chapter.
§ 307-3. Initiation of special assessment projects by petition.
A. Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed as
follows:
(1) In the case of street and road improvements, by the record owners
of lands whose frontage constitutes at least 65% of the total
frontage upon the street or road improvement; and
(2) In the case of all other local public improvements, by the record
owners of lands whose land area constitutes at least 51% of the
total land area in the special assessment district, as finally
thereafter established.
B. In all cases, the record owners shall be determined based on the last
preceding general tax records of the Village. Land contract purchasers
shall be considered as record owners if they have registered with the
§ 300-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-3
1:197
§ 307-4. Initiation of special assessment projects without petition.
Proceedings for the making of a local public improvement within the Village
may also be commenced by resolution of the Council without a petition in
those circumstances where the Council determines as part of its initiating
resolution that the local public improvement concerns water distribution
facilities or sanitary or storm sewer collection facilities which are necessary
for the public health or that the local public improvement concerns street,
sidewalk or alley improvements that are necessary for public safety. The
determination of the Council as to necessity pursuant to this section shall
be final and conclusive on all parties.
§ 307-5. Report.
Before the Council shall consider the making of any local public
improvement, the Council shall cause to be prepared a report which shall
include, as the Council shall deem necessary, such plans and specifications
as are necessary to generally describe the improvement and its location
and prepare detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the useful life of
the improvement, a description of the assessment district, and such other
pertinent information as will permit the Council to decide the cost, extent
and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion
should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially
benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the Village at large. The
Council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local
public improvement until such report has been filed nor until after a public
hearing has been held by the Council for the purpose of hearing objections
to the making of the improvement.
§ 307-6. Determination of the project; notice.
Assessor to receive property tax bills. Lands not subject to assessment
and lands within public streets and alleys shall not be included in
computing frontage or assessment district area. Any filed petition may
be supplemented as to signatures by the filing of an additional signed
copy. Such petition shall contain a brief description of the property
owned by the respective signatories; and if it shall appear that the
petition is signed by the requisite percentage, the Clerk/Treasurer shall
certify the petition to the Council. The petition shall be addressed to
the Council and filed with the Clerk/Treasurer and shall in no event be
considered directory but is advisory only.
A. After receiving the report required in § 307-5 for making any local
public improvement, and after the Council has reviewed the report, a
resolution may be passed tentatively:
(1) Determining the necessity of the improvement and setting forth its
nature;
§ 307-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 307-6
1:198
§ 307-7. Hearing on necessity.
At the public hearing on the proposed local public improvement, or any
adjournment of the meeting, which may be without further notice, all
persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which
the Council may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a
manner as it shall deem to be in the best interest of the Village as a whole;
provided that if the scope of the improvement is increased or additions
are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to
notice prescribed in § 307-6. If the determination of the Council shall be
to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving
the necessary plans and specifications, assessment district and detailed
estimates of cost, and directing the Clerk/Treasurer to prepare a special
assessment roll in accordance with the Council's determination and report
the roll to the Council for confirmation.
§ 307-8. Limitations on preliminary expenses.
The Council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a
local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost
of preparing necessary plans and specifications and estimates of cost and
(2) Prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of the improvement
shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially
benefited;
(3) Determining the benefits received by affected properties, and what
part, if any, shall be paid by the Village at large;
(4) Designating and establishing the special assessment district; and
(5) Designating whether the cost shall be assessed according to
frontage or other benefits.
B. Such resolution shall also direct the placing of complete information
concerning the improvement on file in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer,
where it may be found for examination, and shall also direct the Clerk/
Treasurer to give notice of a public hearing on the proposed
improvement, at which time and place, interested persons will be given
the opportunity to be heard. Such notice shall be given publication in a
newspaper published or circulated within the Village and by first-class
mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the Village.
The publication of notice shall be made at least 10 full days prior to the
hearing, and the mailing of notice shall be made at least 10 full days
prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state that the report
concerning the improvement is on file with the Clerk/Treasurer and
shall also contain a description of the special assessment district. Proof
of publication and an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the Clerk/
Treasurer prior to the hearing. The hearing required by this section
may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the Council.
§ 307-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-8
1:199
for legal fees and hearing expenses, shall be made for the improvement, nor
shall any improvement be commenced, until the special assessment roll to
defray the costs of the improvement shall have been made and confirmed.
§ 307-9. Special assessment roll.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and
parcels of land within the special assessment district benefited by the
proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the
proportionate amount benefited. The amount spread in each case shall be
based upon the detailed estimate of cost as approved by the Council.
§ 307-10. Clerk/Treasurer to file assessment roll.
When the Clerk/Treasurer shall have completed such assessment roll, the
roll shall be presented to the Council for Council review and certification.
§ 307-11. Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections in
writing.
Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the Council, by resolution, shall
accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the Clerk/
Treasurer for public examination; shall fix the time and place the Council
will meet to review such special assessment roll; and shall direct the Clerk/
Treasurer to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an
opportunity for interested persons to be heard. The notice shall be given
by publication once, at least 10 full days prior to the date of the hearing,
in a newspaper published or circulated within the Village and by first-class
mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the Village,
mailed at least 10 full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing
required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special
meeting of the Council. The hearing may be adjourned without further
notice. Proof of publication and an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer prior to the hearing. At this meeting, all interested persons
shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the assessments against
them. The Clerk/Treasurer shall be present at every meeting of the Council
at which a special assessment is to be reviewed.
§ 307-12. Changes and corrections in assessment roll.
The Council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of
such special assessment roll and at such meeting, or a proper adjournment
of the meeting, shall consider all objections submitted in writing. The
Council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description
of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing in the roll; or it
may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that a new roll
be prepared. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll
as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and
making a record of such changes as the Council deems justified, the Council
§ 307-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 307-12
1:200
determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that
assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass
a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it
on file in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer and directing the Clerk/Treasurer
to attach the warrant of the Clerk/Treasurer to a certified copy of the
roll within 10 days, commanding the Assessor to spread and the Clerk/
Treasurer to collect the various sums and amounts appearing on the roll
as directed by the Council. The roll shall have the date of confirmation
endorsed on the roll and shall from that date be final and conclusive for
the purpose of the improvement to which it applies unless contested in the
manner provided by state law and subject to adjustment to conform to the
actual cost of the improvement, as provided in § 307-17.
§ 307-13. Special assessment; due date.
All special assessments, except such installments as the Council shall make
payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and
payable upon the date specified in the Council resolution confirming the
special assessment roll.
§ 307-14. Partial payments; penalty for overdue payment.
A. The Council may provide for the payment of special assessments in
annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed 30 in
number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll or
on such date thereafter as the Council may determine and deferred
installments being due annually thereafter, or in the discretion of the
Council, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual Village tax
roll in each calendar year thereafter until all are paid. Annual
installments need not be equal in amount. Interest shall be charged on
all deferred installments at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate then
permitted by law for special assessment bonds sold by the Village, from
such date as shall be fixed by the Council, and shall be payable on the
due date of each subsequent installment. The full amount of all or any
deferred installments, with interest accrued to the last day of the month
of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates.
B. If a special assessment or installment is not paid when due, it shall be
deemed to be delinquent and there shall be collected a penalty of 1% of
the amount of the delinquent assessment payment, the assessment
itself and all accrued interest to the payment date, for each month, or
fraction of a month, that the assessment remains unpaid before being
reported to the Council for reassessment upon the Village tax roll. After
the Council has confirmed the roll, the Clerk/Treasurer shall notify by
mail each property owner on the roll that the roll has been filed, stating
the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of
the Clerk/Treasurer to give the notice or of such owner to receive the
notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the Village or
any assessment on the roll, nor excuse the payment of any assessment
or the interest or penalties.
§ 307-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-15
1:201
§ 307-15. Delinquent special assessments.
Any assessment, or part of an assessment, remaining unpaid on the first
Monday of March following the date upon which it became delinquent shall
be reported as unpaid by the Clerk/Treasurer to the Council. Any such
delinquent assessment, together with all accrued interest and penalties,
shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual Village tax roll in
a column headed "special assessments" with a penalty of 4% upon such
total amount of the assessment and the interest and penalties added, and
when so transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll shall be collected in
all respects as provided for the collection of Village taxes.
§ 307-16. Creation of lien.
Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges on such
assessments from the date of confirmation of the roll shall become a debt to
the Village from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall
be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and
effect as the lien created by general law for state, county and Village taxes;
and the lands upon which such assessments are a lien shall be subject to
sale the same as are lands upon which delinquent Village taxes constitute a
lien.
§ 307-17. Additional assessments; refunds.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall, within 60 days after the completion of each
local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost and adjust
the special assessment roll to correspond with such cost. Should the
assessment prove larger than necessary by less than 5% of the amount of
the roll, this shall be reported to the Council, which may place the excess in
the Village treasury or make a refund pro rata according to the assessment,
such refund to be in cash or by the cancellation of all or part of one or more
future due installments. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by
5% or more, the entire excess shall be refunded pro rata according to the
assessment, such refund to be in cash or by the cancellation of all or part
of one or more future due installments. No refunds of special assessments
or cancellation of future due installments may be made which impair or
contravene the provision of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in
whole or part by such special assessments. When any special assessment
roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which
it was made, the Council may make an additional pro rata assessment; but
the total amount assessed against any one parcel of land shall not exceed
the benefits received by the lot or parcel of land.
§ 307-18. Additional procedures.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient
to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the Council shall
provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required.
§ 307-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 307-19
1:202
§ 307-19. Collection of special assessments.
If bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments,
all collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall
be set in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest on the
bonds so issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments,
and shall be used for no other purpose.
§ 307-20. Special assessment accounts.
Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local
improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any
money borrowed for such improvements. Each special assessment account
must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment
was levied, incidental expenses, including the repayment of the principal
and interest on money borrowed, and to refund excessive assessments if
refunds are authorized.
§ 307-21. Contested assessments.
An action may not be instituted for the purpose of contesting or enjoining
the collection of a special assessment unless:
§ 307-22. Reassessment for benefits.
Whenever the Council shall deem any special assessment invalid or
defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason
whatsoever, in whole or in part, the Council shall have power to cause a
new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former
assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part has been
completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or
not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for its collection shall be
made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion
of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it
shall be applied upon the reassessment; and the reassessment shall to that
extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have
been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such
payment.
A. Within 45 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll,
written notice is given to the Council indicating an intention to file such
an action and stating the grounds on which it is claimed that the
assessment is illegal; and
B. The action is commenced within 90 days after the confirmation of the
roll.
§ 307-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-23
1:203
§ 307-23. Combination of projects.
The Council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose
of effecting a saving in the costs. There shall be established for each district
separate funds and accounts to cover the cost.
§ 307-24. Division of parcels.
Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment has been
confirmed and divided into installments, the Assessor shall apportion the
uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided and shall
enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall, within 10 days after such apportionment, send
notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address
by first-class mail. Such apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all
parties unless a protest in writing is received by the Clerk/Treasurer within
20 days of the mailing of the notice, in which event the Council shall grant
all interested parties a hearing and affirm or modify such apportionment as
it shall determine.
§ 307-25. Deferred payments of special assessments.
The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments
from persons who, in the opinion of the Council and Assessor, by reason
of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost. In all such cases, as
a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the Village shall
require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary payable on
or before his death, or in any event, on the sale or transfer of the property.
§ 307-26. Hazards and nuisances.
When any lot, building or structure within the Village, because of the
accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age
or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in
the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous
to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the Village or those of them
residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the Council
may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon which
such hazard or nuisance exists, or the owner of the building or structure
itself, specifying the nature of the hazard or nuisance, and requiring such
owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove the building or structure
promptly and within a time to be specified by the Council, which shall
be commensurate with the nature of the hazard or nuisance. If at the
expiration of the time limit in the notice the owner has not complied with its
requirements, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building
or structure itself is not known, the Council may order such a hazard or
nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the Village which
is qualified to do the work required; and the costs of such abatement shall
be assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon
which the hazard or nuisance was located.
§ 307-23 SPRING LAKE CODE § 307-26
1:204
Chapter 313
STORMWATER: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Groundwater use — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Water — See Ch. 373.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 307-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-26
1:205

ARTICLE I
Authority; Findings and Purpose; Terminology
§ 313-1. Statutory authority; local enforcement.
§ 313-2. Findings.
The Village finds that:
A. This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule Village Act,
as amended, being MCLA § 78.10 et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as
amended, being MCLA § 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as
amended, being MCLA § 560.101 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as
amended, being MCLA § 141.101 et seq., the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being MCLA § 324.101 et
seq.; Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also
known as the "Clean Water Act") as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342(p)
and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; and other applicable state and
federal laws.65
B. The Village shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Village
may be delegated in writing by the Village Manager, acting as the
authorized enforcement agency (i.e., stormwater officer), to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the
Village.
A. Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the
water bodies and water resources of the Village, thus threatening the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry.
B. Illicit discharges enter the stormwater drainage system through either
direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or
deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect connections
(e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills connected by
drain inlets).
C. Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and
connections contained in this chapter and implementing the same will
address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges.
D. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-3
1:207
§ 313-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the
following objectives:
§ 313-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the stormwater drainage
system and water bodies generated on any developed and undeveloped
lands.
§ 313-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the
context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Village Manager and/or
any persons or agencies designated to act as the authorized enforcement
agency by the Village Manager.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Structural devices or
nonstructural practices that are designed to prevent pollutants from
entering stormwater flows, to direct the flow of stormwater, or to treat
polluted stormwater flows. BMPs may include, but shall not be limited
to, those described in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan watersheds. Equivalent practices and
design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this chapter (including, but
not limited to, minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge
of pollutants into stormwater) shall be as determined by the Village
Manager.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder.
DISCHARGE — The introduction (intentionally or unintentionally, and
directly or indirectly) of any liquid, substance, pollutant, or other material
into a stormwater drainage system or water body.
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage
system and water bodies by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the stormwater
drainage system and water bodies.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
D. To provide appropriate remedies for failure to comply with this chapter.
§ 313-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-5
1:208
DISCHARGER — Any person who directly or indirectly discharges
stormwater from any premises. "Discharger" also includes any employee,
officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or
is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission that is, or results
in, a violation of this chapter.
DRAIN — Any and all conduits, facilities, measures, areas, and structures
that serve to convey, catch, hold, filter, store, and/or receive stormwater or
groundwater, either on a temporary or permanent basis.
DRAINAGE — The collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/
or surface water.
DRAINAGEWAY — A drain, water body, or floodway.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
FLOODPLAIN — The area, usually lowlands, adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, or watercourse or lake, or other body of standing water, that
has been or may be covered by floodwater.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any solid, liquid, semisolid, or gaseous
substance or material that because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any method, means, or conduit for conveying an
illicit discharge into a water body or a stormwater drainage system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a water body or a stormwater
drainage system that does not consist entirely of stormwater, that is not
authorized by the terms of an NPDES permit, or that is not an authorized
discharge as defined by this chapter.
MDEQ — Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA or a state under authority delegated
pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the stormwater
drainage system or a water body that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity.
POLLUTANT — Includes, but is not limited to, the following: any dredged
spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural
waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive
§ 313-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-5
1:209
materials, hazardous materials, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural
waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant
under the Clean Water Act. "Pollutant" also includes properties or
characteristics of water, including, but not limited to pH, heat, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land,
or property, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks
and parking strips.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person having legal title, or holding equitable
title as recorded at the Ottawa County Register of Deeds, or any person
having or exercising care, custody, or control over any premises.
STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS — All applicable
state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the
provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended.66
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Storm sewers, conduits, curbs,
gutters, catch basins, drains, ditches, pumping devices, parking lots, roads,
or other man-made channels that are designed or used, singly or together
in combination with one another, for collection or conveying stormwater.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document, that
describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and
the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, a
stormwater drainage system, and/or a water body to the maximum extent
practicable.
STORMWATER RUNOFF (or STORMWATER) — The runoff and drainage of
precipitation resulting from rainfall, snowmelt, or other natural event or
process.
TOXIC MATERIAL — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is
or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment,
including, without limitation, those listed in 40 CFR 401.15 as toxic under
the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical Materials
Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, or as otherwise provided by local, state, or federal laws, rules or
regulations.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a premises. The term includes any water that
has in any way been used and degraded or physically or chemically altered.
WATER BODY — A river, lake, stream, creek, or other watercourse or
wetlands.
66.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.3106.
§ 313-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-6
1:210
§ 313-6. Word usage; interpretation.
Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their
common and accepted meanings, except those words and phrases defined
in § 313-5 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given
in that section. Technical words and technical phrases not defined in this
chapter, but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical
usage, shall be construed according to such meanings.
§ 313-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-6
1:211

ARTICLE II
Prohibitions and Authorizations
§ 313-7. Prohibited discharges.
§ 313-8. Prohibited illicit connections.
§ 313-9. Authorized discharges.
The following nonstormwater discharges are permissible, but only if they
do not result in a violation of State of Michigan Water Quality Standards
and provided that they are undertaken in compliance with any applicable or
required BMPs:
A. It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, to
a stormwater drainage system or water body any substance or material,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater or an authorized discharge.
This prohibition includes the commencement, conducting, or
continuance of any illicit discharge by any person to a stormwater
drainage system or water body.
B. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively prevent pollutants
from being discharged with the stormwater, except in accordance with
BMPs.
C. The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to require
dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, using
stormwater pollution prevention plans and BMPs, as determined
necessary by the authorized enforcement agency to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants to a stormwater drainage system or water
body.
D. The discharge prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any
nonstormwater discharge authorized under an NPDES permit, waiver,
or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the EPA, provided the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater
drainage system.
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain (or to allow the
construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of) an illicit
connection.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
§ 313-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-9
1:213
§ 313-10. Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in floodway.
Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store
or stockpile, within a floodway, any hazardous or toxic materials, unless
adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent
any such materials from entering a stormwater drainage system or water
body.
A. Water supply line flushing.
B. Landscape irrigation runoff.
C. Diverted stream flows.
D. Rising groundwater.
E. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains.
F. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
G. Discharges from potable water sources.
H. Foundation drains.
I. Air-conditioning condensate.
J. Irrigation water.
K. Springs.
L. Water from crawl space pumps.
M. Footing drains and basement sump pumps.
N. Lawn watering runoff.
O. Waters from noncommercial car washing.
P. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Q. Residential swimming pool water and other dechlorinated swimming
pool water (which is dechlorinated in accordance with product
directions), provided that any filter backwash water that is present is
treated.
R. Residual street wash water.
S. Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities.
T. Discharges specifically authorized in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health,
welfare, and safety or the environment.
§ 313-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-10
1:214
ARTICLE III
Inspection; Monitoring; Reporting and Recordkeeping
§ 313-11. Inspection and sampling.
The authorized enforcement agency may inspect and/or obtain samples
from any discharger's premises as necessary to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow
properly identified representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to
enter the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes
of such inspection or investigation including, but not limited to, smoke/
dye testing, televising pipes, sampling, and excavation. The authorized
enforcement agency shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice
of the need for such access, if possible and consistent with protection
of public health, safety and the environment. The properly identified
representatives may place on the discharger's premises the equipment
or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Unreasonable delays in
allowing access to a premises are a violation of this chapter.
§ 313-12. Stormwater monitoring facilities.
If directed in writing to do so by the authorized enforcement agency, a
discharger of stormwater runoff from any premises used for commercial
or industrial purposes shall provide and operate equipment or devices for
the monitoring of stormwater runoff to provide for inspection, sampling,
and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a stormwater
drainage system, as specified by the authorized enforcement agency. The
authorized enforcement agency may require a discharger to provide and
operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for
the inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of discharges in order to
determine whether adverse effects from, or as a result of, such discharges
may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling, and
flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained at the
discharger's expenses in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and
regulations.
§ 313-13. Accidental discharges.
Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a stormwater drainage
system or a water body any substance other than stormwater or an
authorized discharge shall immediately notify the authorized enforcement
agency of the discharge. If the notification is given orally, a written report
concerning the discharge shall be filed with the authorized enforcement
agency within five business days. The written report shall specify all of the
following:
A. The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof.
B. The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge.
§ 313-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-13
1:215
§ 313-14. Recordkeeping requirement.
Any person that violates any requirement of this chapter or that is subject
to monitoring under this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less
than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence, and records, including records on
magnetic or electronic media, and any and all summaries of such records
relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis of any discharge
or stormwater runoff from any premises connected with the violation or
subject to monitoring.
C. All measures taken to clean up the discharge, all measures taken or
proposed to be taken to mitigate any known or potential adverse
impacts of the discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to
reduce and prevent any recurrences.
D. The names and telephone numbers of the individual making the report,
and (if different) the individual who may be contacted for additional
information regarding the discharge.
§ 313-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-14
1:216
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 313-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Violation: municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by Subsection
C, and notwithstanding any other provision of the Village's laws,
ordinances, and regulations to the contrary, a person who violates any
provision of this chapter (including, without limitation, any notice,
order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made
by the authorized enforcement agency under this chapter) is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil
fine of not less than $1,000 per day for each infraction and not more
than $10,000 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other
sanctions. Each day during which any violation of this chapter
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Repeat offenses; increased fines. Increased civil fines may be imposed
for repeated violations of this chapter. A "repeat violation" means a
second or subsequent municipal civil infraction violation committed by
a person within any twelve-month period and for which a person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased civil
fine for repeat violations shall be as follows:
(1) The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be $2,500
plus costs and other sanctions.
(2) The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be $5,000.
C. Any person who 1) at the time of a violation knew or should have known
that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision
of this chapter, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the authorized
enforcement agency under this chapter; or 2) intentionally makes a
false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or
form pertaining to a permit or in a notice, report, or record required by
this chapter, or in any other correspondence or communication, written
or oral, with the authorized enforcement agency, regarding matters
regulated by this chapter; or 3) intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or
renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record
required to be maintained by this chapter; or 4) commits any other act
that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90
days; shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of $500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or
both in the discretion of the court.
D. Any person who aids or abets another person in a violation of this
chapter shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
§ 313-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-16
1:217
§ 313-16. Failure to comply; costs of correction.
The authorized enforcement agency is authorized, after giving reasonable
notice and opportunity for compliance, to correct any violation of this
chapter or damage or impairment to the stormwater drainage system
caused by a discharge and to bill the person causing the violation or
discharge for the costs of the work to be reimbursed. The reimbursable
costs under this section shall be in addition to fees, amounts or other
costs and expenses required to be paid to the authorized enforcement
agency under other sections of this chapter. What is reasonable notice
and opportunity for compliance shall be determined by the authorized
enforcement agency given the facts of the situation.
§ 313-17. Emergency measures.
If emergency measures are necessary to respond to a nuisance; to protect
public safety, health, and welfare; and/or to prevent loss of life, injury,
or damage to property, the authorized enforcement agency is authorized
to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. The authorized
enforcement agency shall provide written notice to the property owner of
the need to take emergency measures, the actions taken, and the costs of
said measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such
measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall
promptly reimburse the Village for all of such costs.
§ 313-18. Cost recovery for damage to stormwater drainage system.
Any person who discharges to a stormwater drainage system or a water
body, including, but not limited to, any person who causes or creates a
discharge that violates any provision of this chapter, produces a deposit
or obstruction or otherwise damages or impairs a stormwater drainage
system, or causes or contributes to a violation of any federal, state, or
local law governing the Village shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse
the Village for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect)
payable or incurred by the Village as a result of any such discharge, deposit,
obstruction, damage, impairment, violation, exceedance or noncompliance.
The costs that must be reimbursed to the Village shall include, but shall not
be limited to, all of the following:
A. All costs incurred by the Village in responding to the violation or
discharge, including expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement
work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring, and treatment, as a result
of the discharge, violation, exceedance or noncompliance.
B. All costs to the Village of monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in
connection with investigation, verifying, and prosecuting any
discharge, violation, exceedance, or noncompliance.
C. The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties, and claims,
including natural resource damages, levied against the Village, or any
Village representative, by any governmental agency or third party as a
§ 313-16 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-18
1:218
§ 313-19. Collection of costs; lien.
§ 313-20. Suspension of access to stormwater drainage system.
result of a violation of applicable laws or regulations that is caused
by or contributed to by any discharge, violation, exceedance, or
noncompliance.
D. The full value of any Village staff time (including any required
overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual attorney fees
and defense costs (including the Village legal counsel and any special
legal counsel), associated with responding to, investigating, verifying,
and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedance or
noncompliance, or otherwise enforcing the requirements of this
chapter.
A. Costs incurred by the Village pursuant to §§ 313-16, 313-17, 313-18 and
313-20A shall constitute a lien on the premises, which shall be
enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended from time to time,67 or as otherwise authorized by law. Any
such charges that are delinquent for six months or more may be
certified annually to the Village Clerk/Treasurer, who shall enter the
lien on the next tax roll against the premises, the costs shall be
collected, and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as
provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the
enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful
enforcement methods, the Village shall have all remedies authorized by
Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and by other
applicable laws.
B. The failure by any person to pay any amounts required to be
reimbursed to the Village as provided by this chapter shall constitute an
additional violation of this chapter.
A. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend
access to the stormwater drainage system to any person or premises
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to
the stormwater drainage system or a water body. If the person fails to
comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the stormwater drainage system or the
environment, or to minimize danger to persons, and bill the person for
the costs to the Village in taking such steps. The Village, or its
authorized agent, shall not be held liable for any damage and/or other
consequence that may result from suspension of access to the
stormwater system.
67.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ 313-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-20
1:219
§ 313-21. Appeals.
Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may
appeal in writing to the Village Council, not later than 30 days after the
action or decision being appealed. Such appeal shall identify the matter
being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The Village Council shall
consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects, or
modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the
Village Council may consider the recommendations of the authorized
enforcement agency and the comments of other persons having knowledge
or expertise regarding the matter. In considering any such appeal, the
Village Council may grant a temporary variance from the terms of this
chapter so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being
appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are
satisfied:
§ 313-22. Judicial relief.
With the approval of the Village, the authorized enforcement agency may
institute legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek all
appropriate relief for violations of this chapter or of any permit, order,
notice or agreement issued or entered into under this chapter. The action
may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, penalties,
costs, and any other relief, at law or equity that a court may order. The
authorized enforcement agency may also seek collection of fines, penalties
and any other amounts due to the Village that a person has not paid.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the stormwater drainage system in violation of this
chapter may have their access to the system terminated if the
authorized enforcement agency determines that such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement
agency will provide a violator twenty-four-hour written notice of the
proposed termination of its access. It shall be unlawful for any person to
reinstate access of the stormwater drainage system to a premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior written approval
of the authorized enforcement agency. Nothing in this subsection shall
preclude the Village from pursuing emergency action as set forth in
Subsection A above.
A. The application of the chapter provisions being appealed will present or
cause unnecessary hardship for the person appealing; provided,
however, that unnecessary hardship shall not include the need for a
property owner to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to
comply with the chapter; and
B. The granting of the relief requested will not prevent accomplishment of
the goals and purposes of this chapter, nor result in less effective
management of stormwater runoff.
§ 313-20 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-23
1:220
§ 313-23. Cumulative remedies.
The imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage, or surcharge upon
any person for a violation of this chapter, or of any permit, order, notice
or agreement issued, or entered into under this chapter, shall not preclude
the imposition by the Village, the authorized enforcement agency, or a court
of competent jurisdiction of a combination of any or all of those sanctions
and remedies or additional sanctions and remedies with respect to the same
violation, consistent with applicable limitations on penalty amounts under
state or federal laws or regulations. A criminal citation and prosecution of a
criminal action against a person shall not be dependent upon and need not
be held in abeyance during any civil, judicial, or administrative proceeding,
conference, or hearing regarding the person.
§ 313-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-23
1:221

ARTICLE V
Performance and Design Standards
§ 313-24. Responsibility to implement BMPs.
The owner or operator of a premises used for commercial or industrial
purposes shall provide, at the owner's or operator's own expenses,
reasonable protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the stormwater drainage system or water body through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge may be required to implement, at the person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system or water body.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial or
commercial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 313-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-24
1:223
Chapter 320
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 39.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Groundwater use — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Water — See Ch. 373.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 313-24 SPRING LAKE CODE § 313-24
1:224
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 320-1. General intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation and control of
stormwater runoff to protect waterways and sensitive areas in the Village.
These provisions are intended to protect sensitive areas and waterways
while at the same time allowing design flexibility. Protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare shall be a primary consideration in the design of
all stormwater runoff facilities.
§ 320-2. Statutory authority.68
This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Constitution and laws of
the State of Michigan which authorize local units of government to provide
stormwater management services and systems that will contribute to the
protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare and to
protect natural resources, including the Drain Code of 1956, as amended,
being MCLA § 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as amended, being
MCLA § 560.101 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being MCLA
§ 141.101 et seq.; and the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, as amended, being MCLA § 324.101 et seq.; Section 401(p) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the "Clean Water Act"),
as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123 and
124, and other applicable state and federal laws.
§ 320-3. Findings.
The Village of Spring Lake finds that:
A. Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and
downstream of the Village are at times subjected to flooding;
B. Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a
danger to the natural resources of the Village and the region;
C. Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds,
resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased
flooding, increased stream channel erosion, increased sediment
transport and deposition, and increased nonpoint source pollutant
loading to the receiving water bodies and the Great Lakes;
D. Stormwater runoff produced by land development contributes to
increased quantities of waterborne pollutants;
E. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution have
increased as a result of land development, and have impacted the water
resources of the Spring Lake Watershed;
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-3
1:225
§ 320-4. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the
following objectives, to:
F. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, because
of land development within the Village, have resulted in deterioration of
the water resources of the Village and downstream municipalities;
G. Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and
pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development
projects within the Village will, absent proper regulation and control,
adversely affect the Village water bodies and water resources, and
those of downstream municipalities;
H. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development;
I. Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in, or cited
by, this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the
deleterious effects of stormwater runoff;
J. Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare;
K. Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the
Village and are addressed in Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge
and Connection. The provisions of Chapter 313 control illicit discharges
and connections contained in this chapter, and implementation
addresses many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges. The
provisions of Chapter 313 are administered by the Village Manager or
his or her designee, in coordination with the provisions of this chapter
as needed;
L. This chapter addresses the requirements for control of stormwater
from new developments and redevelopments and is administered by the
Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, in coordination with the
existing provisions of Chapter 313, illicit discharge elimination plan
(IDEP), as needed.
A. Reduce artificially induced flood damage;
B. Minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from
identified land development;
C. Prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution;
D. Minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and
bridges, and other structures;
§ 320-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-4
1:226
§ 320-5. Applicability.
E. Require water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable
conditions exist;
F. Maintain the ecological integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;
G. Minimize the impact of development on stream bank and streambed
stability;
H. Reduce erosion from development or construction projects;
I. Control nonstormwater discharges to stormwater conveyances and
reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges;
J. Preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by
means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and
runoff pollution;
K. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were
developed without stormwater management controls meeting the
purposes and standards of this chapter;
L. Reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and,
to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect
water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where
there are insufficient stormwater management controls;
M. Ensure that storm drain or stormwater best management practices are
adequate to address stormwater management needs within a proposed
development, and to protect downstream landowners from flooding and
degradation of water quality. The procedures, standards, and
recommendations set forth in this chapter and the Low Impact
Development Manual for Michigan are designed for these purposes;
N. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
O. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
A. This chapter shall apply to every development requiring approval of a
plat, a site development plan or building permit, or for any work which
will alter stormwater drainage characteristics of the development site
in the Village of Spring Lake, including but not necessarily limited to:
(1) Land development proposals subject to site plan review
requirements in Chapter 390, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Spring Lake;
§ 320-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:227
§ 320-6. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding the requirements of § 320-5, this chapter shall not apply
to:
(2) Subdivision plat proposals;
(3) Site condominium developments pursuant to the Condominium Act,
P.A. 59 of 1978 as amended; MCLA § 559.101 et seq.;
(4) Any development on property divided by land division, on platted
subdivision lots, or on site condominium lots;
(5) Any proposal to mine, excavate, or clear and grade, compact, or
otherwise develop one acre or more of land for purposes, other
than routine single- and two-family residential landscaping and
gardening;
(6) Any non-single-family or two-family proposed development on
property within 20 feet of the top of the bank of an inland lake or
stream;
(7) Development projects of federal, state, and local agencies and
other public entities subject to the Village NPDES permit for
municipal separate storm sewer systems;
(8) Maintenance of a stormwater basin constructed prior to the
effective date of the regulations of which this subsection is a part;
(9) Village of Spring Lake public improvements other than bike paths.
B. This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the storm drain
system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted in Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection, illicit discharge elimination plan (IDEP).
A. Single-family and two-family homes except for that portion of all private
and public property that is 20 feet closer to a water body;
B. Activities protected by the Right to Farm Act 93 of 1981,69 although this
exemption shall not apply to livestock production facilities as defined in
this chapter, greenhouses and other similar structures;
C. Routine single-family and two family landscaping, unless such
landscaping is within 20 feet of a water body, other residential
landscaping and/or gardening which does not otherwise materially alter
stormwater flow from the property in terms of rate and/or volume and
therefore meet lot coverage standards;
D. The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a mobile
home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the
69.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 286.471 et seq.
§ 320-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-6
1:228
construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park. Plats
that have received preliminary plat approval and other developments
with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this chapter,
where such approvals remain in effect;
E. Sidewalks, bike paths and non-motorized trails.
§ 320-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-6
1:229

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 320-7. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words, and derivatives, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person proposing or implementing the development of
land.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Zoning Administrator or
Village Manager or his or her designee. The Zoning Board of Appeals will
resolve all applicant appeals.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The high-water elevation of the base flood,
commonly referred to as the "one-hundred-year flood elevation."
BASE FLOODPLAIN — The area inundated by the base flood.
BMP or BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — See Chapter 313, Stormwater:
Illicit Discharge and Connection.
BUFFER ZONE — A vegetative strip consisting of native Michigan plants,
which serve as a separation for infiltration and vegetative transpiration to
impede the flow of stormwater.
BUILDING OPENING — Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or
door, through which floodwaters could penetrate.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 22 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated
pursuant to the Act.
CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER RUNOFF — Stormwater runoff from
a development site following an earth change.
CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A storm drain, pipe, swale, or channel.
DESIGN ENGINEER — The registered and licensed professional engineer
made responsible for the design of the stormwater management plan as
designated by the Zoning Administrator.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Requirements that differentiate between new
development and redevelopment depending on site specific characteristics
like water table issues and degree of new runoff impacts.
DETENTION — A system which is designed to capture stormwater and
release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT — The installation, construction or
redevelopment of impervious surfaces on a development site that require,
pursuant to state law or local ordinance, the Village's approval of a site plan,
§ 320-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-7
1:231
site condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning
of land, land division approval, public or private road approval, building
permits or other approvals required for the development of land or the
erection of buildings or structures. This shall include construction or
improvement project on lands owned by the Village and the local school
district.
DEVELOPER — Any person proposing or implementing the development of
land.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — Any land that is being or has been developed, or
that a developer proposes for development.
DISCHARGER — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
DRAIN — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and Connection.
DRAINAGE — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
DRAINAGE PLAN — Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches,
written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which
contain information pursuant to this chapter. Also known as a "plan."
DRAINAGE STANDARDS — As established by the Village from time to time.
DRAINAGEWAY — The area within which surface water or groundwater is
carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel
or to adjacent land.70
DRAIN COMMISSIONER — The Ottawa County Drain Commissioner.
EARTH CHANGE — A human-made change in the natural cover or
topography of land, including cut and fill activities. Earth change includes,
but is not limited to, any excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping,
or removal of vegetation roots. Earth change does not include the practice
of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn away by
action of wind, water, gravity or a combination of any or all.
EXEMPTED DISCHARGES — Discharges other than stormwater as
specified in Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and Connection.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The agency
of the federal government charged with emergency management.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow
of water bodies or the unusual or rapid accumulation of surface water runoff
from any source.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-7
1:232
FLOODPLAIN — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
FLOODPROOFING — Any structural and/or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures or property that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to land or improvements, including utilities and other
structures.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE) — The base flood elevation plus
one foot at any given location.
FLOODWAY — The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of
a foot because of the loss of flood conveyance or storage.
GRADING — Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any
combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit
Discharge and Connection.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any method or means for conveying an illicit
discharge into water bodies or the Village's stormwater system as set forth
in Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and Connection, of this Code.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface, such as a paved or gravel driveway,
roof, parking area or road, that prevents the infiltration of water into the
soil.
INFILTRATION — The percolation of water into the ground, expressed in
inches per hour.
LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION FACILITIES — An agricultural activity in which
100 or more livestock are fed, bred, and/or raised within a confined area,
other than an open pasture either inside or outside an enclosed building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor or the lowest enclosed area (including
a basement), but not including an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
which is usable solely for parking of vehicles or building access.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A binding agreement that sets forth the
terms, measures, and conditions for the maintenance of stormwater
systems and facilities.
MDEQ — The State Department of Environmental Quality.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A publicly
owned conveyance system designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — See Chapter 313, Stormwater:
Illicit Discharge and Connection.
§ 320-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-7
1:233
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — All or part of a drainage system that is located
partially or completely off the development site which it serves.
OVERLAND FLOW-WAY — Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of
stormwater runoff.
PEAK RATE OF DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater flow at
a particular location following a storm event, as measured at a given point
and time in cubic feet per second (CFS).
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or other legal entity.
POLLUTANT — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person having legal or equitable title to property
or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any
property.
RETENTION — A system which is designed to capture stormwater and
contain it until it infiltrates the soil, evaporates, or drains.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed
from its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in suspension in
water, or is being transported.
SOIL EROSION — The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land
creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, thereby enabling
formation of new sedimentary deposits.
STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS — All applicable
state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the
provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended.71
STORM DRAIN — A conduit, pipe, swale, natural channel, or man-made
structure which serves to transport stormwater runoff. Storm drains may be
either enclosed or open.
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Any facility,
structure, channel, area, process or measure which serves to control
stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes and standards of this
chapter.
71.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.3106.
§ 320-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-7
1:234
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — The method, structure, area,
system, or other equipment or measures which are designed to receive,
control, store, or convey stormwater.
STORMWATER PERFORMANCE DESIGN STANDARDS — Requirements
that differentiate between new development and redevelopment depending
on site specific characteristics like water table issues and degree of new run
off impacts.
STORMWATER PERMIT — A permit issued by either the Zoning
Administrator of the Village pursuant to state law or by the Village Planning
Commission pursuant to this chapter.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPP) — A document
prepared by the Village Manager, or his or her designee (e.g., engineer,
landscape architect, or surveyor), which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
identifying sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions
necessary to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater water,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent possible.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The runoff and drainage of precipitation
resulting from rainfall or snowmelt or other natural event or process.
STREAM — A river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a
drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.
SWALE — Defined contour of land with gradual slopes that transport and
direct the flow of stormwater.
WASTEWATER — See Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and
Connection.
WATER BODY — A river, lake, stream, creek, or other watercourse or
wetlands.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or man-made waterway or other body of
water having reasonably well defined banks. Rivers, streams, creeks and
brooks, and channels, whether continually or intermittently flowing, as
well as lakes and ponds are watercourses for purposes of stormwater
management.
WATERSHED — An area in which there is a common outlet into which
stormwater ultimately flows, otherwise known as a "drainage area."
WETLANDS — Land characterized by the presence of hydric soils and
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is
commonly referred to as a "bog," "swamp," or "marsh," as defined by state
law. See, also, Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge and Connection.
§ 320-8. Word usage; interpretation.
For purposes of this chapter, the following rules of construction apply:
§ 320-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-8
1:235
§ 320-9. Catch-line headings.
The catch-line headings of the articles and sections of this chapter are
intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the
meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles or sections to which
they may refer.
A. Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their
common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases
defined in § 320-7 of this chapter shall be construed according to the
respective definitions given in that section;
B. Particulars provided by way of illustration or enumeration shall not
control general language;
C. Ambiguities, if any, shall be construed liberally in favor of protecting
natural land and water resources;
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary;
E. Technical words and technical phrases which are not defined in this
chapter but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in
technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings.
§ 320-8 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-9
1:236
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Permits
§ 320-10. Permit required.
§ 320-11. Stormwater permit review procedures.
The Village shall grant a stormwater permit which may impose terms and
conditions in accordance with Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit Discharge
and Connection, illicit discharge elimination plan (IDEP) and this chapter
and which shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the following
requirements:
A. A developer shall not engage in any development without first receiving
a stormwater permit from the Zoning Administrator pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter;
B. The Village shall submit an annual permit for review of normal
maintenance;
C. The granting of a stormwater permit shall authorize only such
development for which the permit is required, subject to the terms of
the permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other development or
other land use activities.
A. The developer has submitted a drainage plan for all drainage complying
with all requirements of this chapter; and
B. The drainage plan contains a description of an adequate, temporary
stormwater retention or system to prevent construction site stormwater
runoff, satisfying all the requirements of this chapter, and the developer
has obtained a soil erosion permit, if necessary; and
C. If it can be demonstrated that the drainage will be materially improved,
the following standards will not apply if the developer provides:
(1) A permanent on-site drainage plan and a stormwater management
facility complying with the Village of Spring Lake Standards and
Specifications and the Village of Spring Lake Performance and
Design Standards adopted by the Village; and
(2) The developer has paid or deposited the stormwater permit review
fee pursuant to this chapter, if applicable; and
(3) The developer has paid or posed the applicable financial guarantee
pursuant to this chapter, if applicable; and
(4) The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the
approved drainage plan and stormwater management facility and
to otherwise comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. All
easements shall be acceptable to the Village in form and substance
and shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds; and
§ 320-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-11
1:237
§ 320-12. Drainage plan.
During the site plan approval process, the developer shall provide a
drainage plan to the Village for review and approval. The drainage plan
shall identify and contain all of the following:
(5) The drainage plan is designed in conformity with the Village of
Spring Lake Performance and Design Standards adopted by the
Village as part of this chapter; and
(6) All stormwater runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance
with the Village design criteria as set by the stormwater manager;
and
(7) The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for
routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities. This agreement shall be in compliance with
the approved drainage plan and this chapter; and
(8) The maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the Village in
form and substance and shall be recorded with the County Register
of Deeds, if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
A. The location of the development site and water bodies that will receive
stormwater runoff;
B. The existing and proposed topography of the development site,
including the alignment and boundary of the natural drainagecourses,
with contours having a maximum interval of two feet (using USGS
datum). The information shall be superimposed on the pertinent Ottawa
County soil map. This provision does not apply to developments not
required as stated in §§ 320-5 and 320-6 of this chapter;
C. The development tributary area to each point of discharge from the
development;
D. Calculations for the final peak discharge rates of a one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour storm as determined by the Village Engineer and also
if permitted by the Planning Commission per § 320-48 of the
performance and design standards;
E. Calculations for any facility or structure size and configuration;
F. A drawing showing all proposed stormwater runoff facilities with
existing and final grades;
G. The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts serving
the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development site.
Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions, other
than culverts, should be noted on the drainage map;
H. An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all
stormwater management facilities necessary to the overall drainage
§ 320-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-12
1:238
§ 320-13. Stormwater permit review fees.
plan, including a schedule of estimated dates for completing
construction of the stormwater runoff facilities shown on the plan and
an identification of the proposed inspection procedures to ensure that
the stormwater management facilities are constructed in accordance
with the approved drainage plan;
I. A plan to ensure the effective control of construction stormwater runoff
and sediment tracking onto roadways and how often roadways will be
cleaned;
J. Drawings, profiles, and/or specifications for the construction of
stormwater management facilities reasonably necessary to ensure that
stormwater runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in
accordance with this chapter;
K. A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to the
Village, as applicable, if determined necessary by the Zoning
Administrator, for ensuring maintenance of any privately owned
stormwater management facilities. The maintenance agreement shall
include the developer's written commitment to provide routine,
emergency, and long-term maintenance of the facilities in perpetuity
and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in accordance
with the approved drainage plan, the agreement shall authorize the
Village to maintain an on-site stormwater management facility as
reasonably necessary, at the developer's expense;
L. The name of the engineering firm and the professional engineer that
designed the drainage plan and that will inspect final construction of
the stormwater runoff facilities, unless the use of an engineer is waived
by the Zoning Administrator;
M. All design information should be compatible with the county geographic
information system.
A. Permit application fees: as established by the Village Council from time
to time in the annual fee schedule.
B. For more complicated projects as deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator unless demonstrated otherwise, all expenses and costs
incurred by the Village directly associated with processing, reviewing,
and approving or denying a stormwater permit application shall be paid
(or reimbursed) to the Village from the funds paid directly by the
developer or from a separate escrow account established by the
developer. The Village may draw funds from a developer's escrow
account to reimburse the Village for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the Village relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses
include, but are not limited to, expenses related to the following:
(1) Services of the Village Attorney directly related to the application;
§ 320-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-13
1:239
§ 320-14. Construction site runoff controls.
Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by
this chapter, the developer shall first obtain a soil erosion permit from
the County Drain Commissioner issued in accordance with Part 91 of Act
No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended,72 if one is required. The
developer shall install stormwater management facilities that conform to
the Village's stormwater performance and design standards and shall phase
the development activities so as to prevent construction site stormwater
runoff and off-site sedimentation. During all construction activities on the
development site, the Village Manager, engineer, Zoning Administrator,
or his or her designees, may inspect the development site to ensure
compliance with the approved construction site runoff controls.
§ 320-15. Financial guarantee as applicable.
(2) Services of the Village Engineer directly related to the application;
(3) Services of other independent contractors working for the Village,
which are directly related to the application;
(4) Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice
requirements, etc., necessitated by the application.
C. At the time a developer applies for a stormwater permit, the developer
shall deposit with the Village Clerk/Treasurer, as an escrow deposit, an
initial amount as determined by resolution of the Village Council for
such matters and shall provide additional amounts as requested by the
Village in such increments as are specified in said resolution. Any
excess funds remaining in the escrow account after the application has
been fully processed, reviewed and after the final approval and
acceptance of the development has occurred, will be refunded to the
developer with no interest to be paid on those funds. At no time prior to
the Village's final decision on an application shall the balance in the
escrow account fall below the required initial amount. If the funds in
the account are reduced to less than the required initial amount, the
developer shall deposit into the account an additional amount to restore
the balance to the required initial amount, before the application
review process will be continued. Additional amounts may be required
to be placed in the escrow account by the developer, at the discretion of
the Village Zoning Administrator.
A. The Village Zoning Administrator shall not approve a stormwater
permit until the developer submits to the Village, in a form and amount
satisfactory to the Village, a letter of credit or other financial guarantee
for the timely and satisfactory construction of all stormwater runoff
facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage
plan. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer that the
stormwater management facilities have been completed in accordance
72.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.
§ 320-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-15
1:240
§ 320-16. Certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until stormwater management
facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage
plan; provided, however, the Village may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy if an acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee
has been submitted to the Village Zoning Administrator, for the timely and
satisfactory construction of all stormwater management facilities and site
grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan.
§ 320-17. No change in approved facilities.
Stormwater management facilities, after construction and approval, shall
be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved drainage
plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except
in accordance with the approved drainage plan, or in accordance with
approved amendments or revisions in the plan.
§ 320-18. Terms and conditions of permits.
with the approved drainage plan including, but not limited to, the
provisions contained in § 320-12 of this article, the Village may release
the letter of credit or other financial guarantee subject to final the
Village acceptance and approval.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the amount of the financial
guarantee shall be equal to the construction cost estimate provided by
the developer of all stormwater runoff facilities and site grading, unless
the Village Zoning Administrator determines that a greater amount is
appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be
provided to the developer in writing. In determining whether a greater
amount is appropriate, the Village Zoning Administrator shall consider
the size and type of the development, the size and type of the on-site
stormwater system, and the nature of the off-site stormwater
management facilities the development will utilize.
C. This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a
developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site
private stormwater runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from
the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce the
development's impact on a drain consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. In granting a stormwater permit, the Village may impose such terms
and conditions as are reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter. A developer shall comply with such terms and
conditions.
B. A permit is considered to be granted by the Village when approval is
granted to a development by the Planning Commission, unless
§ 320-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-18
1:241
authorization is required to be granted by another agency also under
state law and this approval has not been offered.
§ 320-18 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-18
1:242
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater System; Floodplain and Other Standards; Soil Erosion
§ 320-19. Management and responsibility for stormwater system.
The Village is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private
property for the management of stormwater on that property. The property
owner shall be responsible to provide for, and maintain, private stormwater
runoff facilities in compliance with Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit
Discharge and Connection, serving the property and to prevent or correct
the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function of a
water body.
§ 320-20. Stormwater system.
All stormwater management facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, and they shall not conflict with any existing local
stormwater management, wetlands and watershed plans.
§ 320-21. Stormwater discharge rates and volumes.
The Village shall utilize the performance and design standards adopted
pursuant to § 320-46 of this chapter for stormwater discharge and release
rates. However, if the Village Planning Commission makes a specific finding
that these standards are not appropriate for a specific site and cannot be
followed, the Village is authorized to establish minimum design standards
for stormwater discharge release rates and to require dischargers to
implement on-site retention, detention or other methods necessary to
control the rate and volume of surface water runoff discharged into the
stormwater drainage system if the circumstances outlined in § 320-49 of
this chapter apply.
§ 320-22. Floodplain standards.
A. All new buildings and substantial (pursuant to state or federal laws or
regulations) improvements to existing buildings shall be protected from
flood damage up to the flood protection elevation (FPE) and shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations. Floodplain/floodway alteration shall be permitted
only upon review and approval by the State Department of Natural
Resources and Environment (MDNRE), or its successor, as regulated by
the federal government. The developer shall provide the Village copies
of all permits, elevation certificates, letters of map revision or other
documentation related to floodplain/floodway development of any kind.
B. In addition to all requirements of FEMA and the MDNRE, a drainage
plan providing for the filling or alteration of a floodplain/floodway shall
include provisions to minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank and to
protect water quality.
§ 320-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-22
1:243
§ 320-23. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
C. A natural vegetation strip shall be maintained on each parcel or lot
between the top of the stream bank and a line, each point of which is 25
feet horizontal from the top of the stream bank of the body of water
toward the stream.
D. Within any required buffer zone, no earth change shall take place
except in accordance with the approved MDNRE permit and soil
erosion and sedimentation control permit as described in § 320-23 of
this chapter.
A. All persons who cause, in whole or in part, any earth change to occur
shall provide soil erosion and sedimentation control so as to adequately
prevent soils from being eroded and discharged or deposited onto
adjacent properties or into a stormwater drainage system, a public
street or right-of-way, wetland, wetland buffer, creek, stream, water
body, or floodplain. All development shall be in accordance with Part 91
of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended and all applicable
federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulation.
B. A soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit is required for
any earth change that is greater than one acre or less than 500 feet
from any lake or stream, or as determined by the County Drain
Commissioner's Office, whichever is more restrictive. Permits are
obtained from the SESC agent in the County Drain Commissioner's
Office. A copy of the SESC permit shall be provided to the Village prior
to any work on the site.
C. During any earth change which exposes soil to an increased risk of
erosion or sediment tracking, the property owner and other persons
causing or participating in the earth change shall do the following:
(1) Comply with the stormwater management standards of this
chapter;
(2) Obtain and comply with the terms of a soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit from the County Drain Commissioner
Office;
(3) Prevent damage to any public utilities or services within the limits
of grading and within any routes of travel or areas of work of
construction equipment;
(4) Prevent damage to or impairment of any water body on or near the
location of the earth change or affected by the earth change;
(5) Prevent damage to adjacent or nearby land;
(6) Apply for all required approvals or permits prior to the
commencement of work;
§ 320-22 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-23
1:244
§ 320-24. Sump pump discharge.
(7) Proceed with the proposed work only in accordance with the
approved plans and in compliance with this chapter;
(8) Maintain all required soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures, including but not limited to measures required for
compliance with the terms of this chapter;
(9) Protect all surrounding storm sewer inlets with appropriate filter
devices per current stormwater management BMPs;
(10) Promptly remove all soil, sediment, debris, or other materials
applied, dumped, tracked, or otherwise deposited on any lands,
public streets, sidewalks, or other public ways or facilities,
including catch basins, storm sewers, ditches, drainage swales, or
water bodies. Removal of all such soil, sediment, debris or other
materials within 24 hours shall be considered prima facie
compliance with this requirement, unless such materials present
an immediate hazard to public health and safety;
(11) Refrain from grading land at locations near or adjoining lands,
public streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public or private property
without providing adequate support or other measures so as to
protect such other lands, streets, sidewalks, or other property from
settling, cracking or sustaining other damage. The developer shall
be responsible for all damage caused to adjacent private and public
properties.
A. Whenever building footing drains are required or utilized, a direct
connection between the footing drains through a sump pump-check
valve system to the on-site stormwater management system is required.
A gravity system is not permitted.
B. In cases where a waiver or variance has been granted, and connection
to the municipal storm sewer system is permitted, a stormwater lateral
shall be provided for each parcel at the time of storm sewer
construction.
C. Laundry facilities or other similar features shall not be connected to a
footing drain or pump system discharging to the stormwater
management system.
§ 320-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-24
1:245

ARTICLE V
Prohibitions and Exceptions
§ 320-25. Prohibited discharges.
The Village is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution
prevention measures, utilizing best management practices, necessary to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the Village's stormwater
drainage system. All other discharge requirements not regulated by this
chapter shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 313, Stormwater: Illicit
Discharge and Connection.
§ 320-26. Interference with natural or artificial drains.
§ 320-27. Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway.
Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store
or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter
the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural or constructed
drain or drainageway without first submitting a drainage plan to the
Village and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the
approved plan is a violation of this chapter. This section shall not
prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or
mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the environment or the
public health, safety, or welfare. When any of the above activity involves
an established county drain, a drain use permit is required from the
County Drain Commissioner.
B. No filling, blocking, fencing or above-surface vegetation planting shall
take place within a floodplain/floodway.
C. For an overland drainageway:
(1) Silt fence shall not be permitted below the top of the bank of a
water body;
(2) Chain-link fences shall be permitted if the Village determines that
the fence will not obstruct or divert the flow of water;
(3) If a fence is removed by the Village for drain access or drain
maintenance, the fence shall be replaced by the owner of the fence
at the owner's expense, as long as the owner complied with
Subsection C(2) above;
(4) No shrubs or trees shall be planted below the top of the bank of a
water body.
D. Shrubs, trees or other aboveground vegetation shall not be planted
over the top of an underground storm sewer or over the top of the
easement within which the storm sewer has been installed.
§ 320-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-27
1:247
adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent
any such materials from entering a drainageway.
§ 320-27 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-27
1:248
ARTICLE VI
Performance Standards; Best Management Practices
§ 320-28. Resolution to adopt and implement performance and
design standards.
The Village Council shall adopt the stormwater performance and design
standards as set forth in § 320-46 of this chapter so as to achieve the goals
and purposes of this chapter.
§ 320-29. Responsibility to implement best management practices
(BMPs).
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment, or any
developer, shall provide, at the person's own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for the
property or premises, which is or may be the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at that person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the stormwater drainage system or water body. Compliance
with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of the stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 320-30. Off-site stormwater management.
A. Requirements.
(1) In lieu of on-site stormwater BMPs, the use of off-site stormwater
BMPs and storm drains may only be proposed if the reasons comply
with the requirements specified in the stormwater performance
and design standards adopted by the Village, and all other
standards provided by this chapter that are applicable to on-site
facilities;
(2) Off-site stormwater management areas may be shared with other
landowners, provided that the terms of the proposal are approved
by the Village Council and the Village Attorney. Approval hereunder
shall not be granted for off-site stormwater BMPs unless the
applicant demonstrates to the Planning Commission of the Village,
following recommendation by the Village Zoning Administrator,
that the use of off-site stormwater management areas shall protect
water quality and natural resources to an equal or greater extent
than would be achieved by the use of on-site stormwater
management areas;
§ 320-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-30
1:249
(3) Adequate provisions and agreements providing for maintenance
and inspection of stormwater management facilities shall be made,
and the documents, in recordable form, including an access
easement, be approved by the Village Council;
(4) Accelerated soil erosion shall be managed off site as well as on site.
B. Performance guarantees, inspections, maintenance, and enforcement.
All provisions for performance guarantees in § 320-15 of this chapter
shall apply to off-site stormwater conveyance and detention.
§ 320-30 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-30
1:250
ARTICLE VII
Inspection; Monitoring; Reporting and Recordkeeping
§ 320-31. Inspection and sampling.
To ensure compliance with the standards described in this chapter, the
Village may inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater
management facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the
Village's identified representative to enter on the premises of the discharger
at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling.
The Village shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of such
inspection and/or sampling. The Village or its properly identified
representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or
devices used for such sampling or inspection.
§ 320-32. Stormwater monitoring facilities.
A discharger of stormwater runoff shall provide and operate equipment
or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff, so as to provide for
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water
body or a stormwater runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by the
Village Manager or his or her designated representative. The Village may
require the discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices
if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects
from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment and
devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
§ 320-33. Accidental discharges.
Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body any
substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall
immediately inform the Village Manager concerning the discharge. If such
information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall
be filed with the Village Manager within five days. The written report shall
specify:
A. The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
B. The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
C. All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence;
D. The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and
the name of a person who may be contacted for additional information
on the matter.
§ 320-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-34
1:251
§ 320-34. Recordkeeping requirement.
Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less
than three years any and all books, drawing, plans, prints, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on
magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records,
relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or
stormwater runoff from any property.
§ 320-34 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-34
1:252
ARTICLE VIII
Stormwater Management Easements and Maintenance Agreements
§ 320-35. Applicability of requirements.
Requirements of this chapter concerning stormwater management
easements and maintenance agreements shall apply to persons required to
submit a drainage plan to the Village Planning Commission for review and
approval.
§ 320-36. Stormwater management easements.
§ 320-37. Maintenance agreement.
A. Necessity of easements. Stormwater management easements shall be
provided in a form required by the applicable approving body of the
Village and the Village Attorney, and recorded to ensure:
(1) Access for inspections;
(2) Access to stormwater best management practices for maintenance
purposes; and
(3) Preservation of primary and secondary drainageways which are
needed to serve stormwater management needs.
B. Easements for off-site stormwater best management practices. The
proprietor shall obtain easements assuring access to all areas used for
off-site stormwater management, including undeveloped or undisturbed
lands.
C. Recording of easements. Easements shall be recorded with the County
Register of Deeds according to county requirements.
D. Recording prior to building permit issuance. The applicant must
provide the Village Clerk/Treasurer with evidence of the recording of
the easement prior to final subdivision plat or condominium approval or
other applicable final construction approval.
A. Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance
agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of
stormwater best management practices shall be undertaken and
continued periodically.
B. Maintenance agreement required.
(1) A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the Village, for
review by the Zoning Administrator and the Village Attorney, or his
or her designee, for all development requiring Planning
Commission review, and shall be subject to approval in accordance
with the stormwater permit. A formal maintenance plan shall be
included in the maintenance agreement;
§ 320-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-37
1:253
(2) Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the Village Planning
Commission prior to final subdivision plat or condominium
approval, as applicable, and prior to construction approval in other
cases.
C. Maintenance agreement provisions.
(1) The maintenance agreement shall include a plan for routine,
emergency, and long-term maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices;
(2) The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent
owners of land served by the stormwater best management
practices and shall be recorded in the office of the County Register
of Deeds prior to the effectiveness of the approval of the Village
Planning Commission;
(3) If it has been found by the Village Zoning Administrator, following
notice and an opportunity to be heard by the property owner, that
there has been a material failure or refusal to undertake
maintenance as required under this chapter and/or as required in
the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder, the
Village shall then be authorized, but not required, to hire an entity
with qualifications and experience in the subject matter to
undertake the monitoring and maintenance as so required, in
which event the property owner shall be obligated to advance or
reimburse payment (as determined by the Village) for all costs and
expenses associated with such monitoring and maintenance,
together with a reasonable administrative fee. The maintenance
agreement required under this chapter shall contain a provision
spelling out this requirement and, if the applicant objects in any
respect to such provision or the underlying rights and obligations,
such objection shall be resolved prior to the commencement of
construction of the proposed development on the site.
§ 320-37 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-37
1:254
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 320-38. Violations and penalties.
§ 320-39. Stop-work order.
Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or
in part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Village Zoning
Administrator is authorized to issue a stop-work order so as to prevent
further or continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the
stop-work order is directed, or who are involved in any way with the work
or matter described in the stop-work order shall fully and promptly comply
therewith. The Village may also undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
necessary or advisable protective measures so as to prevent violations of
this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of noncompliance herewith.
The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the
responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work, and
such cost shall be a lien upon the property.
§ 320-40. Failure to comply; costs of completion.
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, the Village Zoning Administrator may, after
the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the
necessary work done, and the owner shall be obligated to promptly
reimburse the Village for all costs of such work.
§ 320-41. Emergency measures.
When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to
protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life,
injury or damage to property, the Village Manager is authorized to carry
out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2.73 Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any
twelve-month period and for which a person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat
violations is set forth in § 1-2.74
B. Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter shall
be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
73.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-41
1:255
responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a
violation of this chapter, and shall promptly reimburse the Village for all of
such costs.
§ 320-42. Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system.
A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the Village as the result
of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions of this
chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the
EPA or MDEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other
costs and expenses.
§ 320-43. Collection of costs; lien.
Costs incurred by the Village pursuant to §§ 320-39, 320-40, 320-41 and
320-42 of this chapter shall be a lien on the premises which shall be
enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended from time to time.75 Any such charges which are delinquent for
six months or more may be certified annually to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises and the
costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner
as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the
enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement
methods, the Village shall have all remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the
Public Acts of 1933, as amended.
§ 320-44. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 320-45. Appeals.
A. Suspension because of illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Village may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
property when the suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment or to the health and welfare of
persons or to the MS4. If a violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the Village Manager may take steps
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or the
environment, or to minimize danger to the health or welfare of persons.
B. Suspension because of the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The Village Manager will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. It is a violation of this chapter for a
person to reinstate MS4 access to a premises terminated pursuant to
this section, without the prior approval of the Village Manager.
75.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ 320-41 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-45
1:256
A. Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may
appeal the decision in writing to the Village Zoning Board of Appeals,
not later than 30 days after that action or decision. The appeal shall
identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. Notice
of the request for appeal shall be made in accordance with the
procedures of the Zoning Enabling Act as it may be amended from time
to time.76 The Village Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal
and make a decision to affirm, reject or modify the appealed action. In
considering any appeal the Village Zoning Board of Appeals may
consider the recommendations of the Village Engineer and the
comments of other persons having knowledge of the matter. In
considering any appeal, the Village Zoning Board of Appeals may grant
a variance from the terms of this chapter so as to provide relief, in
whole or in part, from the appealed action. In passing on an appeal to
vary or modify any of the rules or provisions of this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider if there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
chapter, so that the spirit of this chapter is observed, public safety is
secured, and substantial justice is done. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may grant a variance from the terms of this chapter only upon finding
that the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) That the applicant has applied for and been denied a waiver by the
Planning Commission pursuant to the performance and design
standards of this chapter;
(2) That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property in question which are different
from other properties in the Village or result from conditions that
do not exist throughout the Village;
(3) That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right and that the need for such variance
was not created by the applicant. The possibility of increased
financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a
variance;
(4) That the granting of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property or materially impair the intent and
purposes of this chapter or the public interest.
B. If the Village Zoning Board of Appeals determines that a variance is
merited, they shall refer the request to the Village Planning
Commission who shall, after review and recommendation by the Village
Engineer as needed, determine the appropriate alternate criteria to be
followed in lieu of the Village stormwater standards. In no instance
shall the alternate standard be less than what is required by the County
Drain Commission. The developer shall be responsible for all expenses
76.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 320-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-45
1:257
incurred by the Village for reviews and recommendations by the Village
Engineer, or other professionals, regarding the waiver request.
§ 320-45 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-45
1:258
ARTICLE X
Additional Standards; Exceptions
§ 320-46. Stormwater performance design standards.
Stormwater management facilities for new development and redevelopment
shall be designed in accordance with the current County Drain Commission
default criteria and the Village specific standards adopted pursuant to the
Village Stormwater Management Ordinance.77 In general, these specific
Village standards are more stringent than the County Drain Commission
default criteria to further protect the integrity of downstream surface
waters, including Spring Lake.
§ 320-47. Full retention of stormwater runoff.
All new developments within the Village shall provide sufficient stormwater
management facilities to fully retain stormwater runoff on site from events
up to and including the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
Infiltration and/or capture and reuse technologies should be utilized to meet
this Village standard.
§ 320-48. Requirements for redevelopment.
A. It is the intention of the Village that redevelopment of all properties
within the Village shall require the existing stormwater management
facilities be upgraded to meet the current Village standards adopted
pursuant to this chapter. At the discretion of the Village Planning
Commission, a redevelopment may not be required to fully upgrade the
existing stormwater management facilities on the site if all of the
following apply:
(1) The impacted area of the site associated with the redevelopment is
less than 20% of the total site area;
(2) The total impervious surface of the site is reduced, unchanged, or
increased by 20% or less.
B. Where full compliance with current standards is not required by the
Planning Commission, the following reduced standards will be
mandated:
(1) Where the total impervious surface of the site is increased by 20%
or less, on-site retention shall be provided for all proposed new
impervious surfaces. On-site retention for a one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour storm event shall be provided;
(2) Where feasible, stormwater quality best management practices
(BMPs) shall be installed to provide treatment for runoff from the
remaining existing impervious surfaces on the site.
77.Editor's Note: See the provisions in this chapter, and see also Ch. 313, Stormwater: Illicit
Discharge and Connection.
§ 320-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-49
1:259
§ 320-49. Exceptions for full retention.
A. Under a few circumstances, the Planning Commission may waive the
requirement for full retention of stormwater on site. Notice of an appeal
for waiver shall be made in accordance with the procedure of the
Zoning Enabling Act as may be amended from time to time.78
B. It is the responsibility of the developer to adequately demonstrate why
infiltration and/or capture and reuse technologies cannot be utilized to
meet the Village retention requirement standards.
C. Situations for which the Village Planning Commission may consider
waiving (or reducing) the retention requirements include:
(1) Soil contamination. Infiltration may not be feasible in areas of soil
contamination if there is a risk of contaminating groundwater. The
developer will need to demonstrate why soil remediation is not
feasible. Capture and reuse technologies should be utilized to the
extent possible for these sites.
(2) Poorly draining soils. The developer will need to provide
documentation (based on on-site infiltration tests) identifying the
permeability rates of the existing soils. Capture and reuse
technologies should be utilized to the extent possible for these
sites.
(3) High groundwater table. The developer will need to provide
documentation (based on on-site tests) identifying the elevation of
the groundwater table. Capture and reuse technologies should be
utilized to the extent possible for these sites.
D. In approving a waiver to the full retention requirement the Village
Planning Commission after review and recommendation by the Village
Engineer as needed, will determine the appropriate alternate criteria to
be followed in lieu of the Village stormwater standards. In no instances
will the alternate standard be less than what is required by the County
Drain Commission. The developer shall be responsible for all expenses
incurred by the Village for reviews and recommendations by the Village
Engineer, or other professionals, regarding the waiver request.
78.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 320-49 SPRING LAKE CODE § 320-49
1:260
Chapter 326
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Sewers — See Ch. 280.
Special assessments — See Ch. 307.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
Water — See Ch. 373.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 320-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-49
1:261

ARTICLE I
Obstructions on Sidewalks and Other Public Areas
[Adopted 7-1-1996 as Ord. No. 244; amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No.
307 (Ch. 70, Art. I, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 326-1. Sidewalks, pathways, public areas and parking lots.
Persons shall not, without the consent of the Village, construct, deposit,
place, dump, throw, leave, or cause or permit the construction, dumping,
depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of any object or material on any
sidewalk, pedestrian pathway, or public property adjacent to any sidewalk,
pedestrian pathway, or any other place open to the general public including
those areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, or in any way
obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on sidewalks,
pedestrian pathways, or other places open to the general public, including
those areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the Village.
§ 326-2. Removal of obstruction.
A person who constructs, deposits, places, dumps, throws, leaves, or causes
to be constructed, deposited, placed, dumped, thrown, or left on any
sidewalk, pedestrian pathway, or public property adjacent to any sidewalk,
pedestrian pathway, or any other place open to the general public, which
may include areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the
Village shall immediately remove the obstruction or cause it to be removed.
§ 326-3. Violations and penalties.79
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.80
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
80.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 326-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-3
1:263

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 326-4. Local public improvement; adoption of special assessment
procedures.
The provisions of Chapter 307, Special Assessments, are incorporated in
this section by reference with respect to the construction of a sidewalk
which is defined to be a local public improvement, excluding repairs
necessary to a sidewalk; and a sidewalk local public improvement shall be
initiated as provided for in Chapter 307.
§ 326-5. Costs of local public improvement.
The cost of a sidewalk local public improvement, as defined in Chapter 307
exclusive of sidewalk repairs, shall be allocated as determined by resolution
of the Village Council, payable as provided in Chapter 307.
§ 326-6. Abutting property owners to disallow unsafe conditions.
No person shall permit any sidewalk which abuts property owned by that
person to fall into a state of disrepair or to become unsafe.
§ 326-7. Notice to repair.
Whenever the Village Council shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for
use, written notice shall be given to the owner of the abutting premises by
mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner; or if the owner
or the owner's address is unknown, by delivering the notice and leaving
it with a person of suitable age and discretion at the premises; or if such
person is not found, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on
the premises. The notice shall specify the condition to be repaired and the
nature of the repairs to be made.
§ 326-8. Hearing.
A hearing shall be granted to any person notified under § 326-7 if requested
within 20 days of the notice. The hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days
after a hearing is requested. The hearing may be part of a Village Council
meeting. There shall be a fourteen-day notice to the appellant of the hearing
date.
§ 326-9. Failure to repair.
If an owner fails to repair a sidewalk within 30 days, the Village Manager
shall report the same to the Village Council with the request that he be
authorized to repair or construct the sidewalk. The Village Manager may
dispense with the notice and report and request the Council for authority
to repair the sidewalk if in the Village Manager's opinion the sidewalk
condition is unsafe and dangerous and requires immediate repair to ensure
§ 326-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-9
1:265
public safety and to prevent the possibility of Village liability for personal
injury or property damage. Upon receipt of any such report of the failure of
such owner to repair the sidewalk within the time specified in such notice,
the Council may determine to repair the sidewalk by resolution and order
the Village Manager to proceed with the required work.
§ 326-10. Cost of repairs.
The cost of repairs under this article, if made by the Village, shall be
charged against the premises abutting such sidewalk and its owner thereof,
in accordance with the provisions of this Code, including those found in
Chapter 307; however, repairs necessitated by root damage from trees
situated in the public right-of-way or by damage caused by public vehicles
shall not be the financial responsibility of the owner of the abutting
property; and the Village Council, if it determines that the sidewalk has
been damaged by abutting trees in the public right-of-way or public
vehicles, shall cause repairs as necessary to be made at the expense of the
Village.
§ 326-11. Specifications; permit.81
No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with
the lines, grade, slope and specifications established by the Village, and
without first procuring a permit from the Village Manager and/or his or her
designee. Permits shall be prominently displayed on the construction site.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 326-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 326-11
1:266
ARTICLE III
Excavations
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. III, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 326-12. Excavations and openings to be guarded.
No person making an excavation in a street, alley or public place shall fail to
guard the excavation fully during the period of construction; and no person
causing any such opening to be used, nor the user, shall fail to guard or
barricade the excavation while in use, so as to protect the safety of the
public. No person using any excavation, or causing the excavation to be
used, shall fail to close the opening in accordance with the directions of the
Village Manager or his or her designee.
§ 326-13. Permit required.
No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street,
alley or public place without first procuring a permit from the Village
Manager or his or her designee.
§ 326-14. Application for permit.82
Any person who desires to procure a permit under this article shall make
application to the Village Manager or his or her designee. Such application
shall be made on the form provided by the Village and shall include such
information as is reasonably necessary for the Village Manager or his or
her designee to be advised of the location of the proposed excavation; the
purpose of the excavation; the work to be performed and any item to be
installed; and such maps, sketches, drawings or other written materials as
are necessary in the reasonable judgment of the Village Manager or his or
her designee to provide the Village with adequate information with respect
to the work to be done and utility lines or other items to be installed as
part of the excavation. The application shall also include such information
as is reasonably necessary for the Village Manager or his or her designee
to determine whether there has been compliance with Public Act No. 174 of
2013 (the MISS DIG Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety
Act, MCLA § 460.721 et seq.).
§ 326-15. Compliance with statutory provisions required for
issuance of permit.83
A permit required by this article shall not be issued unless the person
applying for a permit has complied with the requirements of Public Act No.
174 of 2013 (the MISS DIG Underground Facility Damage Prevention and
Safety Act, MCLA § 460.721 et seq.). Compliance with Public Act No. 174 of
2013 (the MISS DIG Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 326-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-15
1:267
Act, MCLA § 460.721 et seq.) shall not be deemed to relieve a person from
the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 326-16. Permit refusal; appeal.
If the Village Manager or his or her designee shall refuse to issue any permit
under this article, the applicant may appeal to the Village Council, which
shall grant a hearing on the appeal; and the decision of the Village Council
shall be final. In granting a permit after such hearing, the Village Council
may impose such conditions as it may deem desirable to protect the safety
of persons and property.
§ 326-17. Inspections; revocation or suspension of permit.
All work done pursuant to any permit under this article shall be inspected
by the Village Manager or his or her designee, and the Village Manager or
his or her designee may suspend or revoke any permit so granted where
either the workmanship or materials used does not conform to the plans and
specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit or when the
terms of any permit or of this article are violated. No person shall perform
any work authorized by any permit or cause any such work to be performed
while that permit is suspended or revoked.
§ 326-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 326-17
1:268
ARTICLE IV
Grand Trunk Right-of-Way
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. IV, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 326-18. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GRAND TRUNK RIGHT-OF-WAY — The former Grand Trunk Railroad rightof-
way, which is owned by the Village, as situated easterly of Buchanan
Street and westerly of Lake Avenue in the Village for a width of 100 feet
for its entire length, and easterly of Lake Avenue and westerly of Fruitport
Road for its entire length for a width of 50 feet.
PERSON — Includes individuals, firms, joint ventures, partnerships,
corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations or natural persons,
either corporate or unincorporated, howsoever operated in name, whether
acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, including all legal
representatives, heirs, successors and assigns.
§ 326-19. Occupancy and use; permit requirements.
A. The occupancy and use of the Grand Trunk right-of-way shall be
restricted and regulated as follows:
(1) No person shall use, occupy or be upon the Grand Trunk right-ofway
other than by means of pedestrian nonmotorized conveyance
or use.
(2) No person shall discharge onto the Grand Trunk right-of-way any
wastes or wastewater, or shall place or permit to be placed any
trash, debris, junk or other such similar items; and no burning of
any things or items shall be permitted on the Grand Trunk right-ofway.
(3) No person shall remove any growing vegetation from the Grand
Trunk right-of-way or disturb the soil or excavate such soil or
remove any soil from such Grand Trunk right-of-way.
B. Upon prior application in writing by a person to the Village Manager,
the Village Manager, upon review of such application and the reasons
stated in such application and the receipt of an application fee in an
amount determined to be appropriate by the Village, may issue the
person a permit to do such things or activities as would otherwise be
prohibited by this article. Such permit when issued shall state the terms
and conditions deemed appropriate by the Village Manager and shall be
in effect for the length of time provided for in such permit. Any person
having a permit issued pursuant to this article shall hold the Village
harmless for any and all claims for damages for injuries or to the
§ 326-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-19
1:269
§ 326-20. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall enter to maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, tamper with, deface or otherwise harm
any of the Grand Trunk right-of-way or any structure, appurtenance,
equipment or other part of the right-of-way.
§ 326-21. Effect on other provisions; conflicts.
This article shall not repeal, abrogate or annul or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other ordinances of the Village or with
state law, except where those have been specifically repealed at the time
of the adoption of this article. Where provisions of any state law, rule
or regulation or other Village ordinance which may be applicable impose
greater restrictions or other duties on persons concerning Grand Trunk
right-of-way than those restrictions and standards contained in this article,
then the provisions of such law, rule, regulation or ordinance shall control.
§ 326-22. Public nuisance.
Any violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 326-23. Violations and penalties.84
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.85
property arising out of the activities carried on in the Grand Trunk
right-of-way by such person.
84.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
85.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
§ 326-19 SPRING LAKE CODE § 326-23
1:270
Chapter 334
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special assessments — See Ch. 307.
§ 326-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-23
1:271

ARTICLE I
Tax Exemption for Housing Development
[Adopted 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 333 (Ch. 67, Art. I, of the 2000
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 334-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "2013 Tax Exemption
Ordinance."
§ 334-2. Preamble.
A. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for elderly
citizens of low or moderate income and to encourage the development
of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property
taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act
of 1966 [1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq., MSA
§ 116.114(1) et seq.]. The Village is authorized by this Act to establish
or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all
classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it
chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low or
moderate income (as defined in this article) is a public necessity, and as
the Village will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the
encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax
exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the
continuance of the provisions for this article for tax exemption and the
service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of
housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance
on such tax exemption.
B. The Village acknowledges that Mill Point Senior Housing Limited
Dividend Housing Association, a Michigan limited dividend housing
association limited partnership, which consists of Seybert New Limited
Partnership and PBN Park, LLC (the "sponsor"), has offered, subject to
receipt of a mortgage loan and/or an allocation of low-income housing
tax credits from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to
erect, own and operate a housing development identified as "Mill Point
Senior Housing," on certain property described on Exhibit A attached
hereto,86 all being in the Village, to serve elderly persons of low or
moderate income. The sponsor has offered to pay the Village on account
of this housing development an annual service charge for public
services in lieu of all taxes consistent with the provisions of this article.
86.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the Village offices.
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-3
1:273
§ 334-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended.87
ANNUAL SHELTER RENT — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from (or in the case of housing assisted under Section 8 of the United
States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, contract rents paid on behalf of),
all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, refuse removal, or
other utilities furnished to the occupants.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CONTRACT RENT — Rental rates as defined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated
pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended
by the Housing Community Development Act of 1974.
ELDERLY — A single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household
in which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other
members are 50 years of age or older.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for elderly persons of low or moderate income and such
elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal
and educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality
of the development as it relates to housing for elderly persons of low or
moderate income.
HUD — The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
acting through its Federal Housing Administration divisions.
LOW OR MODERATE INCOME — Families and persons who cannot afford
to pay the amounts at which private enterprise, without federally aided
mortgages or loans from the Authority, is providing a substantial supply of
decent, safe, and sanitary housing and to fall within income limitations set
in the Act or by the Authority and its rules. Among low or moderate income
persons, preference shall be given to the elderly and those displaced by
urban renewal, slump clearance or the governmental action.
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan to be made by the Authority and/or insured by
HUD to the sponsor for the construction and/or permanent financing of the
housing development.
SPONSOR — Person(s) or entities which have applied to the Authority
and/or HUD for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development, and/
or applied to the Authority for a reservation of low-income housing tax
credits for specifically the housing development known as "Mill Point Senior
Housing Limited Dividend Housing Associates," a Michigan limited dividend
87.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.
§ 334-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 334-3
1:274
housing association limited partnership, which consists of Seybert New
Limited Partnership and PBN Park, LLC, although sponsor may assign its
interest in the housing development to any successor entity that is eligible
under the Act.
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service, refuse removal, and/
or electrical service which are paid by the housing development for its
common areas.
§ 334-4. Class of housing developments.
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in
lieu of such taxes shall be elderly housing, which is financed or assisted
pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that the Mill Point Senior
Housing Development is of this class. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 15(a) of the Act to the contrary, the Village will hereby provide tax
exemptions and accept payments in lieu thereof as described in this article
only to the project known as "Mill Point Senior Housing Development."
The Village shall not provide tax exemptions to any other multifamily, low
income or elderly housing projects financed pursuant to the Act or this
article.
§ 334-5. Establishment of annual service charge. [Amended
3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 337]
The Housing Development identified as "Mill Point Senior Housing" and
the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all
property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The
Village, acknowledging that the sponsor and the Authority have established
the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the
enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the
housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment
in lieu of taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of the
sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation of low-income housing
tax credits from the Authority, and/or receipt of a mortgage loan from the
Authority and/or a loan insured by HUD, to construct, own and operate
the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service
charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service
charge shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 239 adopted by Spring Lake
Township, Ottawa County, State of Michigan. The annual service charge
shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of that ordinance.
§ 334-6. Limitation on annual service charge.
The annual service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes for any part of the
housing development that is tax exempt and that is occupied by persons of
low to moderate income shall not exceed an amount equal to the taxes that
would be paid but for the tax exemption granted under this article.
§ 334-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-7
1:275
§ 334-7. Contractual effect of article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the
contrary, a contract between the Village and the sponsor with the Authority
and/or HUD as third party beneficiaries under the contract, to provide tax
exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is
effectuated by enactment of this article.
§ 334-8. Payment of service charge.
The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the article
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable
to the Village except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before
August 15 of each year. On or before June 15 of each year, the sponsor
shall file with the Village an audit showing the number of units in Mill Point
Senior Housing occupied by elderly persons of low or moderate income
as of December 31 of the previous year. The Village shall invoice the
sponsor no later than July 1 of each year for the service charge due on
August 15. On or before March 15 of each year the sponsor shall file with
the Village documentation and accounting records showing the rent or
occupancy charges received from those units considered to be occupied by
elderly persons of low or moderate income during the previous year. Any
additional service charge shall be payable by the sponsor on demand. Any
overpayment of service charge shall be promptly refunded to the sponsor
by the Village.
§ 334-9. Duration.
The construction of the housing development must commence within three
years from the effective date of the adoption of this article, or the provisions
of this article shall terminate according to its own terms. If constructed,
the provisions of this article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate
so long as the housing development remains subject to income and rent
restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended; and the Authority or HUD has any interest in the property.
§ 334-10. Lien.
Annual service charges payable pursuant to this article shall be a lien on
the housing development and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced
in the same manner as general property taxes.
§ 334-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 334-10
1:276
Chapter 339
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 365.
§ 339-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
STREET — Includes any street, alley, avenue, court, land or public place
within the limits of the Village.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for hire, where no regular or specified route is traveled, and in
which passengers are taken to and from such places as they may designate;
provided, that motor vehicles used exclusively as hearses, ambulances or
buses traveling scheduled routes at regularly scheduled times shall not be
construed to be within the meaning of this definition; provided further, that
motor vehicles owned and/or operated solely by the Village or in conjunction
with other municipalities or governmental agencies shall not be construed
to be within the meaning of this definition.
§ 339-2. Insurance required. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 208]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab unless
the taxicab and driver are insured by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the state in order to indemnify any passenger or any other
person against loss due to personal injury, death or property damage
occasioned by the operation or driving of a taxicab in amounts to be set by
resolution of the Village Council and be published as part of the Council
proceedings.
§ 339-3. Fares. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 208]
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a
taxicab or for any service related to such use than has been approved by the
Village Council. All such rates and charges shall be set by resolution of the
Village Council and shall be published as part of the Council proceedings.
§ 339-4. Conduct of drivers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Drive any taxicab in violation of any laws of this state or the ordinances
of this Village.
§ 334-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-4
1:277
§ 339-5. Passenger's failure to pay.
It shall be unlawful for any passenger after having received the service, to
refuse or neglect to pay the regular charge or fare for such service.
§ 339-6. License required.
No person, either as principal, agent or employee, shall run, operate or
drive any taxicab on the streets of the Village without first having obtained
a license; and no such license shall be issued in any other than the manner
described in this chapter.
§ 339-7. Applications for license.
Any person desiring a license to operate a taxicab shall file with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer an application for a license to so operate and in such
application shall specify:
B. Allow any person other than drivers to loiter in any taxicab.
C. Charge or collect any fare in excess of those specified in this chapter or
in the application for a license.
D. Fail or neglect to deliver to the Police Department within 24 hours all
articles of personal property left by passengers or others in any taxicab.
E. Refuse or neglect, when applied to, and tender of fare made, to convey
any person to any place within the Village and thereafter driving the
person to his destination by the most direct route; provided that no
taxicab driver shall be required to convey any intoxicated passenger or
any passenger engaged in any illegal act or conduct.
A. The name, age and residence of the persons applying for such license;
B. The names, ages and places of residence of those persons who are to
actually drive and operate such taxicab and attach a copy of the driver's
or chauffeur's license issued by the state to such driver or drivers, the
copy to be certified under oath that it is a correct and true copy;
C. The name, model and year of the motor vehicle or vehicles to be so used
as a taxicab;
D. A schedule of rates to be charged within the limits of the Village and a
schedule of rates to be charged for any passenger hiring a taxicab
within the Village limits to be transported to any point within a radius of
five miles of the limits of the Village and whether it is on a mileage basis
or on a flat rate basis; and
E. The place where the taxicab will normally be kept when not in actual
use.
§ 339-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 339-8
1:278
§ 339-8. Consideration of license application by Council.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall submit the application to the Village
Council at its next regular meeting, and the Council shall then determine
after considering the public needs and safety whether or not a license to
operate such taxicab shall be issued to such applicant.
§ 339-9. Issuance of license; fee.
If the application is approved by the Council, the Clerk/Treasurer shall
issue a written license to be in such form as shall be prescribed by the
Council; provided that before such license is delivered to such applicant,
the applicant shall pay to the Clerk/Treasurer a license fee as prescribed by
Council resolution.
§ 339-10. License expiration; renewal.
The license under this chapter shall expire one year after its date of issue;
and thereafter if such licensee desires to secure a new license, such
licensee or applicant shall again submit an application in the same manner
as stated in this chapter; and such application shall be subject to review
by the Council in the same manner as stated in this chapter; and, if such
application is approved, the applicant shall again pay the license fee as
provided in this chapter.
§ 339-11. Report of change of drivers; permit required.
If a new licensee employs drivers different than those named on the
application, the new licensee shall, before such person shall be permitted
to drive a taxicab, submit to the Chief of Police the name, age and address
of such proposed driver; thereafter the Chief of Police shall examine the
driver's and/or chauffeur's license of such proposed driver and shall make
an investigation of the driving ability and character of such proposed driver;
and if satisfied that such proposed driver is a proper person to drive a
taxicab, shall then issue a written permit authorizing such proposed driver
to drive and operate a taxicab. It shall be unlawful for any person not named
in the original application to operate or drive a taxicab unless the permit is
issued.
§ 339-12. Revocation of license.
The violation of this chapter or any part of this chapter or of the laws of the
state or any ordinances of the Village shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of any permit or license issued under this chapter. Such
revocation or suspension shall only be made by the Council in regular or
special meeting.
§ 339-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-13
1:279
§ 339-13. Violations and penalties.88
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with
§ 1-2. The Village may also seek injunctive relief as may be appropriate.
Chapter 345
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 345-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the Village qualifies for distributions
under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying
with the Act.
§ 345-2. Conflict with other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
§ 345-3. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from
time to time.89
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-ofway
in the Village for its telecommunications facilities.
B. All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the
following:
88.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
89.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
§ 339-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 345-3
1:280
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the
Act.90
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning
as the term "Commission" in the Act.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-ofway"
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The
equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines,
wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or
can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunications services or signals. "Telecommunications facilities
or facilities" do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment
and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed
commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332.(d) of Title III
of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47
U.S.C. § 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service
in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2102. "Telecommunications provider" does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also
includes all of the following:
VILLAGE — The Village of Spring Lake.
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband Internet transport access service.
90.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3103.
§ 345-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:281
§ 345-4. Permit required.
VILLAGE COUNCIL — The Council of the Village of Spring Lake or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the Village Council.
VILLAGE MANAGER — The Manager for the Village of Spring Lake or
his or her designee.
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-ofway
in the Village for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for
and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the Village Clerk/Treasurer, one copy with the Village
Manager, and one copy with the Village Attorney. Upon receipt, the
Village Clerk/Treasurer shall make one copy of the application and
distribute a copy to the Village Manager or his or her designee.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by
the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location
of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with the
Act.
C. Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA
§§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face
of each map.
D. Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time, nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $500.
E. Additional information. The Village Manager may request an applicant
to submit such additional information which the Village Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all
such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such
additional information established by the Village Manager. If the Village
and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional
information requested by the Village, the Village or the applicant shall
notify the MPSC as provided in Section (6)(2) of the Act.
F. Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the Village under Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the Village to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section
§ 345-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 345-4
1:282
§ 345-5. Issuance of permit.
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall
satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
G. Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-ofway
in the Village as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA § 484.2251, shall submit
to the Village an application for a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the application fee of $500 required
under Subsection D above. A provider under this subsection shall be
given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if
allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.
A. Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is hereby delegated to the Village Manager. Pursuant to
Section 15(3) of the Act, the Village Manager shall approve or deny an
application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under
Subsection B below for access to a public right-of-way within the
Village. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the Village Manager shall
notify the MPSC when the Village Manager has granted or denied a
permit, including information regarding the date on which the
application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or
denied. The Village Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Village
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the Village Manager
may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions
shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage
of the public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on Subsection C above, the Village Manager may require that
a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of
the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost
to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original
condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access
and use.
§ 345-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-6
1:283
§ 345-6. Construction/engineering permit.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public right-of-way in the Village without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required by the Village
for such construction within the public right-of-way. No fee shall be charged
for such a construction or engineering permit.
§ 345-7. Conduit or utility poles.
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
§ 345-8. Route maps.
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the Village, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
Village. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the
MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.
§ 345-9. Repair of damage.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the Village, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below,
or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public rightof-
way to its preexisting condition.
§ 345-10. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the Village set
forth in § 345-4D, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the Village's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.
§ 345-11. Modification of existing fees.
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the Village
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date
of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under
the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the Village also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunications facilities in
public rights-of-way within the Village's boundaries, so that those providers
§ 345-6 SPRING LAKE CODE § 345-11
1:284
pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The Village shall
provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy
of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4). To the
extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with
the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the Village's
policy and intent, and, upon application by a provider or discovery by the
Village, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
§ 345-12. Savings clause.
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 345-11 shall be
void from the date the modification was made.
§ 345-13. Use of funds.
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the Village
from the Authority shall be used by the Village solely for rights-of-way
related purposes.
§ 345-14. Annual report.
The Village Manager shall file an annual report with the Authority on
the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority, as
required under Section 10(5) of the Act.
§ 345-15. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the Village shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband Internet transport access services.
§ 345-16. Existing rights.
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the Village may have under a permit
issued by the Village or under a contract between the Village and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
§ 345-17. Compliance.
The Village hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The Village shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
the Act, including but not limited to the following:
§ 345-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-17
1:285
§ 345-18. Reservation of police powers.
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the Village's
right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's access to and
A. Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in § 345-4C of this
chapter.
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter, in accordance with § 345-4F of this
chapter.
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the
application fee of $500, in accordance with § 345-4G of this chapter.
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the Village, in
accordance with § 345-5A of this chapter.
E. Notifying the MPSC when the Village has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with § 345-5A of this chapter.
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 345-5A of this chapter.
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 345-5B of this
chapter.
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 345-5C of this chapter.
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunications
provider's access and use, in accordance with § 345-5D of this chapter.
J. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits.
K. Providing each telecommunications provider affected the Village's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with
§ 345-11 of this chapter.
L. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 345-14 of this chapter.
M. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 345-15 of this chapter.
§ 345-17 SPRING LAKE CODE § 345-18
1:286
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Village's authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 345-19. Authorized Village officials.
The Village Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized Village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction
notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal Chapter
Violations Bureau).91
§ 345-20. Municipal civil infraction.92
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
Chapter 351
TOURIST PARK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 135. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 249.
§ 351-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LOT — A designated and numbered site, station or location within the park
which is designated to accommodate a trailer for residential purposes.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A written permit, as may be amended, prepared by
the Village and executed by any occupant and the Village or its authorized
agent for the purpose of governing in part the terms and conditions of any
use or occupancy of the park.
OCCUPANT — A person who obtains an occupancy permit for a lot within
the park and who executes an occupancy permit in connection therewith.
91.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Civil Infractions.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 345-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-1
1:287
PARK — The Village tourist park located adjacent to the Grand River within
the Village.
PARK MANAGER — The person duly appointed and authorized by the
Village Manager, with the advice and consent of the Village Council, to
operate, manage and control the use of the park in accordance with the
standards established by the Village Manager, and also in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the occupancy permit, and any other
provisions of law.
TRAILER — A trailer coach, a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor
home, a truck camper or other vehicular-type structure so designed and
constructed as to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place by one
or more persons, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on
or drawn by another vehicle which is self-powered.93
§ 351-2. Application for reservation of space; assignment of lots.94
Space within the park may be applied for and will be reserved in accordance
with the following provisions of this section:
A. Receipt of applications. Applications for reservations of a lot within the
park shall be received by the Village at the office of the Village Manager
on application forms provided by the Village commencing the last
Friday of February of the year immediately preceding the year which
such reservation is sought.
B. Assignment of lots. Each year the Village shall assign specified lots
within the park to those seasonal residents of the Village who have
made application for a lot for the coming season. Such assignments
shall be made in order of seniority and then in the order in which
applications were received by the Village and shall further be made,
insofar as possible in accordance with the written request of the
applicant as contained on the application form.
C. Notification of residents of lot assignment. On or before February 14 of
each year the Village shall notify those who have been assigned a lot the
specific lot which they have been assigned and the terms for the
occupancy permit for such lot. Such notice of assignment and terms
shall be sent to the residents by first-class mail at the address indicated
by the residents on their application. The resident shall have until the
last day of February to return one executed copy of the license to the
office of the Village Manager. Failure to return an executed copy of the
license to the office of the Village Manager on or before the last day of
February shall result in such resident applicant's forfeiture of any
preference or priority he might otherwise have pursuant to this chapter.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 351-1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 351-2
1:288
§ 351-3. Park rules and regulations governing use. [Amended
7-6-2009 by Ord. No. 314]
No person shall use the park except in accordance with the following
provisions of this section:
D. Assignment of remaining lots. Commencing subsequent to the
assignment of lots within the park then remaining, unoccupied lots shall
be available for hire by residents and nonresidents of the Village alike.
Lots shall be assigned in the order in which applications were or are
received by the Village and shall further be made, insofar as possible, in
accordance with the written request of the applicant as contained in the
application form. As lots are assigned, the Village shall notify the
applicant who has been assigned a lot the specific lot which has been
assigned and the terms for the occupancy of such lot. Such notice of
assignment and terms shall be sent to the applicant by first-class mail at
the address indicated by the applicant on the application. Letters are
mailed the first week of January for current seasonal residents,
requesting deposit by the last Friday in February or informing the
applicant that the lot will be offered to the next available applicant on
the waiting list.
E. Exchange of lots; amendment of agreements. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, lots within the park may be exchanged and occupancy
permits amended as required on the mutual agreement of all parties
concerned and with the prior approval of the park manager.
A. Lot use for trailer parking only. No lot shall be occupied or used except
for the purpose of parking a trailer pursuant to an occupancy permit
obtained from the park manager and executed by the Village and
occupant.
B. Transfer of permit. No occupant shall transfer or assign any occupancy
permit obtained under this chapter, nor shall any occupant transfer all
or any part of a lot covered by such occupancy permit, nor shall any
trailer be transferred between lots except by written amendment to the
occupancy permit as provided in the amendment.
C. Location of trailers. All trailers shall be placed or situated within the
park in such location and manner as may be directed by the park
manager.
D. Use for residential purposes only. No lot or trailer located on such lot,
and no other place within the park, shall be used for any purposes other
than residential purposes.
E. Removal of hazardous trailers. No trailer which, in the opinion of the
park manager, is unfit to be used or occupied as a dwelling or sleeping
place, or which constitutes a health or fire hazard, shall be permitted
within the park; and any trailer which is so unfit or constitutes such a
§ 351-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-3
1:289
hazard shall be immediately removed from the park when so ordered
by the park manager.
F. Occupation of trailers. No trailer shall be occupied by persons other
than those named in the occupancy permit, except upon prior written
approval of a change in the named occupants of such trailer by the park
manager.
G. Erection of structures. No person shall construct or erect, or cause or
permit to be constructed or erected, any building, tent or other
structure or enclosure on any lot unless such structure or enclosure is
attached to or otherwise connected with a trailer.
H. Animals. No person shall bring or keep any animal except in compliance
with park rules.95
I. Damage to property. No person shall destroy, deface or injure any park
property, including but not limited to signs, guideposts, trees and
shrubs.
J. Litter. No person shall store, throw, discard or deposit, or cause or
permit to be stored, thrown, discarded or deposited, any garbage,
debris, cans, bottles, papers, junk, refuse, or other waste material or
unwholesome substance of any kind or description anywhere within the
park or in the adjacent waters of the Grand River except in such
receptacles as may be provided for the deposit and collection of such
materials or substances.
K. Fires. No person shall build or start, or cause or permit to be built or
started, within the park an open fire; and no person shall leave or cause
or permit to be left unattended any fire while it is still burning, except at
the park fire pit.96
L. Changing clothes. No person shall sleep or change clothes in any
vehicle within the park other than a trailer.
M. Disorderly conduct; nuisances. No person shall, within the park, engage
in any disorderly or boisterous conduct likely to disturb, disrupt or
interfere with the rights, peace and quiet, or comfort of other persons;
nor shall any person within the park engage in any conduct likely to
cause damage to any persons or property; nor shall any person within
the park otherwise cause a nuisance.
N. Dock and boat mooring facilities. No dock or other boat mooring facility
shall be placed, constructed or otherwise maintained at the park unless
the plans and specifications have first been approved in writing by the
Village Manager or his or her designee. All such docks and other boat
mooring facilities shall be constructed under the personal supervision
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 351-3 SPRING LAKE CODE § 351-3
1:290
§ 351-4. Fees and charges.
of the Village Manager or his or her designee. All docks placed,
constructed or otherwise maintained at the park shall comply with the
following specifications: minimum width, 28 inches; all stringers, two
inches by eight inches; all treads, two inches by six inches; and all
supporting posts, four inches by four inches. No dock shall have a
length of greater than 30 feet.
O. Compliance with all laws. No person shall at any time use the park
except upon compliance, and in accordance with the occupancy permit,
with this chapter, with the other ordinances of the Village, and with the
laws of the state.
A. No person shall use the park facilities except upon payment of certain
fees and charges to be established and adjusted by Village Council
resolution. The fees and charges shall include usual charges for
electricity billed monthly for seasonal and monthly tenants, water,
sewer and garbage pickup from a central location. Such rates shall not
include charges for telephone or other utilities not specifically included
in such rates, and all telephone or other utility charges not specifically
included in such rates arising out of the use of any lot shall be paid by
the lessee before they become delinquent.97
B. The checkout time for leaving the park shall be 12:00 noon, local time;
and any occupant who allows a trailer to remain on any lot or who
makes any other use of the park beyond the checkout time shall pay the
fees and charges for an additional day.
C. All fees and charges connected with the use of the park facilities shall
be strictly in accordance with the fee schedules and shall be payable as
provided in the occupancy permit.
D. The park manager is authorized and directed to collect the lawful fees
and charges provided for under the provisions of this chapter and upon
collection of the fees shall transmit the fees to the Village Clerk/
Treasurer and obtain a receipt for such fees. At the time of collecting
such fees and charges, the park manager shall give a receipt to the
occupant or party paying such fees and charges, shall designate upon
such receipt the period for which such fees and charges are paid, and
shall cause a copy of such receipt to be filed with the Village Clerk/
Treasurer.
E. Any occupancy permit shall provide that it may be terminated by the
Village at any time without cause in the sole discretion of the Village
even though the term of the occupancy permit has not expired. If the
occupant has not breached any of the terms and provisions of his
occupancy permit or this chapter, then, on termination, the occupant
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 351-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-4
1:291
§ 351-5. Safety regulations.
The park manager shall make such regulations subject to the approval of
the Village Council and give such orders and directions relative to the use
and occupancy of the park as are consistent with the occupancy permit,
this chapter and the laws of the state, and as may be necessary to promote
health, safety and good order in the park.
Chapter 358
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Fertilizers — See Ch. 168.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 326.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 358-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 212]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PARK TREES — Any one or more trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks and all other areas owned by the Village.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — All the land lying between private property lines on
either side of all public streets, alleys, ways and places.
STREET TREES — Any one or more trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all
public highways, streets, avenues or ways within the Village.
TREE BOARD — The Parks and Recreation Committee as designated by
the Village Council, which will develop and administer a comprehensive
community tree management program for the care of park trees and street
trees on public property.
shall be entitled to a refund of fees paid on a pro rata basis for the
unexpired portion of the permit term.
§ 351-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 358-2
1:292
§ 358-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-15-1995 by Ord. No.
23698]
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to § 1-2. Increased civil fines may be
imposed for “repeated violations,” which means a second or subsequent
municipal civil infraction violation committed by a person within any twelvemonth
period and for which a person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible. The increased civil fine for repeat violations is set forth
in § 1-2.
§ 358-3. Restitution.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, in addition to the
penalties provided in § 358-2, also be required to make restitution to the
Village for the damage incurred by paying for the cost of removal, stump
grinding and replacement of the damaged tree with a new tree of the type
used by the Village in the annual tree planting program, as approved by the
Village Manager.
§ 358-4. Powers and duties of Village Manager and Tree Board.
[Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 212]
A. The Village Manager shall have jurisdiction, authority, control,
supervision and direction over all street trees and park trees, plants
and shrubs planted or growing in or upon the public ways and public
places of the Village, and their planting, removal, care, maintenance
and protection. Upon referral by the Village Manager, the Tree Board
will develop and recommend the administration of a comprehensive
community tree management program for the care of street trees and
park trees.
B. The Tree Board shall recommend tree care policies for planting,
maintenance and removal, including the species to be utilized in
replacing and planting of street trees and park trees, including the
spacing and location requirements for such trees.
C. The Tree Board shall also provide to the Village Manager and the
Village Council an inventory of the street trees and park trees, species,
location and condition with the intent that such report shall present an
objective analysis of the status of such trees and recommendations for
future management. By way of example but not limitation, the annual
inventory shall provide a work plan which would address the care,
maintenance and removal of dead or hazardous trees, pruning
requirements and insect and disease control.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 358-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-5
1:293
§ 358-5. Planting trees; permit required; specifications; prohibited
varieties.
§ 358-6. Prohibited acts.
A. No shade or ornamental tree, plant or shrub shall be planted in any of
the public highways of the Village by private individuals, businesses or
corporations until the Village Manager shall have first approved the
kind, size and variety of the trees, designated the location and granted
a permit for their planting, provided that trees shall be planted not less
than 40 feet apart, not less than 3 1/2 feet from any sidewalk, and not
less than 3 1/2 feet from any driveway, and provided, further, that if in
the opinion of the Village Manager such spacing is undesirable,
impossible or impractical, the Village Manager may allow a variation of
spacing and shall so state on the permit, together with the reason. It is
further provided that no varieties of soft maple, willow, poplar, catalpa,
box elder, black locust, elm, ailanthus, fruit trees or other weak-wooded
trees that may be prohibited by other Village ordinances shall be set out
on the public highways, nor any other tree unless it is free from
infectious disease. The Village Manager may promulgate additional
rules for types of trees to be planted and spacing of street trees of
varying sizes and varieties if deemed to be in the best interest of the
Village.
B. Unless expressly permitted as provided in § 358-10, planting of trees
will be done by Village employees or agents hired by the Village under
the direction of the Village Manager.
A. No person shall, without the written permit of the Village Manager,
remove, destroy, break, deface, trim, brace, move, do surgery work,
mutilate, kill, girdle, or in any way injure or interfere with any tree,
plant or shrub in any highway, park or boulevard of the Village;
however, nothing in this section shall be construed so as to apply to the
removal, under the direction of the Village Manager, of any root, tree,
shrub or plant or part when such removal shall be necessary for the
construction and/or maintenance of any sidewalks, sewer or public
improvement.
B. No person shall attach any rope, wire, cable, sign, card or poster or any
other article to a tree or its guard in a public highway without a written
permit from the Village Manager; nor shall any person pour or deposit
salt or brine or other injurious material upon any public highway in
such manner as to intentionally injure any tree or shrub planted or
growing on the highway; nor shall any person hitch, tie, fasten or
secure any horse or other animal to any tree or allow the animal to
stand so it can injure any tree, plant or shrub.
C. Any subsurface installation or work, waterline, sewer line, gasline,
transmission line or other utility, within a ten-foot distance of a street
tree or park tree will be by jack-and-bore method unless written
approval for open trenching is issued by the Village Manager, in which
§ 358-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 358-6
1:294
§ 358-7. Protection of trees.
In the erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building, structure,
utility line, pavement or sidewalk, the owner shall place or cause to be
placed such guards around all nearby trees on the public highway as will
effectually prevent injury to such trees.
§ 358-8. Trees extending into public highways.
§ 358-9. Gas pipes and mains; leaks; remedy.
No person owning, maintaining or operating any gas pipes or mains laid
beneath the surface of any street, alley or public place in the Village shall
permit any leaks to exist in such pipe or main within 40 feet of any tree
growing in any street or public place in the Village; and if leaks exist or
occur in such pipe or mains, it shall be the duty of the person owning or
operating such defective pipes or mains to repair them immediately and
stop such leaks in a manner so as to prevent a recurrence of the leaks and
compensate the Village for the removal and replacement of the dead trees
caused by such leaks.
§ 358-10. Removal of trees; authority to impose.
As a condition to any permit to remove any tree or shrub as provided in
§ 358-6A, the Village Manager may require that the permittee plant one
or more approved trees or shrubs in the place of the one removed and/or,
if required by the Village Manager after reasonable determination of the
circumstances of such removal, pay for moving the tree to another parkway
location. Failure, refusal or neglect to plant another tree or shrub of the
type, size and in the location specified in the permit within 12 months from
the date of the issuance of the permit shall be a violation of this section.
case a charge for vigor pruning, fertilization or other preventative
maintenance service will be applicable. This requirement shall not
apply to the repair or replacement of a private utility lateral or service
on private property.
A. Any tree not growing on a public alley, street or highway but so located
as to extend its branches over a public alley, street or highway shall be
so trimmed by the owners of the property on which the tree stands or by
the owners' agents so that there will be a clear height of 14 feet above
the surface of the street or highway unobstructed by branches; and
such owner or the owner's agents shall remove all dead branches and
stubs on such trees which are or may become a menace to travelers on
the public highway, street or alleys of the Village.
B. The Village shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign. The Village shall give each property owner so affected at least 10
days' notice prior to taking action allowed by this subsection.
§ 358-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-11
1:295
§ 358-11. Restrictions on excavations.
No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches within a radius
of six feet of any tree or shrub without a written permit from the Village
Manager.
§ 358-12. Prohibitions on harmful substances; painting; burning.
No person shall deliberately cause, authorize or permit any salt, brine
water, oil, liquid dye or other substances deleterious to tree and shrub life
to lie, leak, flow or drip into the soil at the base of any tree or shrub or on to
any sidewalk, road, pavement or gutter in such position that the runoff may
enter the soil area at the base of any tree or shrub; nor shall any person
deface with paint, whitewash or other materials, trees or shrubs, in any
public highway or place; nor shall any person set fire or permit any fire to
burn where such fire or its heat will injure any portion of any tree or shrub
in any highway, park or public place.
§ 358-13. Chains, cables, and wires prohibited.
No person shall fasten chains, cables or wire about the trunk of any tree
in the public highways, streets or places of the Village; and the use of such
trees as anchors is prohibited.
§ 358-14. Unimpeded passage of air and water to tree roots.
No person shall without the written permit of the Village Manager deposit,
place or maintain upon the surface of any street or public highway of the
Village any stone, brick, concrete, cement or other material which shall
impede the free passage of water and air to the roots of any tree growing
in such street or public highway; however, nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to require the Village in the construction of sidewalks or
pavements to leave any open space around the trunk of any tree when such
tree is planted or is growing within the lines established as a sidewalk line;
but if any tree grows within a distance of less than one foot from the inner
or outer established sidewalk lines, the sidewalk shall be so constructed as
to leave an open space of one foot around the trunk of such tree.
§ 358-15. Electric wires.
A. No person shall attach any electric wire, insulation or other device for
holding electric wire to any tree growing in any street or public
highway under the control of the Village.
B. Every person having any wires charged with electricity of more than
600 volts shall securely fasten the wires where reasonably practical so
that such wires shall not come in contact with any tree in any street or
public highway in the Village.
§ 358-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 358-16
1:296
§ 358-16. Interference with Village employees or agents.
No person shall hinder, prevent or interfere with the agents or employees
of the Village while engaged in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 358-17. Enforcement; complaints; disputes.
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, and all complaints as to the violation of this chapter shall be
presented in writing to the Village Attorney and shall be prosecuted in the
name of the Village. If at any time a bona fide dispute arises or shall exist
relative to or under the provisions of this chapter, such dispute must first be
submitted to the Village Manager; reasonable efforts shall be used by the
Village Manager to compromise the dispute.
§ 358-18. Trimming permitted.
A person owning property directly abutting a Village parkway may effect
minor and controlled remedial trimming of street trees located in the
parkway if prior written approval is received from the Village Manager.
Persons desiring to perform trimming under this section must file a written
plan with the Village Manager for consideration. If the plan is approved,
trimming may proceed only according to the approved plan. Exceeding the
approved plan shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 358-19. Budgeting. [Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 212]
The Village Council, upon its annual determination of the budget for
operating the Village, shall take into consideration the activities of the Tree
Board and appropriate and spend at least $2 per capita for the annual
Village forestry program as recommended by the Tree Board, acting by and
through the Village Manager and the Parks and Recreation Committee of
the Village. Such spending will be accounted for within the budget for the
various departments or boards of the Village which provide services to the
street trees and park trees of the Village.
§ 358-20. Arbor Day observance. [Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No.
212]
The Village Council annually will issue a proclamation to observe Arbor Day
in the Village at such time as is generally observed by other communities
and the National Arbor Day Foundation.
§ 358-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-20
1:297
Chapter 365
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 249.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 339.
Tourist park — See Ch. 351.
§ 358-20 SPRING LAKE CODE § 358-20
1:298
ARTICLE I
Uniform Traffic Standards
[Adopted as Ch. 74, Art. II, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 278]
§ 365-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Spring Lake
Uniform Traffic Code Ordinance."
§ 365-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police,
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 P.A. 306,
MCLA §§ 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all
future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they
are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by
reference.
§ 365-3. Word usage.
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages
to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Village of Spring Lake, Ottawa
County, Michigan.
§ 365-4. Violations and penalties.
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships,
and Villages are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 365-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-4
1:299

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 8-2-2004 by Ord. No. 281 (Ch. 74, Art. III, Div. 1, of the
2000 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 365-5. Laws governing.
The parking of vehicles within the Village shall be governed by this article,
by the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by § 365-2, and the
provisions of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code adopted by § 365-21.
§ 365-6. No parking during snow removal.
To facilitate the removal of snow from Village streets and roads, no person
shall park or stop a vehicle as defined in the Uniform Traffic Code and the
Michigan Motor Vehicle Code within five feet of the edge of the traveled
portion of any Village street or road or in any municipal parking lot between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1 of each
year.
§ 365-7. Obedience to parking signs.
When erected parking signs limit the time for which a person may park or
stop a vehicle in a particular parking space, zone or lot, no person shall
stop or park a vehicle in the space, zone or lot for a period longer than
designated on the parking sign during the period of time the time limits are
in force as designated on the parking sign.
§ 365-8. Disabled parking.
§ 365-9. Parking Violations Bureau.
A. A disabled person is a person who, for the purposes of this article, has a
physical characteristic categorized as a disability that limits ambulation
or necessitates the use of a wheelchair for mobility.
B. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a parking space clearly
identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by disabled
persons which is on public property or private property available for
public use unless the person is a disabled person as described in
Subsection A of this section unless the person is parking the vehicle for
the benefit of a disabled person. A certificate of identification issued
under MCLA § 257.675(5) to a disabled person shall be displayed in the
lower left corner of the front windshield, or a special registration plate
issued under MCLA § 257.803d, to a disabled person shall be displayed
on the vehicle.
A. Creation. Pursuant to Public Act No. 154 of 1968 (MCLA § 600.8101 et
seq.), and for the purpose of disposing of parking violations, the Village
establishes a Parking Violations Bureau to be under the supervision and
control of the Chief of Police. This Bureau shall be located at the Village
§ 365-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-9
1:301
§ 365-10. Issuance of parking ticket.
The issuance of a parking ticket by a police officer shall be deemed an
allegation of a parking violation. Such parking ticket shall indicate that the
ticket may be disposed of at the Police Department, the location of the
department, and the penalty for the offense for which the parking ticket was
issued.
§ 365-11. Parking violations schedule.
of Spring Lake/City of Ferrysburg police station and shall be
administered and operated by the Police Department.
B. Jurisdiction. Only those violations scheduled in § 365-11 shall be
disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. In any case, the Chief of
Police may decline or refuse to dispose of a parking violation at the
Parking Violations Bureau. In such case, any person having knowledge
of the facts may file a sworn complaint before any court having
jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law.
C. Rights of violator. No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations
Bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty
for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having
committed the offense, and in no case shall the Chief of Police
determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to
dispose of a parking violation at the Parking Violations Bureau, and all
persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a
court having jurisdiction if they so desire. The unwillingness of any
person to dispose of any violation at the Parking Violations Bureau shall
not prejudice that individual or in any way diminish the rights,
privileges and protection afforded by law.
A. The following parking violations may be disposed of at the Parking
Violations Bureau. If disposed of at the Parking Violations Bureau, the
civil fine schedule shall be as established by the Village Council and
shall be kept on file and available for inspection at the Parking
Violations Bureau. Such parking violations shall consist of civil
infractions as follows:
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
Parking too far from
the curb
R801, R803 $10 $20
Angle parking
violations
R803, R807 $10 $20
§ 365-9 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-11
1:302
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
Obstructing traffic MCLA
§ 257.676(b)
$10 $20
Prohibited parking
(signs unnecessary)
$10 $20
On a sidewalk MCLA
§ 257.674(a)
$10 $20
In front of a
public or private
drive
MCLA
§ 257.674(b)
$10 $20
Within an
intersection
MCLA
§ 257.674(c)
$10 $20
Within 15 feet of
a fire hydrant
MCLA
§ 257.674(d)
$10 $20
On a crosswalk MCLA
§ 257.674(e)
$10 $20
Within 20 feet of
a crosswalk, or if
none, then within
15 feet of the
intersection of
property lines at
an intersection of
highways
MCLA
§ 257.674(f)
$10 $20
Within 30 feet of
street side traffic
signal or sign
MCLA
§ 257.674(g)
$10 $20
Within 50 feet of
the nearest rail of
a railroad
crossing
MCLA
§ 257.674(i)
$10 $20
Alongside or
opposite a street
excavation or
obstruction, if the
stopping,
standing, or
parking could
obstruct traffic
MCLA
§ 257.674(k)
$10 $20
§ 365-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-11
1:303
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
On bridge or
viaduct
MCLA
§ 257.674(m)
$10 $20
Double parking MCLA
§ 257.674(l)
$10 $20
In front of a
theater
MCLA
§ 257.674(p)
$10 $20
Blocking
emergency exit
MCLA
§ 257.674(q)
$25 $50
Blocking fire
escape
MCLA
§ 257.674(r)
$25 $50
Failure to remove
disabled vehicle
MCLA
§ 257.673
$10 $20
On a street or
other area open
to the parking of
vehicles that
results in the
vehicle
interfering with
the use of a curbcut
or ramp by
persons with
disabilities
MCLA
§ 257.674(u)
$40 $80
Obstructing a fire
lane
MCLA
§ 257.674(aa)
$10 $20
Parking between
sidewalk and curb
Village Code
§ 365-13
$10 $20
Parking in
prohibited zones
(signs or directives
required)
MCLA
§ 257.674
$10 $20
Improper angle
parking
R803, R807
§ 365-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-11
1:304
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
Between a safety
zone and the
adjacent curb or
within 30 feet of a
point on the curb
immediately
opposite the end
of a safety zone,
unless a different
length is
indicated by an
official sign or
marking
MCLA
§ 257.674(h)
$10 $20
Within 20 feet of
the driveway
entrance to a fire
station and on the
side of a street
opposite the
entrance to a fire
station within 75
feet of the
entrance if
properly marked
by an official sign
MCLA
§ 257.674(j)
$10 $20
In marked towaway
zone
MCLA
§§ 257.674(w)
and 257.606
$50 $100
In marked
handicapped zone
without
handicapped
parking permit
MCLA
§ 257.674(s),
Village Code
§ 365-8
$100 $200
§ 365-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-11
1:305
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
In a clearly
identified access
aisle or access
lane immediately
adjacent to a
space designated
for parking by
persons with
disabilities
MCLA
§ 257.674(t)
$50 $100
In any other
prohibited
parking zone
MCLA
§ 257.674(n)
$10 $20
Parking for
prohibited purposes
(on a public street/
property)
R814
Displaying vehicle
for sale
R814(a) $10 $20
Washing,
polishing,
greasing, working
on or repairing
vehicle
R814(b) $10 $20
Displaying
advertising
R814(c) $10 $20
Selling
merchandise
R814(d) $15 $30
Storage over 48
hours
R814(e) $15 $30
Wrong side of
boulevard parking
R815 $10 $20
Loading zone
violation
R817 $10 $20
Taxicab, parking
other than at cab
stand
R819 $10 $20
Bus, taxicab stand
violation
R820 $10 $20
§ 365-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-11
1:306
§ 365-12. Failure to pay fines.
If the owner or operator of a vehicle which has been ticketed shall not
within the thirty-day period pay or cause to be paid the fees set forth
Offense
Uniform
Traffic Code
Section
Motor
Vehicle
Code
Section or
Village
Ordinance Civil
After 7
Days
Parking outside
designated
parking spaces in
public parks and
parking lots
Village Code
§ 365-13
$25 $50
Failure to set
parking brake
MCLA
§ 257.676
$10 $20
Parking on grade,
wheels not turned
to curb
MCLA
§ 257.676
$10 $20
Bicycle parking
violations
R617, R617a $10 $20
Parking on any
public street, alley,
parking lot in the
Village between
2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m., Dec. 1 to April
1
Village Code
§ 365-6
$10 $20
Parking on any
bicycle, pedestrian
or walkway
designated area
Village Code
§ 365-13
$10 $20
Parking overnight
on public street,
alley or parking lot
with semitrailer,
boat, motor home
Village Code
§ 365-13
$15 $30
Improper parking at
boat launch
Village Code
§ 365-13
$40 $80
B. All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquiring
or incurred at the time this section takes effect are saved, and such
proceedings may be consummated under and according to the
ordinance in force at the time such proceedings are or were
commenced.
§ 365-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-12
1:307
in § 365-11 or make an appearance in the District Court and indicate an
intent to dispute the parking ticket, any police officer of the Village may
seize such vehicle at any time thereafter, anywhere within the Village.
In order that the owner or operator may remove any vehicle which has
been thus impounded, that individual shall pay to the Police Department all
overdue parking tickets and to the impounder all impounding fees which
have accrued against such vehicle during the time of his ownership, and in
addition the cost of towing and storage. If at the time of seizure the vehicle
has been sold to a bona fide purchaser and transfer of title has been duly
made, such new owner may have the car released forthwith by showing
his new certificate of title to the proper officers. If the owner or operator
disputes liability as to any impoundment fees or any previously incurred
impoundment fees, fines, cost, forfeiture or penalty, such owner or operator
may have the vehicle released from impoundment by posting a bond, to be
approved by the District Judge in an amount not to exceed $500, pending
final adjudication of disputed liability. Any vehicle impounded by seizure
under any Village ordinance may, after one month from the date of seizure,
be sold by the Police Department either at private or public sale to the
highest bidder, after first giving the owner of the car as is shown to be in
the office of the Secretary of State in which the car is licensed, on the day of
seizure, a notice of seizure and proposed sale in writing, delivered in person
or sent by registered mail addressed to such person at the owner's place of
business or residence as shown in the Secretary of State's office.
§ 365-13. Parking in public places. [Amended 8-19-2013 by Ord. No.
336; 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 346]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases or operates a motor
vehicle, mobile home, motor home, recreational vehicle, boat, boat
trailer or bus, whether licensed or not, to park or stand such motor
vehicle in the parkway area between a sidewalk and the curb of a street
or within the boulevard area of such street, but within the public rightof-
way area of such street, except under the following circumstances:
(1) The owner of a single-family dwelling which is not situated on a
street that has curb and gutter may apply to the Village for a
license to park one vehicle within the public right-of-way.
(2) The space on which the motor vehicle may be parked must be a
hard surface, which is defined as concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, or
a compacted aggregate such as RAP (which must include a border).
(3) The parking space within the public right-of-way must be
contiguous with the street.
(4) The motor vehicle utilizing the approved parking space must park
parallel with the roadway (and not perpendicular), with the
passenger side of the vehicle adjacent to the curb or sidewalk.
(5) No more than one motor vehicle may park in any approved parking
space.
§ 365-12 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-13
1:308
(6) The individual who obtains the license from the Village must
maintain the approved parking space in conformance with the
ordinances of the Village of Spring Lake and may use gravel or
dolomite as a product to improve the area.
(7) The approved parking space must be weed-free.
(8) The license will not be issued until the parking space is improved
and inspected by the Village of Spring Lake.
(9) The license shall not expire; however, it may not be transferred to
anyone other than the original licensee.
(10) The license fee which will be imposed shall be established yearly in
conjunction with the annual budget.
(11) The winter parking restrictions set forth in § 365-6 shall apply to all
licenses obtained under this section.
(12) A waiver to the license requirement will be granted by the Village
Manager to those individuals who have a handicapped parking
permit from the State of Michigan.
(13) A waiver to the license requirement may be granted by the Village
Council to property owners who do not have the ability to create a
driveway based on topography or unusual site restrictions.
(14) Licenses will not be required in the following circumstances: when
parking on the roads immediately adjacent to Tanglefoot Park,
when parking near religious institutions on Sundays between 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon or parking in the vicinity of Hammond Street
during sporting events.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases or operates a motor
vehicle, except as a passenger-type vehicle, or light truck under ten-ton
rated, to park or stand such motor vehicle on any public street, alley or
public parking area overnight.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or leases a boat, boat
trailer or any other trailer, including a semitrailer, whether attached to
a motor vehicle or not, to park or stand such boat or trailer in any public
street, alley, or public parking area overnight.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or leases a
mobile home, bus, motor home, or recreational vehicle to park or stand
such mobile home, bus, motor home or recreational vehicle in any
public street, alley or public parking area overnight.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or leases a
commercial or industrial motor vehicle in excess of 3/4 ton to let it be
parked or stored on any public street, alley or public parking area
within any residential zoning district; however, this subsection shall not
prevent temporary parking of not to exceed eight hours' duration while
§ 365-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-13
1:309
engaged in a delivery, pickup or service call to the property where
located.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or leases a motor
vehicle or trailer to park, stand or store such motor vehicle or trailer
while in a public park on a grassy or lawn area or in an area not marked
or designated for vehicle parking or trailers.
G. Citations will be issued to any individual in violation of Subsection A, B,
C, D, E or F of this section.
H. Any individual who is the registered owner of a motor vehicle, boat, or
trailer, as disclosed by the registration records of the state, province, or
country where it is licensed, is deemed to be responsible for the
locating of such motor vehicle, boat or trailer in violation of this section;
and whether such owner has knowledge of the unlawful locating of such
motor vehicle, boat or trailer is irrelevant, the violation of any such
subsection being a civil infraction by the owner; provided the lessee of a
leased vehicle having a lease term in excess of one month shall in all
cases be deemed the owner of such motor vehicle for purposes of this
section. The lessor of a leased vehicle having a lease term of one month
or less, or if a daily or weekend rental vehicle, shall in such cases be
deemed the owner of such motor vehicle for purposes of this section.
I. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
when a violation of this section occurs or continues.
§ 365-13 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-13
1:310
ARTICLE III
School Property
[Adopted as Ch. 74, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances]
§ 365-14. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. When any words and phrases
used in this article are not defined in this section but are defined in Public
Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.1 et seq., MSA § 9.1801 et seq.), any such
definition shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this
article.
DRIVEWAY — The entire width or area of any place open to or intended for
motor vehicular travel as a means of access to or egress from any parking
area.
PARK and PARKING — Halting or standing a motor vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
PARKING AREA — The entire expanse or area of any school property, or
any other place within the Village open to the general public, which is
designated or intended for the parking of motor vehicles.
SCHOOL PROPERTY — The property of the county school district of the
Fourth Class No. 41.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, motor vehicles or other conveyances, either singly
or together while using any driveway or parking area for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — Any sign, signal, marking and device not
inconsistent with this article placed or erected by authority of the Village
Council or traffic engineer for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
§ 365-15. Areas outside driveways or parking areas; sidewalks.
No motor vehicle shall at any time be driven on school property except
upon established and existing driveways and parking areas, or other areas
designated for motor vehicle travel, without the express consent of the
owner of such property; and no motor vehicle shall at any time be driven
upon any sidewalk area of such property except at a driveway.
§ 365-16. Emerging from driveway, parking area or building.
The driver of a motor vehicle emerging from a driveway, parking area
or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto any
sidewalk area extending across any driveway or parking area, or prior to
driving onto any roadway or alleyway where there is no such sidewalk,
yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian or vehicle approaching on the
sidewalk, roadway or alley which is so close as to create an immediate
§ 365-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-16
1:311
hazard; and, having so stopped, such driver shall proceed into such
sidewalk area, roadway or alleyway only when such movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 365-17. Limitations on backing vehicle.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not back the vehicle on any driveway
or parking area unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety
and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 365-18. Reckless driving.
Any person who operates any motor vehicle upon a driveway or parking
area, or other school property, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety
of persons or property, is guilty of reckless driving.
§ 365-19. Careless driving.
Any person who operates any motor vehicle upon a driveway or parking
area, or other school property, in a careless or negligent manner likely to
endanger any person or property, but without wantonness or recklessness,
shall be guilty of careless driving.
§ 365-20. Drag races.
A. Prohibited. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any driveway
or parking area, or other school property, in a speed or acceleration
contest or for the purpose of making a speed record, whether from a
standing start or otherwise, over a measured distance, or in a drag
race.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DRAG RACING — The operation of two or more motor vehicles from
a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt
to outdistance each other over a common selected course or where
timing is involved or where timing devices are used in competitive
accelerations of speed by participating motor vehicles. Persons
rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles
shall be equally charged as participants. The operation of two or more
vehicles either at speeds in excess of prima facie lawfully established
speeds or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed
in excess of prima facie lawful speed is prima facie evidence of drag
racing and is unlawful.
§ 365-16 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-20
1:312
ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Statutory Provisions
[Adopted 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 277 (Ch. 74, Art. V, of the 2000 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 365-21. Adoption of Michigan vehicle standards.
The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949 of the State of Michigan,
being codified at MCLA §§ 257.1 through 257.923, is hereby adopted in full
by reference except as modified in this article.
§ 365-22. Word usage; violations and penalties.
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities," to
"government" or to "governmental unit" shall mean the Village of Spring
Lake.
A. Misdemeanor. Any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code, which
describes an act, omission, or condition which is declared to be a
criminal offense shall be processed as a misdemeanor. Unless some
other penalty is expressly provided for by the Michigan Vehicle Code,
any person found guilty of a misdemeanor under this article shall be
subject to the imposition of a sentence which includes a fine of not more
than $500, or imprisonment in the county jail for a maximum period of
93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Civil infraction. Any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code which
describes an act, omission, or condition which is declared to be a civil
infraction shall be processed as a civil infraction as provided for under
state law. Any person found responsible for a civil infraction may be
ordered by the Judge or Magistrate to pay a civil fine and costs as well
as such additional penalties as are provided for by state law.
C. Costs. When any person is found guilty of a criminal violation or
responsible for a civil infraction pursuant to this article, the Judge or
Magistrate shall summarily determine and tax the costs of the action
which shall include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the
Village has incurred relative to the violation or infraction up to the
entry of judgment.
§ 365-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-22
1:313
Chapter 373
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 25.
Building regulations — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 189.
Groundwater use — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater discharges and
connections — See Ch. 313.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 320.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 365-22 SPRING LAKE CODE § 365-22
1:314
ARTICLE I
Connections and Use Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 2000 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 351]
§ 373-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
NORTHWEST OTTAWA WATER SYSTEM — The system to which the Village
is connected within the county for providing public source of water to its
residents and users.
VILLAGE SYSTEM — All water mains, water supply facilities and their
appurtenances, which the Village has or shall have possession of and
operating responsibility for (whether owned by the Village or not), either
now in existence in the Village or hereafter acquired or constructed in the
Village, together with all works, plants, instruments, instrumentalities and
properties used or useful in connection with the system, in the obtaining of
a water supply or in the treatment or distribution of water, except that of
the Northwest Ottawa Water System, and all extensions, enlargements and
improvements in the Village.
§ 373-2. Connection to Village system.
Connection to the Village system, directly or indirectly, and the use of water
from the system, for all purposes, shall only be in compliance with this
article and in compliance with all standards and applicable regulations of
the Village, county and Northwest Ottawa Water System as amended.
§ 373-3. Fiscal year.
The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year beginning July 1
of each year and ending at June 30 of the next year.
§ 373-4. Application to connect.
No connections shall be made to the system without obtaining a permit.
Application for such permit shall be made by the premises' title holder
or land contract purchaser and filed with the Village Manager or his or
her designee. The Village Manager or his or her designee shall issue such
permit when all prescribed conditions have been met. Such permit shall be
issued subject to such regulations as may be established and amended by
the Village Council.
§ 373-5. Annual report.
The Village shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record
and account in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-5
1:315
transactions relating to the operation of the system. Not less than six
months after the close of each fiscal year of the system, the Village shall
cause to be prepared a statement in reasonable detail showing the cash
income and disbursements of the system at the beginning and close of the
operating year and such other information as may be necessary to enable
any taxpayer of the Village, user or beneficiary of the service provided by
the system to be fully informed as to all matters pertaining to the financial
operation of the system during such fiscal year. Such annual statement
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, where it will be
open to public inspection. The books of record and account shall be audited
annually by a certified public accountant to be designated by the Village
Council, and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. Such audit may be a part of the general Village audit.
§ 373-6. Public service line.
All premises connecting to the system shall be provided with a public
service line from the water main to the edge of the street right-of-way or
public easement within which the water main is located, as well as a stop
box. The Village shall be the owner of the public service line and stop
box. The Village shall be responsible for the repair, reconstruction, and
replacement of the public service line.
§ 373-7. Work in right-of-way.
All work in the street right-of-way or in public easements, including service
lines to the property line, shall be constructed and performed by the Village
or its agents or contractors.
§ 373-8. Meters.
The Village Manager or the Manager's designated representative shall
have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any premises connected
to the Village system for the purposes of reading the water meter or
otherwise inspecting the piping systems which are connected to the Village
system. If any meter shall fail to register properly, the Village shall estimate
the amount of water consumed based upon prior billing periods and bill
the water customer accordingly. A water customer may request that a
water meter be tested for accuracy. If the meter is found accurate within
acceptable tolerances, a charge shall be assessed to the water customer. If
the meter is found to be inaccurate within the tolerances established, the
water meter shall be repaired or a new water meter shall be installed and
no charge shall be made to the water customer, either for the test or the
meter repair or replacement. The charge provided for in this section may be
established at a greater sum by a resolution adopted and amended by the
Village Council.
§ 373-9. Customer service line.
§ 373-5 SPRING LAKE CODE § 373-9
1:316
§ 373-10. One service line per premises.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Village Manager in writing, each service
line shall serve one premises only.
§ 373-11. Repairs of meter, meter horn or angle valve.
If the meter, meter horn or valves are damaged for any reason, all required
repairs and replacements shall be at the expense of the premises' owner.
If the meter, meter horn or valves malfunction or are defective, repair or
replacement shall be at the expense of the Village.
§ 373-12. Damage to system facilities.
No person, except an employee of the Village or other person duly
authorized by the Village, shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of
the system.
§ 373-13. Fire hydrant use.
No person, except an employee of the Village or other person duly
authorized by the Village, shall open or use any fire hydrant, except in case
of an emergency, without first securing written permission from the Village
Manager and paying such charges as may be prescribed by the Village
Manager.
A. The owner of each premises served by water shall, at the owner's sole
expense, construct the customer service line, running from the
termination of the public service line to the building, structure or other
improvement served with water and shall maintain that line in good
condition with no leaks, breaks or other malfunctions. A customer
service line which leaks shall be replaced in its entirety in order to
avoid future leaks from the already compromised service line. The
leaking customer service line may be patched up for up to 90 days, in
order to allow the replacement of the customer service line to be
accomplished during favorable weather. However, the replacement of
the customer service line must occur within 90 days from the discovery
of the leak. The customer service line shall be replaced with the use of
materials allowed by the system rules and regulations.
B. All repair, reconstruction, and replacement of this customer service line
shall be the responsibility of the premises' owner. The premises' owner
shall indemnify the Village and its authorized representatives against
any loss or damage, including attorney's fees that may directly or
indirectly result from the construction, repair, maintenance,
construction, or replacement of the customer service line.
§ 373-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-14
1:317
§ 373-14. Water emergency orders.
The Village Manager or the Village President, when the Village Manager is
unavailable or unable to act, may, by written order, subject to review and
modification or reversal by the Village Council, regulate, limit or prohibit
the use of water. Such order may restrict less essential water uses to
the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential
domestic and commercial water needs and for fire protection. Notice of
the promulgation of any such order shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Village as soon as reasonably possible after
promulgation. Violation of such an order shall constitute a violation of this
article and shall be subject to the penalties and other remedies prescribed
in this article.
§ 373-15. Rules and regulations.
The Village Council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations
governing the type and quality of materials and accessories to be used
for connection to the system, construction methods for connection to the
system, and other operations and maintenance matters pertaining to the
system. Violation of any such rules or regulations shall constitute a violation
of this article and shall be subject to the penalties and other remedies
prescribed in this article.
§ 373-16. Disruption of service.
The Village shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the supply of
water to water customers, whether occasioned by maintenance or repair of
the system, or any other cause.
§ 373-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided
in § 1-2. In addition to the penalties set forth in that section, the Village may
maintain equitable or legal action available to it for the abatement of any
violation of this article.
§ 373-14 SPRING LAKE CODE § 373-17
1:318
ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 5-2-1994 by Ord. No. 221 (Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 2, of the
2000 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 373-18. Connection charges and fees. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 291]
The following charges and fees shall apply to all connections to the Village
system:
A. Connection charge and system equity charge.
(1) A connection charge, in an amount to be established and adjusted
by Village Council resolution for:
(a) The installation and use of a water service line to the property
line;
(b) The installation and use of a water meter;
(c) The installation and use of a meter horn and two valves; and
(d) All necessary Village inspections;
(2) Shall be payable by each premises connecting to the Village
system. If the premises requires a different-sized service line, the
connection charge for the line, appropriate size meter, meter horn
and valves and inspections shall be that charge which is
established and adjusted by Village Council resolution. The
connection charge shall be paid by each premises connecting to the
system in cash at the time application is made for a permit to
connect in accordance with § 373-4. The Village shall be the owner
of the service line, the meter, meter horn, and the two valves.
(3) In addition, a system equity charge shall be payable by each
premises connecting to the system and each premises, already
connected to the system, which requests a larger meter. The
system equity charge for each new connection shall be as adopted
from time to time by resolution. [Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 348]
(4) In the case of a premises already connected to the Village system
which requests a larger meter, the system equity charge shall be
the difference between the system equity charge then in effect for
the existing meter and the system equity charge then in effect for
the requested larger meter.
(5) The system equity charge shall be paid by each premises
connecting to the Village system in cash at the time application is
made for a permit to connect in accordance with § 373-4 or, in the
§ 373-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-18
1:319
§ 373-19. Water rates.
Rates for water supplied to each premises connected to the Village system
and for the charges described in § 373-17, and for any standby fire-lineprotection
connection, shall be determined by the Village Council and shall
be established by a resolution adopted and amended by the Village Council.
No free service shall be furnished by this Village system to the Village or to
any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency
or instrumentality. The Village shall pay for water supplied to it or any of its
departments or agencies at the rates established pursuant to this section. In
case of a request for a larger meter, at the time that request is
made.
B. Off and on charge. If a customer desires that the water service be
turned off and later turned on, the charge for such turnoff and turn-on
shall be in an amount to be established and adjusted by Village Council
resolution. Such fee will be paid prior to the time the water service is
once again restored. [Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 348]
C. Use charge. A use charge, in an amount to be established and adjusted
by Village Council resolution for use of the water furnished by the
Northwest Ottawa Water System and the Village system, shall be
payable by each premises using water from the Northwest Ottawa
Water System and the Village system as provided in § 373-18.
D. Readiness-to-serve charge. A readiness-to-serve charge in an amount to
be established and adjusted by Village Council resolution shall be
payable each quarter by each premises connected to the Village system,
as provided in § 373-18.
E. Testing charge. A testing charge in an amount to be established and
adjusted by Village Council resolution for testing of a meter at the
request of a customer shall be payable by each premises using water
from the Village system if upon testing of the meter according to Village
testing procedures the meter is found to be accurate, as provided in
§ 373-18.
F. Administrative charge. An administrative charge in an amount to be
established and adjusted by Village Council resolution shall be payable
by each premises using water from the Village system when the Village
has incurred court costs in enforcing payments to the Village for use of
water from the Village system in the amount of the actual court costs
together with an additional sum for administrative time incurred in
collecting the charges provided for in this section and § 373-18,
together with charges for nonsufficient fund checks returned after
tender by a customer for payment of water furnished to premises by the
Village system, together with a service charge as established and
adjusted by Village Council resolution as provided in § 373-18, plus the
actual bank charges assessed to the Village system by such institution.
[Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 348]
§ 373-18 SPRING LAKE CODE § 373-19
1:320
addition, the Village shall pay for water use for fire hydrants, fire protection
and other purposes at the rates established pursuant to this section.
§ 373-20. Billing and enforcement. [Amended 4-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 32299]
Charges for water shall be billed quarterly. Bills shall be mailed by the 15th
day of the month following the quarter for which the bills are rendered and
shall be due and payable on the 15th day of the next month. Bills not paid
on or before such due date shall be subject to a penalty charge equal to 10%
of the bill. If the bill is not paid within five days after the due date, a shutoff
notice shall be mailed. If the bill is not paid within 10 calendar days after
the date of mailing of a shutoff notice, the customer's water service shall be
turned off immediately without further notice. An additional penalty charge
as is determined by resolution of the Village Council shall then be charged
to the customer whether water was shut off or not; if the shutoff team
has to go to the property a fee will be assessed, before the water service
is turned on again. On or before May 1 of each year, the Village Clerk/
Village Treasurer shall prepare a certified statement of all water services
and penalty charges then three months or more past due and unpaid. The
Village Clerk/Village Treasurer shall then place such charges on the next
tax roll and they shall be collected, and such lien shall be enforced in the
same manner as is provided for general Village taxes.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 373-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-20
1:321

ARTICLE III
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 274 (Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 3, of the
2000 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 347]
§ 373-21. Short title.
This article may be referred to as the "Village of Spring Lake Cross-
Connection Ordinance."
§ 373-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate the public health,
safety, and general welfare by regulating and controlling connections to the
public water supply in order to prevent entry into the public water supply
of water of questionable quality or water which is contaminated with waste
or other contaminants.
§ 373-23. Legal authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Michigan
statute and the Village of Spring Lake Charter.
§ 373-24. Word usage; interpretation.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this article:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. The headings which title various sections are for convenience only and
are not to be considered in any construction or interpretation of the
article or as enlarging or restricting the terms and provisions of the
article in any respect.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in
the singular number shall include the plural, and words used in the
plural number shall include the singular, unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary.
E. The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, municipal or
public entity or any other legal entity, or a combination of any of them,
as well as a natural person.
F. Any word or phrase not defined in this section, § 373-24 or the plan
referenced in § 373-26 shall be considered to be defined in accordance
with its common or standard definition.
§ 373-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-25
1:323
§ 373-25. Definitions.
The following listed words and phrases are defined for the purpose of their
use in this article. These definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated.
PLAN — The cross-connection control plan referred to in § 373-26 of this
article.
SYSTEM — The Village of Spring Lake water supply and distribution
system.
WATER UTILITY — The Village of Spring Lake Water and Sewer
Department.
§ 373-26. Adoption of Michigan Administrative Code.
The Village hereby adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection
Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, being R
325.11401 through R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
§ 373-27. Cross-connection control plan.
The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a
comprehensive cross-connection control plan for the elimination and
prevention of cross-connections, including, but not limited to, provisions
pertaining to the installation, maintenance, testing, reporting, and
inspecting of backflow prevention devices, piping labeling, and water outlet
labeling. The plan shall also provide for discontinuation of water service
from the system pursuant to the provisions of § 373-29 of this article. The
plan shall be administered by the water utility. The provisions of the plan
and all amendments thereto shall be approved by resolution of the Village
Council. The plan shall meet with the approval of the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality Drinking Water and Radiologic Protection
Division. Any violation of the plan shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 373-28. Duties of the Director.
The Water and Sewer Director shall have the duty to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where
cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The
frequency of initial inspections and reinspections based on potential health
hazards shall be as established by the Director and as approved by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
§ 373-29. Inspections.
The water utility, or its authorized inspection agent, shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the system for the purposes of inspecting the piping system or systems
thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants
of any property so served shall furnish to the water utility or its authorized
§ 373-25 SPRING LAKE CODE § 373-29
1:324
inspection agent any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property. The refusal of such information or the refusal of
access, when requested, shall be deemed to be evidence of the presence of
a cross-connection.
§ 373-30. Termination of water service.
The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection
in violation of this article exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not
be restored until all cross-connections have been eliminated in compliance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 373-31. Backflow prevention assembly testing.
All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon
installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent
testing of assemblies shall be on an annual basis or as required by the
plan and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
requirements. Only individuals certified by the State of Michigan shall be
qualified to perform such testing. The individual performing such testing
must certify the results of the test to the water utility.
§ 373-32. Water outlet labeling.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this
article, the State Plumbing Code, and any other Village ordinance which
regulates plumbing. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or
domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
§ 373-33. Article supplemental to other provisions.
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code or any other
Village ordinance but is supplementary to them.
§ 373-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-34
1:325
§ 373-34. Violations and penalties.
§ 373-35. Administrative liability.
No water utility officer, agent, or employee, or any officer, agent, or
employee of the Village, shall render himself or herself personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to any person, firm, association, corporation,
partnership, joint venture, or combination of any of them as the result of
any act, decision, or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the
discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this article or
the plan, or both.
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with, or resists the enforcement of, this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to § 1-8 of the Code.
Increased civil fines shall be imposed for repeated violations, which
means a subsequent municipal civil infraction violation committed by a
person within any twelve-month period and for which a person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased civil
fine for repeat violations shall be as follows:
(1) The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be $250
plus costs and other sanctions.
(2) The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offence or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be $500, plus costs and other
sanctions.
B. The water utility, its officers, agents and employees, and the members
of any police agency providing police services in the Village are hereby
designated as authorized officials to issue municipal civil infraction
citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal
civil infraction violation notices directing alleged violators to appear at
the Village Violations Bureau as provided in § 1-8 of the Code.
§ 373-34 SPRING LAKE CODE § 373-35
1:326
Chapter 390
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown development — See Ch. 18.
Historic conservation — See Ch. 215.
Registration of rental units — See Ch. 271.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 285.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Telecommunications providers — See Ch. 345.
Tourist park — See Ch. 351.
Trees — See Ch. 358.
§ 373-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-35
1:327

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 390-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Spring Lake Village
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 390-2. Purpose.
This chapter is based on the Village of Spring Lake Master Land Use Plan
and is intended and designed to regulate the use of land and structures,
and to accomplish all of the following: to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare; to insure that the use of land shall be situated in appropriate
locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land
and congestion of population, transportation, and other public facilities;
to facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems,
sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation and other public
service and facility needs; to encourage the use of lands and natural
resources in the Village in accordance with their character and adaptability;
to limit the improper use of land; to provide for the orderly development of
the Village; and to reduce hazards to life and property.
§ 390-3. Scope.
A. Where any provision of this chapter imposes either greater or lesser
restrictions, limitations, conditions, standards or requirements upon 1)
the use of buildings, structures or land, 2) the height of buildings or
structures, 3) lot coverage, 4) lot areas, 5) yards or other open spaces,
or (6) any other use, activity or conduct which is regulated by this
chapter, than any comparable restriction, limitation, condition or
requirement contained in any other provision of this chapter or any
other ordinance, law or regulation, the provision which is more
restrictive or limiting, or which imposes the higher condition, standard
or requirement shall govern.
B. This chapter shall not abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or
private agreement. Where any provision of this chapter is more
restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the provision of this
chapter shall govern.
C. Zoning applies to every building, structure or use. No building,
structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure
or part thereof shall be erected, moved, placed, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with this chapter.
D. The regulations herein established shall be the minimum regulations
for promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:329
§ 390-4. Effective date.
This chapter was adopted by the Village Council on April 2, 1990, and is
ordered to take effect on April 23, 1990.
§ 390-5. Legislative authority.100
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110
of 2006 (MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.), as amended.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-4 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-5
1:330
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 390-6. Interpretation; word usage.
The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter:
A. Except with respect to the headings contained in § 390-7, the headings
which title an article, section, or subsection of this chapter are for the
purpose of convenience only and are not to be considered in any
construction or interpretation of this chapter, or as enlarging or
restricting any of its terms and provisions in any respect.
B. The illustrations contained within this chapter are intended to illustrate
hypothetical applications of the provisions which refer to them, and
shall not have the effect of enlarging or restricting the terms and
provisions which refer to them, nor shall they be applicable to other
provisions of this chapter which do not refer to them. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of the written text of this chapter and
the illustrations, the text shall govern.
C. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
shall include the future tense, words in the singular number shall
include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include
the singular number.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive.
E. A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
F. The word "person" shall include a firm, association, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, trust, municipal or public entity, or equivalent
entity or a combination of any of them as well as a natural person.
G. The words "used" and "occupied," as applied to any land, building or
structure, shall be construed to include the phrases "intended to be,"
"arranged to be," or "designed to be" used or occupied.
H. The words "erected" or "erection" as applied to any building or
structure, shall be construed to include the words "built,"
"constructed," "reconstructed," "moved upon" or any physical operation
or work on the land on which the building or structure is to be built,
constructed, reconstructed or moved upon, such as excavation, filling,
drainage or the like.
I. The particular shall control the general.
J. Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily
accepted.
§ 390-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:331
§ 390-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of their use in this chapter, the following terms and words
are hereinafter defined:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building or structure, or a portion thereof,
supplementary and/or subordinate to a main building or structure on the
same lot, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to and subordinate to the
main use of the land, lot, building or structure.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A building and premises wherein
gasoline, oil, grease, tires, batteries and other automobile supplies and
accessories may be sold at retail and installed, and where minor services
may be rendered, not to include the following:
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below
grade but so located that the vertical distance from the mean grade to
the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the mean grade to the
ceiling. (See Figure 1.101)
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A single-family dwelling in
which transient guests are provided a sleeping room, breakfast and access
to bathing and lavatory facilities in return for payment.
BOARD OF APPEALS — Refers to the Village of Spring Lake Zoning Board
of Appeals.
BUILDING — Any structure which is erected having a roof supported by
columns or walls, which is used or erected for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or personal property or for carrying on business activities
or other similar uses.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the established grade at
the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface
of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof, and to the mean elevation
level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. (See Figure
2.102)
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which the principal or main use of the lot
on which it is situated occurs.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT FACILITY — A charitable facility that provides
temporary transitional housing, free food and clothing, or other similar
Major mechanical and body work, such as straightening of body parts,
painting and refinishing.
A.
Storage of damaged automobiles not in operating condition, except
those awaiting immediate service.
B.
C. Other work creating noise, glare, fumes or smoke.
101. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 390-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-7
1:332
services to those in need and may include the administration of such
programs on site. Any temporary housing is provided in individual singlefamily
units or may be part of a multifamily facility. "Community support
facility" does not include the following:
COUNCIL — Refers to the Village Council of the Village of Spring Lake.
DAY-CARE FACILITY, ADULT — A facility, other than a private residence,
that provides temporary care for periods less than 24 hours for adults,
over 18 years of age, who for reasons of age or physical and/or cognitive
limitations are in need of supervised care. An adult day-care facility does
not include adult foster care, nursing care facilities or other facilities which
require licensing from the State of Michigan.
DAY-CARE HOME, FAMILY — A single-family dwelling occupied as such in
which one but less than seven adults are received for care and supervision
for periods of less than 24 hours per day, or, in which one but less than
seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of
less than 24 hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related by blood, marriage or adoption to an adult member of the
family occupying the single-family dwelling.
DAY-CARE HOME, GROUP — A single-family dwelling occupied as such in
which more than six but less than 12 adults are given care and supervision
for periods of less than 24 hours per day, or, in which more than six but less
than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related by blood, marriage or adoption to an adult member of the
family occupying the single-family dwelling.
DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS — A business establishment so developed
that its retail or service character is wholly or partially dependent on
providing a driveway approach and service windows or facilities for vehicles
in order to serve patrons while in the vehicle.
DWELLING OWNER — A person holding legal or equitable title to a
dwelling.[Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or part thereof, providing complete living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation,
for exclusive use by one family, with no ingress or egress through any other
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building containing three or more
dwelling units designed for exclusive use and occupancy by three or more
families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for exclusive use and
occupancy as a dwelling unit by one family.
A. Sheltered housing such as a homeless shelter or women's shelter;
An establishment commonly described as a residential facility for
persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions.
B.
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:333
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units,
designed for exclusive use and occupancy by two families.
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions
of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication supply or
waste disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, water pump
stations, sewer lift stations, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, towers, poles and other similar equipment; and
accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions but not including buildings. Electric substations, natural gas
regulator stations, radio broadcasting and receiving towers and equipment
or structures used in cellular telephone systems are specifically excluded
from the definition of "essential public services."
FAMILY — A single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together
whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient, domestic character and
who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit, housekeeping
unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals whose
relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for anticipated limited
duration of school terms or other similar determinable period.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — For the purpose of computing the required number
of parking spaces, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of a
building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, and the
center lines of interior walls, exclusive of mechanical areas, elevator shafts,
stairwells and vent shafts for more than one floor, and uninhabitable attics
or basements having headroom of seven feet or less.
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL — For the purpose of computing the floor
area of a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each
story of a dwelling unit, measured from the interior faces of the exterior
walls, exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages,
carports, breezeways and enclosed or unenclosed porches.
FOSTER-CARE FAMILY HOME — A single-family dwelling occupied as such
in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related
to an adult member of the family occupying the single-family dwelling by
blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours
per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.103
FOSTER-CARE GROUP HOME — A single-family dwelling occupied as such
in which more than four but less than seven minor children, who are
not related to an adult member of the family occupying the single-family
dwelling by blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and supervision for
24 hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-7
1:334
GARAGE — Part of a main building or an accessory building used primarily
for the parking or storage of vehicles necessary in connection with the
permitted use of the main building, where there is no vehicle servicing for
compensation.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the finished ground level
adjoining a building or structure.
GRADE, MEAN — The arithmetic mean of the lowest and highest grade
elevations in an area within five feet of the foundation line of a building or
structure, or in the area between the foundation line and the lot line, in the
case where the foundation line is less than five feet from the lot line. (See
Figure 3.104)
GREENBELT — A strip of land which shall be of sufficient width and density
of planting materials to screen adjacent properties from view. Unless
additional, more stringent requirements are imposed by the Planning
Commission as a condition of approval of a special land use, pursuant to
Article XXV, or as a condition of approval of a site plan, pursuant to Article
XXIV, or by the Village Council as a condition of approval of a planned
unit development, pursuant to Article VIII, a "greenbelt" shall be defined as
follows: a planting strip which shall be at least 10 feet in width, composed
of deciduous or evergreen trees not less than 12 feet in height and spaced
not more than 20 feet apart and at least one row of dense shrubs not less
than five feet in height and spaced not more than five feet apart.
HOME OCCUPATION — A gainful occupation traditionally and historically
conducted in a dwelling unit as an activity clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the building as a dwelling unit.
HOTEL — Any establishment in which individual cabins, courts, rooms,
suites or similar structures or units are rented to transients for temporary
periods of time. A "hotel" shall include tourist cabins and homes and motels,
but shall not include bed-and-breakfast establishments. A "hotel" shall not
be considered or construed to be a multiple-family dwelling.
KENNEL — Any land, building or structure where four or more cats and/or
dogs over six months of age are either permanently or temporarily boarded,
housed, bred or sold.
LOT — An undivided portion of land occupied or intended for occupancy by
a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for a main use and accessory uses, together with such yards and
parking areas as may be present or required under the provisions of this
chapter.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than 135°. A lot abutting upon a curved
street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the curve is of less radius
than 150 feet, and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the
104. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:335
side lot lines meet the curve, form an interior angle of less than 135°. (See
Figure 4.105)
LOT COVERAGE — A part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings or
structures.
LOT DEPTH — The arithmetic mean of the shortest and longest distances
from the front lot line to the rear lot line. (See Figure 5.106)
LOT LINES —
LOT OF RECORD — A lot whose legal description is recorded in the office
of the Registrar of Deeds for the County of Ottawa, State of Michigan, as a
part of a plat or subdivision or by metes and bounds.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
parallel to the front lot line at the front setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A mobile home, residential building, dwelling
unit, dwelling room or rooms, or a building component which is designed
for long term residential use and is wholly or substantially constructed at
an off-site location, transported to a site and erected.
FRONT LOT LINE — In the case of an interior lot, abutting upon
one public or private street, the "front lot line" shall mean the line
separating such lot from such right-of-way. (See Figure 6.107)
A.
REAR LOT LINE — That lot line which is opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot,
a line at least 10 feet in length, entirely within the lot, and generally
parallel to and most distant from the front lot line. (See Figure 6.108)
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. (See
Figure 6.109)
C.
In the case of a lot fronting on right-of-way on two or more sides,
or other case in which the above definitions do not apply, the Zoning
Administrator shall designate front, rear and side lot lines, based on the
following considerations:
Location and orientation of existing or proposed buildings on the
lot in question, in relation to existing buildings on properties in the
same general neighborhood.
(1)
Location and effect of vegetation, water, or other natural features
affecting location of buildings or structures on the lot in question.
(2)
D.
105. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 390-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-7
1:336
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation as a dwelling unit.
MOTOR HOME — A self-propelled, licensed vehicle prefabricated on its own
chassis, intended for recreational activities and temporary occupancy.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district
in which it is located, pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum residential floor area, required yards or maximum building
height.
NONCONFORMING USE — A lawful use of a building, structure or land
lawfully in existence on the effective date of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, which no longer conforms to the use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
PARAPET ARTICULATION — A low wall or railing with architectural design
which projects above a flat roof line.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A type of development, subject to
review by the Planning Commission and approval by the Village Council, in
which one or more of the applicable zoning district regulations pertaining
to allowed uses, minimum lot area, minimum lot width, required yards,
maximum building height, minimum residential floor area or other
applicable zoning district requirements are waived in order to accomplish
the intent of Article VIII, Planned Unit Development, of this chapter.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Vehicles intended and designed primarily
for recreational use, such as motor homes, camper trailers, pop-up tent
trailers, boats, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles and other similar vehicles or
trailers. The term "recreational vehicles" shall not include motorcycles or
motorbikes or other similar means of transportation intended primarily for
on street use.
RENT or RENTAL — The permission, provision, or offering of possession
or occupancy of a dwelling with some type of remuneration paid to the
dwelling owner for a period of time by a person who is not the dwelling
owner, pursuant to a written or verbal agreement.[Added 1-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 352]
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A parabolic, spherical or similarly shaped
antenna used for reception of communications signals transmitted from a
satellite in planetary orbit.
SCREEN — A structure such as a fence or wall, providing enclosure and a
visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property.
SETBACK — A horizontal distance measured from all points along a lot
line, which describes an area within which no building or structure may be
placed, except in conformance with this chapter.
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:337
SHORELINE — The line between upland and bottomland which persists
through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and
action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land
is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the
configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation.
SHORT TERM RENTAL — The rental of any dwelling for a term of less
than 28 days in any calendar year; the definition does not include the use
of campgrounds, hotel rooms, transitional housing operated by a nonprofit
entity, group homes such as nursing homes and adult foster care homes,
hospitals, or housing provided by a substance abuse rehabilitation clinic,
mental health facility, or other health care related clinic.[Added 1-21-2019
by Ord. No. 352]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STRUCTURE — Any production or piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including,
but not limited to buildings, radio and television towers, sheds, signs and
storage bins.
USE — The purpose for which land, or a building or structure thereon, is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained,
let or leased.
USE, MAIN — The principal use to which a lot or structure on a lot are
devoted and the primary or principal purpose for which the premises exist.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway, excepting devices
exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks.
VEHICLE REPAIR OR STORAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A building or land
used for caring for, servicing, repairing, refinishing, equipping, adjusting or
otherwise working on vehicles for compensation, including, but not limited
to, major mechanical and body work, storage of damaged or inoperable
vehicles awaiting repair, and other vehicle repair work creating noise, glare,
fumes or smoke, or used for the storage and impounding of vehicles, not
including wrecking, junking or salvaging vehicle parts.
WATERFRONT DEVELOPMENT — The erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, expansion or enlargement of a building or other
structure located in the Waterfront Overlay District, or the establishment of
a new use or change of use of any land, building or other structure in the
Waterfront Overlay District.
YARD —
A space open to the sky and unoccupied or unobstructed, except by
encroachments specifically permitted by this chapter, on the same lot
A.
§ 390-7 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-7
1:338
ZONING ENABLING ACT — Pennsylvania Act 110 of 2006 (MCLA
§ 125.3101 et seq.), as amended.113
with a building or structure. A required yard is measured between
the applicable lot line and the nearest foundation line of a building or
structure.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the distance between the front lot line and the
foundation line of the building or structure. In the case of a waterfront
lot, the yard on the street side shall be the front yard. (See Figure 6.110)
B.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the distance between the rear lot line and rear
foundation line of the main building. (See Figure 6.111)
C.
SIDE YARD — A yard between the foundation line of the main building
and the side lot line extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (See
Figure 6.112)
D.
110. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: Said figure is included in an attachment to this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:339

ARTICLE III
General Requirements
§ 390-8. Required area or space.
§ 390-9. Projections into yards.
§ 390-10. Building height exceptions.
The building height restrictions of all zoning districts shall be subject to
the following exceptions: parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height,
chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, grain
elevators, silos, stacks, stage towers and scenery lofts, water tanks, public
monuments, church spires, and penthouses or roof structures housing
necessary mechanical appurtenances.
A. No lot, adjacent lots in common ownership, required yard, parking area
or other required open space shall be created, divided or reduced in
dimensions or area below the minimum requirements of this chapter. If
already less than the minimum requirements of this chapter, a lot or
adjacent lots in common ownership or a required yard, parking area or
other open space shall not be divided or reduced in dimensions or area
so as to increase its noncompliance with the minimum requirements of
this chapter. Lots or yards created after the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Accessory buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, porches
enclosed by walls, or garages, attached to a dwelling unit or other main
building in a substantial manner, such as by a wall or roof, shall be
deemed a part of such main building, for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter concerning required
yards.
A. Certain architectural features, such as cornices, eaves, gutters,
chimneys, pilasters and similar features may project:
(1) No further than three feet into a required front yard;
(2) No further than five feet into a required rear yard; and
(3) No further than two feet into a required side yard.
B. An enclosed stoop, deck, balcony or window awning may project no
further than eight feet into a required front yard, and no further than 15
feet into a required rear yard. Projection of such building
appurtenances into a required side yard shall be prohibited. In no case
shall a balcony, stoop, deck or awning be placed closer than five feet to
any front or rear lot line, with the exception of the CBD Zoning District.
§ 390-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-11
1:341
§ 390-11. Fences, walls and screens. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 294; 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 331]
Unless otherwise stated in this section, fence, walls and screens shall
require a land use permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. In all zoning districts, fences must comply with the following
requirements:
(1) No fence, wall or screen shall be erected within any public right-ofway.
(2) No fence, wall or screen or planting of any material shall be erected
or maintained in such a way as to obstruct the vision of vehicle
drivers within the triangular area formed by the intersection of the
street right-of-way lines and a line connecting two points located on
those intersecting right-of-way lines 25 feet from the point of
intersection with the right-of-way lines. (See Figure 7.)
Figure 7 Clear Vision Area
(3) The use of electric current or charge on any fence or part thereof is
prohibited.
(4) No fence shall have any spikes or sharp points.
§ 390-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-11
1:342
(5) Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, all fences
shall be constructed of typical or traditional fencing materials,
including, but may not be limited to wood or composite wood
planks, aluminum, wrought iron, chain link and polyvinyl.
B. Fences within the SFR-A, SFR-B, MFR-A and MFR-B Zoning Districts
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this chapter, no fence,
wall or screen located within the required front yard shall exceed a
height of 3 1/2 feet, or be in excess of forty-nine-percent solid or
impervious.
(a) Where the front yards for existing main buildings in the vicinity
of, and in the same zoning district as, a subject lot are less than
the required front yard for the zoning district of the subject lot,
the fence, wall or screen located within the front yard for the
subject lot shall be the average of existing main buildings on
the same side of the street and entirely or partially within 200
feet of the side lot lines of the subject lot, subject to Subsection
B(1)(b) and (c) below.
(b) The reduction permitted in Subsection B(1)(a) above shall only
be permitted if there are two or more lots occupied by main
buildings within the area described in Subsection B(1)(a)
above, for computing the average front yard.
(c) Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this chapter, no
fence, wall or screen located within the required side yard or
required rear yard in any zoning district shall exceed a height
of six feet, except if the lot abuts or is directly adjacent to the
water. No fence, wall, or screen located within the required
side yard or required rear yard of a waterfront lot in any zoning
district shall exceed a height of four feet. Moreover, no such
fence, wall, or screen shall be a solid barrier which completely
obstructs view; rather, any such fence, wall, or screen shall
allow at least seventy-five-percent visibility through the fence,
wall, or screen.
C. Fences within the C, EED, CBD, CBD-1, O and P Zoning Districts shall
have an ornamental character as well as a utilitarian function. All
fences shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Fencing is only permitted for the screening of parking areas and to
accent or define landscaped areas. In all cases, fencing is only
permitted when adjacent at least five feet of landscaped area.
§ 390-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-11
1:343
(2) Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this chapter, no fence,
wall or screen located within any yard shall exceed a height of four
feet or be in excess of forty-nine-percent solid or impervious.
(3) Where a commercial district abuts a residential district, a six-foottall
solid fence may be permitted when located along a shared side
and/or rear lot line.
(4) Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, fences shall be
constructed of wood, composite wood, rigid vinyl, wrought iron or
aluminum. Chain-link fences are prohibited.
D. Fences within the I Zoning District shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) No fence, wall or screen shall exceed a height of eight feet.
(2) Use of barbed wire on any fence shall be permitted, but in no
instance shall barbed wire be placed at a height less than 5 1/2 feet
above grade. Use of sharpened metal tape on any fence is
prohibited.
§ 390-11 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-12
1:344
§ 390-12. Street access.
§ 390-13. Mechanical appurtenances.
§ 390-14. Essential public services.
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential public
services shall be permitted in any zoning district; it being the intention
thereof to exempt such erection, construction, alteration or maintenance
from the application of this chapter.
§ 390-15. Litter, rubbish, and junk storage and disposal.
A. Any lot created after the effective date of this chapter shall have
frontage upon a public street right-of-way or legally recorded access
easement at least 24 feet in width.
B. Access driveways located on access easements or on a flagpole portion
of a lot shall be surfaced with a durable pavement having an asphalt or
cement binder and be constructed in width according to the following
schedule:
Driveways serving: Required pavement width:
1 to 8 dwelling units 15 feet
9 or more dwelling units Roadways shall be constructed in
accordance with Ottawa County Road
Commission specifications for local streets
Commercial lot or use 20 feet
Industrial lot or use 24 feet
A. Except in the CBD (Central Business) Zoning District, mechanical
appurtenances, such as blowers, ventilating fans and air-conditioning
units, shall be placed not closer than 12 feet to any lot line.
B. Any mechanical appurtenances, including elevator housings, stairways,
tanks, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, and other
similar apparatus, located on the roof of any building shall comply with
the following standards:
(1) Such apparatus shall be enclosed in a screening structure having
walls constructed of material compatible in appearance with the
main building to which it is attached.
(2) The apparatus and enclosure shall not exceed a height of 10 feet
above the surrounding roof surface, and shall not occupy greater
than 15% of the total area of the roof of the building on which it is
placed.
A. Except as is provided in Subsection C, no unwholesome substance shall
be deposited, dumped or accumulated by any person on any place or
§ 390-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-15
1:345
premises, private or public, situated in the Village, unless such place or
premises is a landfill fully licensed as required by law for the receipt
and disposal of the unwholesome substance or unless the unwholesome
substance is completely shielded from public view and view from
adjoining properties by being housed within a building or structure or
by being enclosed by a fence; provided, however, that any such fence
shall be erected and maintained in compliance with this chapter and
any other applicable Village ordinance.
B. As used in this section only, those terms which appear below are
defined as follows:
BUILDING MATERIAL — All items used or useful in the construction
of a building or structure including, but not limited to, lumber, bricks,
concrete blocks, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring
and equipment, heating ducts and equipment, shingles, mortar,
concrete, cement, sand and gravel.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle which lacks any or all of the
necessary component parts to make it operative and serviceable and/or
which is not currently licensed, to the extent required, for use upon the
highways of the State of Michigan.
JUNK — Parts of machinery, vehicles or boats, used stoves or other
appliances, plumbing fixtures, furniture stored in the open, iron, steel
and other ferrous or nonferrous materials, batteries, remnants of wood,
and, in general, any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not
the same could be put to any reasonable use.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY — Any motor vehicle which is:
TRASH — All of the following:
Unable to be driven upon a highway under its own power and/
or which lacks all of the necessary component parts to make it
operative and serviceable as a motor vehicle; or
(1)
Not currently licensed for use upon the highways of the State of
Michigan.
(2)
(1) Garbage, i.e., all organic refuse and rejected food waste;
Ashes, i.e., the residue left from burning of paper, leaves, weeds,
wood and coal;
(2)
Kitchen rubbish, i.e., all types of food containers and wrappings,
including cans, bottles, jars, broken glass, crockery, paper and
wood boxes, and metal objects;
(3)
Household rubbish, i.e., all types of household materials commonly
discarded such as newspapers, magazines, books, wrappings,
cartons, boxes, crates, excelsior, rags, clothing, bedding, floor
covering, wallpaper, leather objects and sweepings; and
(4)
§ 390-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-15
1:346
UNWHOLESOME SUBSTANCE — Any trash, motor vehicle body,
inoperable vehicle, stone, junk, offal, refuse, rubbish, debris, animal
wastes, filth, building material [unless i) there is in force a valid
building permit for construction on the property where the building
materials are located and building materials are to be used as part of
that construction; or ii) the building materials are for sale as part of
a commercial business], inoperable boat, or any other material which
constitutes a threat or menace to the health, safety, or general welfare
of the public.
Yard rubbish, i.e., all materials which grow on the property such as
grass clippings, weeds, leaves, plants, garden trash, clippings from
hedges and shrubs, branches, limbs, roots and stumps.
(5)
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, it shall not be unlawful to deposit
grass clippings, weeds, leaves, plants, garden trash, clippings from
hedges and shrubs and other yard debris and products adjacent to the
street right-of-way at any time after 6:00 p.m. local time on the day
preceding a scheduled garbage pick up or collection by a garbage
carrier licensed to pick up garbage in the Village pursuant to Chapter
300, Solid Waste, of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake, or a Villagesponsored
brush, leaf or trash pickup. Grass clippings, weeds, leaves,
plants, garden trash, clippings from hedges and shrubs and other yard
debris and products to be collected by licensed waste haulers, shall be
enclosed or boxed in such a manner to prevent the debris and products
from dispersing, scattering or littering in any manner whatsoever. Such
debris and products shall be contained in disposable plastic bags and
containers only and shall not be housed in any permanent container or
can. Materials to be picked up as part of a Village-sponsored program
shall be placed adjacent to the street in the manner specified by the
Village.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B above, it shall
not be unlawful to establish and maintain on the premises of a
residential use facilities for the organic decomposition or composting of
yard rubbish and vegetable food waste, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) Accumulation of materials for composting shall not be permitted in
a front or side yard.
(2) No materials not generated by or originating from the premises on
which the composting is conducted shall be permitted.
(3) The volume of material accumulated for composting on a single
premises shall not exceed eight cubic yards.
(4) Materials to be composted shall not be located within three feet of
a side or rear lot line.
§ 390-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-15
1:347
§ 390-16. Recreational vehicle parking.
§ 390-17. Storage and repair of vehicles.
(5) No products of animal origin, including meat, fat, grease or bones,
or any human or animal excrement, shall be included in any
material to be composted.
(6) Materials accumulated for composting shall be treated and handled
in a manner to prevent the creation of noxious or offensive odors
beyond the premises, or the harboring of rodents or other animal
pests.
A. Parking of recreational vehicles may be permitted in the required front
yard provided the following restrictions are met:
(1) Unless parked or stored in a completely enclosed garage, all
recreational vehicles shall be stored or parked so that they are no
closer than 17 feet to the edge of the traveled portion of any street.
(2) Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A(1), above, no
recreational vehicle shall be parked so as to block any public
sidewalk.
(3) Recreational vehicles parked or stored in a front yard shall be
parked or stored in a designated driveway, the width of which shall
not exceed at any point 1/3 of the lot width, or 20 feet, whichever is
greater.
B. In the case of a waterfront lot, recreational vehicles shall be parked or
stored no closer than 20 feet to the shoreline.
C. Recreational vehicles parked in the side yard or rear yard shall be
placed at least three feet from the lot line.
A. The carrying out of repair, restoration and maintenance procedure or
projects on vehicles in any residential zoning district, when such work
is not conducted entirely within the interior of the vehicle, shall be
subject to the following limitations:
(1) Procedures or projects exceeding 48 hours in duration or which
require the vehicle to be immobile or inoperable in excess of 48
hours shall be carried out within a garage.
(2) Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside a
building.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or lessee of any lot in any
residential zoning district to permit the open storage or parking outside
of a building of semi-tractor trucks and/or semitrailers, bulldozers,
earth carriers, cranes or any other similar equipment or machinery,
unless parked thereon while in use in construction being conducted on
such lot.
§ 390-15 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-18
1:348
§ 390-18. Illegal dwellings.
§ 390-19. Swimming pools.
§ 390-20. Antennas and towers in residential zoning districts.
Radio or television antennas or towers, including satellite dish antennas and
transmission or reception antennas below 300 watts of output, erected or
installed in any residential zoning district shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. The use of any portion of the basement of a partially completed
building, or any garage or accessory building for dwelling or sleeping
purposes in any zoning district is prohibited.
B. Recreational vehicles, camping trailers or tents may be used for living
purposes when accessory to an existing single- or two-family dwelling
unit. Such use shall only be permitted for a seven-day period and for no
more than one such period in any 30 consecutive days.
A. Every person owning land on which there is located a swimming pool,
spa, hot tub, or similar device (below ground or aboveground) which
contains 24 inches or more of water in depth at any point, shall erect
and maintain thereon a fence or enclosure approved by the Building
Inspector surrounding the device sufficient to make such device
inaccessible to small children. Such fence or enclosure, including the
gates, shall not be less than four feet or greater than six feet above
grade. All gates shall be self-latching with latches placed no less than
four feet above grade or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside
to small children.
B. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices two feet or less
above grade at any point shall not be located less than four feet from
any lot line.
C. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices in excess of two feet
above grade at any point shall not be located less than 10 feet from any
lot line.
D. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices shall not be located
in any front yard.
A. Placement.
(1) An antenna or tower, with the exception of a satellite dish antenna,
shall be located only in a side or rear yard. A satellite dish antenna
shall be located only in a rear yard.
(2) No portion of an antenna, including a satellite dish antenna, shall
be located closer than five feet, measured on a horizontal plane,
from any side or rear lot line.
§ 390-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-20
1:349
§ 390-21. Main use.
No lot may contain more than one main building or use, excepting groups
of multiple-family dwellings or retail business buildings or other groups of
buildings the Zoning Administrator deems to be a main use collectively.
§ 390-22. Accessory buildings and uses.
(3) A satellite dish antenna located in a yard fronting on a public street
shall be screened from such street by a greenbelt.
B. Height.
(1) The height of an antenna, with the exception of a satellite dish
antenna, shall not exceed 50 feet above mean grade in any
residential zoning district, and shall not exceed 100 feet above
mean grade in any other zoning district.
(2) The height of a satellite dish antenna, including any platform or
structure upon which the antenna is mounted, shall not exceed 15
feet above mean grade.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, a satellite dish antenna having a
diameter of 24 inches or less may be attached to the roof of a
building, provided that no portion of the satellite dish antenna
extends more than 36 inches above the highest point of the roof.
C. General provisions.
(1) The installation of an antenna, including a satellite dish antenna,
shall require issuance of a building permit prior to erection.
(2) No advertising or identification display shall be placed on any
portion of an antenna or tower, including a satellite dish antenna.
(3) No more than one antenna, including a satellite dish antenna, shall
be located on the same lot as a main building. Antennas are
permitted only in connection with, incidental to on the same lot as a
main use or building.
A. Accessory uses and buildings are permitted only in connection with,
incidental to and on the same lot with a main use or building which is
permitted in the particular zoning district.
B. An accessory use or building must be in the same zoning district as the
main use on a lot.
C. No accessory use or building shall be occupied or utilized unless the
main structure to which it is accessory is occupied or utilized. No
accessory building or use may be placed on a lot without a main use or
building.
§ 390-20 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-22
1:350
§ 390-23. Regulations applicable to single-family dwellings.
Any single-family dwelling, whether constructed and erected on a lot or a
manufactured home, shall be permitted only if it complies with all of the
following requirements:
D. Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required side yard,
unless located a minimum of 75 feet from the front lot line, or except as
permitted in Article VII, Waterfront Overlay District. All accessory uses
and buildings combined shall cover no more than 30% of the required
rear yard. No accessory building shall be constructed within any front
yard.
E. No detached accessory building shall be located closer than three feet
to any main building, street right-of-way, or any side or rear lot line.
F. When the main building on a lot includes an attached garage, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) No more than two detached accessory buildings shall be permitted.
(2) The total gross floor area of all detached accessory buildings shall
not exceed 300 square feet.
G. When the main building on a lot does not include an attached garage,
the following provisions shall apply:
(1) No more than three detached accessory buildings shall be
permitted.
(2) The total gross floor area of all detached accessory buildings,
exclusive of one detached garage, shall not exceed 300 square feet.
(3) The gross floor area of any single detached accessory building,
exclusive of one detached garage, shall not exceed 150 square feet.
(4) No detached garage shall exceed 650 square feet in gross floor
area.
H. The maximum building height of any detached accessory building shall
be 14 feet.
A. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, the mobile home must either be:
(1) New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate
inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, as amended, or any similar successor or
replacement standards which may be promulgated; or
(2) Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate
inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in
Subsection A(1) above, and found, on inspection by the Building
§ 390-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-23
1:351
Inspector or his designee, to be in excellent condition and safe and
fit for residential occupancy.
B. The dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building, electrical,
plumbing, fire, energy and other similar codes which are or may be
adopted by the Village; provided, however, that where a dwelling unit is
required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or
regulations for construction, and where such standards or regulations
for construction are different than those imposed by the Village codes,
then and in such event such federal or state standard or regulations
shall apply. Appropriate evidence of compliance with such standards or
regulations shall be provided to the Building Inspector.
C. The dwelling unit shall comply with all restrictions and requirements of
this chapter, including, without limitation, the minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, minimum residential floor area, required yard and
maximum building height requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located.
D. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, the mobile home shall be installed
with the wheels removed.
E. The dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent continuous
foundation constructed on the building site, such foundation to have a
wall of the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling unit and to be
constructed of such materials and type as required by the building code
for on-site constructed single-family dwellings. If the dwelling unit is a
mobile home, its foundation shall fully enclose the chassis,
undercarriage and towing mechanism.
F. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, it shall be installed pursuant to
the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the
building site by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules
and regulations, as amended, of the Michigan Mobile Home
Commission, or any similar or successor agency having regulatory
responsibility for mobile home parks.
G. The dwelling unit shall have a minimum horizontal dimension across
any front, side, or rear elevation of 20 feet.
H. Storage area within a building with an area of no less than 120 square
feet shall be provided. This storage area may consist of a basement,
closet area, attic or attached garage in a main building, or in a detached
accessory building which is in compliance with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter pertaining to accessory buildings.
I. Permanently attached steps or porch areas at least three feet in width
shall be provided where there is an elevation difference of greater than
eight inches between the first floor entry of the dwelling unit and the
adjacent grade.
§ 390-23 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-23
1:352
§ 390-24. Private boat docks.
§ 390-25. Nonconforming lots and uses; nonconforming structures
and uses.
J. 114The exterior finish of the dwelling unit shall not cause reflection that
is greater than that from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior
enamel.
K. The dwelling unit shall be so placed on the lot that portions nearest the
principal street frontage are at least 30 feet in dimension parallel to the
street.
L. The dwelling unit shall have no less than two exterior doors, with one
being in either the rear or side of the dwelling unit.
A. No more than one dock per dwelling unit shall be permitted for singlefamily
dwellings and two-family dwellings.
B. No more than one boat slip per dwelling unit shall be permitted for
multiple-family dwellings.
C. Boat docks and boat slips shall be used only by persons residing on the
premises or their guests, and shall not be leased, rented or otherwise
used for compensation except in conjunction with the lease or rental of
the dwelling unit on the same lot, unless approved as a private or public
marina as a special land use, pursuant to Article XXV.
A. Intent. Upon the adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendments,
there may exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which
were lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter, or amendment thereto,
but which are not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, or
amendment thereto. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconforming lots, structures, and uses to continue, but not to
encourage their prolonged existence. Because nonconforming lots,
structures and uses, so long as they exist, prevent the full realization of
the goals and objectives of the Village of Spring Lake Land Use Plan,
the spirit of this chapter is to reduce, rather than increase, such
nonconformance.
B. Nonconforming lots.
(1) In any zoning district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this chapter, where an existing lot of record,
which does not abut any other lot or lots of record in the same
ownership, fails to meet the requirements for minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, or both, of the zoning district in which it is
located, such lot may be used for the permitted uses of the zoning
114. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding the pitch of the main roof, was repealed
5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 345, which ordinance also provided for the renumbering of
Subsections K, L, and M as Subsections J, K and L, respectively.
§ 390-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-25
1:353
district, provided that the requirements not involving lot area, lot
width, or both, of the zoning district in which such lot is located are
complied with.
(2) In any zoning district, where two or more abutting lots of record in
the same ownership do not, when considered individually, meet the
requirements for minimum lot area, minimum lot width, or both, of
the zoning district in which the lots are located, such lots shall be
combined and considered as one lot for the purposes of this
chapter, including Subsection B(1), above.
C. Nonconforming uses of land. The lawful use of any land, not involving a
building or structure, existing and lawful on the effective date of this
chapter, or amendment thereto, may be continued even though such
use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, or amendment
thereto, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the
effective date of this chapter, or amendment thereto.
(2) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot occupied by such use on the effective
date of this chapter, or amendment thereto.
(3) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. Seasonal uses of
land, such as boat storage, shall be excepted from this provision.
D. Nonconforming structures. Structures, including buildings, which are
existing and lawful on the effective date of this chapter, or amendment
thereto, may be continued, even though such structure does not
conform with the provisions of this chapter, or amendment thereto,
subject to the following provisions:
(1) No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity with the provisions of this
chapter, unless authorized by the Planning Commission, following a
public hearing held in accordance with the procedures for approval
of a special land use contained in Article XXV. In authorizing such
enlargement or alteration, the Planning Commission shall consider
the following:
(a) Whether the proposed enlargement or alteration will change
the essential character of the area.
(b) Whether the proposed enlargement or alteration will have an
adverse impact on adjoining property or the general welfare of
the Village, by reason of its nonconformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 390-25 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-25
1:354
(c) Whether there are reasonable and practical alternative means
to achieving the desired enlargement or alteration in a manner
which does not increase the degree of nonconformity of the
structure with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Restoration of damaged nonconforming structures.
(a) In the event that any nonconforming structure shall be
damaged, by any means or in any manner, to the extent that
the cost of reconstruction or restoration exceeds 1/2 the value
of such structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as
determined by the most recent assessment of the market value
of the structure, exclusive of the market value of the land, for
purposes of taxation, such reconstruction or restoration shall
only be permitted in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(b) In the event that any nonconforming structure shall be
damaged, by any means or in any manner, to the extent that
the cost of reconstruction or restoration is equal to or less than
1/2 the value of such structure prior to the damaging
occurrence, as determined by the most recent assessment of
the market value of the structure, exclusive of the market value
of the land, for purposes of taxation, such reconstruction or
restoration shall be permitted, providing a building permit for
such reconstruction or restoration is issued within one year of
the occurrence of such damage.
(3) If any nonconforming structure is altered or modified so as to
eliminate, remove or lessen any or all of its nonconforming
characteristics, then such nonconforming characteristics shall not
be later re-established or increased.
E. Nonconforming use of structures. The lawful use of any structure
existing and lawful on the effective date of this chapter, or amendment
thereto, may be continued, even though such use does not conform with
the provisions of this chapter, or amendment thereto, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the effective date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, but no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
building.
(2) No existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a
use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) If a structure which conforms with the provisions of this chapter,
but which is occupied by a nonconforming use, is damaged by any
§ 390-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-25
1:355
means or in any manner to the extent that the cost of
reconstruction or restoration exceeds 1/2 the value of such
structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as determined by
the most recent assessment of the market value of the structure,
excluding the value of land, for purposes of taxation, such structure
may be reconstructed or restored only if its use conforms with the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) If a nonconforming use of any structure is terminated and replaced
by a permitted use, such nonconforming use shall not be later
reestablished.
(5) When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive
months, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall
not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located. Structures occupied by
seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision.
(6) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
(7) A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use, subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Appeals. The Board may approve such change only if it complies
with all of the following standards:
(a) The proposed use does not substantially differ from the
existing use in terms of compatibility with the character of the
area in which it is located.
(b) The proposed use does not increase the degree of
nonconformity existing prior to such change of use.
(c) No structural alteration of the existing structure will be
required to accommodate the new use.
F. Repairs and maintenance.
(1) On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming
use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of the
current replacement value of the structure, provided that the
structure is not enlarged, extended, moved, or structurally altered.
(2) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or
part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with
protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
§ 390-25 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-25
1:356
§ 390-26. Permitted front setback reductions.
§ 390-27. Temporary buildings and structures.
Temporary buildings and structures, including trailers, incidental to
construction work on a lot, may be placed on such a lot, subject to the
following restrictions:
G. Structures under construction. Any structure on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or amendment thereto, shall be considered existing and lawful.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or use of such structure. Actual construction is
hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in a
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that
where demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to reconstruction, such demolition or
removal shall be deemed actual construction.
A. Where the front yards for existing main buildings in the vicinity of, and
in the same zoning district as, a subject lot are less than the required
front yard for the zoning district of the subject lot, the required front
yard for the subject lot shall be the average front yard of existing main
buildings on the same side of the street and entirely or partially within
200 feet of the side lot lines of the subject lot, subject to Subsections B
and C, below.
B. The front yard reduction permitted in Subsection A, above, shall only be
permitted if there are two or more lots occupied by main buildings
within the area described in Subsection A, above for computing the
average front yard.
C. In no case shall the required front yard resulting from the application of
Subsections A and B, above be less than 15 feet.
A. Temporary buildings and structures may only be used for the storage of
construction materials, tools, supplies and equipment, for construction
management and supervision offices, and for temporary on-site
sanitation facilities, related to construction activity on the same lot. No
temporary building or structure shall be used as a dwelling unit.
B. The placement of temporary buildings and structures shall be in
conformance with the requirements of Article XX. A building permit for
such building or structure shall be issued by the Building Inspector
prior to installation.
C. Temporary buildings and structures shall be removed from the lot
within 15 days after an occupancy permit is issued by the Building
Inspector for the permanent structure on such lot, or within 15 days
after the expiration of a building permit issued for construction on such
lot.
§ 390-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-28
1:357
§ 390-28. Timely completion of construction required.
Following the initiation of the construction, erection, reconstruction,
modification, expansion or enlargement of any building or other structure
authorized under the provisions of this chapter, completion of such work
shall be diligently pursued and completed in a timely manner. Unless
otherwise specified as a condition of approval of a site plan, special land
use, planned unit development or waterfront development by the Planning
Commission or Council, any construction authorized under the provisions of
this chapter shall be completed within one year from the date of issuance of
a building permit for such construction.
§ 390-29. Keeping of animals.
§ 390-30. Withholding of approval.
The Planning Commission or Council may withhold granting of approval of
any use, site plan, PUD plan or other approval required by this chapter
pending approvals which may be required by state or federal agencies or
department.
§ 390-31. Public notice. [Amended 1-19-2009 by Ord. No. 308]
All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall
comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as
amended, and the other provisions of this section with regard to public
notification.
A. The keeping of household pets, including dogs, cats, fish, birds,
hamsters and other animals generally regarded as household pets is
permitted as an accessory use in any residential zoning district.
However, no more than three dogs or cats, six months of age or older, in
any combination thereof, shall be kept or housed in or at one dwelling
unit.
B. The keeping of animals not normally considered household pets,
including, but not limited to, horses, pigs, sheep, cattle, poultry, reptiles
and wild animals, is prohibited in all zoning districts.
A. Responsibility. When the provisions of this chapter or the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the
notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Village of Spring Lake and mailed or delivered as provided in this
section.
B. Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings
shall:
(1) Describe nature of the request. Identify whether the request is for a
rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit
§ 390-28 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-31
1:358
development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other
purpose.
(2) Location. Indicate the property that is the subject of the request.
The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses
within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the
property. If there are no street addresses, other means of
identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification
number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map
showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be
listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for
rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not
involving a specific property.
(3) When and where the request will be considered. Indicate the date,
time and place of the public hearing(s).
(4) Written comments. Include a statement describing when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request. Include
a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in
person or by counsel.
(5) Handicap access. Information concerning how handicap access will
be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible.
C. Personal and mailed notice.
(1) General. When the provisions of this chapter or state law require
that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided
to:
(a) The owners of property for which approval is being considered,
and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property.
(b) Except for rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent
properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not
involve a specific property; to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the
property subject to the request and to the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property
subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or
occupant is located within the boundaries of the Village of
Spring Lake. If the name of the occupant is not known, the
term "occupant" may be used in making notification.
Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a
structure, except that if a structure contains more than one
dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the
case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling
units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by
§ 390-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-31
1:359
§ 390-32. Building demolition. [Amended 6-26-2009 by Ord. No.
312]
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or
organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of
the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the
primary entrance to the structure.
(c) All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies,
railroads and other persons which have requested to receive
notice pursuant to § 390-31E below, Registration to receive
notice by mail.
(d) Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies within
one week of the property involved in the application.
(2) Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its
deposit during normal business hours for delivery with the United
States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service.
The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of property owners
and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to
whom personal notice was delivered.
D. Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, or this chapter where applicable, notice
of a public hearing shall be provided as follows:
(1) For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text
amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance,
appeal, or ordinance interpretation: not less than 15 days before
the date the application will be considered for approval.
(2) For any other public hearing required by this chapter: not less than
15 days before the date the application will be considered for
approval.
E. Registration to receive notice by mail.
(1) General. Any neighborhood organization, public utility company,
railroad or any other person may register with the Zoning
Administrator to receive written notice of all applications for
development approval pursuant to § 390-31C(1)(c), personal and
mailed notice, or written notice of all applications for development
approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The
Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing this
notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice,
as established by the legislative body.
(2) Requirements. The requesting party must provide the Zoning
Administrator information on an official form to ensure notification
can be made. All registered persons must register biannually to
continue to receive notification pursuant to this section.
§ 390-31 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-32
1:360
§ 390-33. Moving of buildings. [Amended 6-26-2009 by Ord. No.
312]
A. No building shall be demolished until a permit has been obtained from
the Building Inspector who shall be authorized to require a
performance bond in any amount not to exceed $1,000 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction thereof of floor area of the building to be
demolished. That bond shall be conditioned on the applicant completing
the demolition within such reasonable period as shall be prescribed in
the permit and complying with such regulations as to health and safety
as the Building Inspector may prescribe, from time to time, including
filling of excavations and proper termination of utility connections. If
the building is safely demolished and the site cleaned as specified in the
permit, then the bond shall be returned within 30 days of completion of
the demolition. If the demolition is not accomplished according to the
terms of the approval, then the Village shall access the performance
bond and use the money to restore the site to a safe and stable
condition. Costs in excess of the bond shall be charged back to the
property owner and placed as a lien on the property if not paid in a
timely fashion.
B. Structures shall be demolished in such a manner as to avoid hazards to
persons and property, interference with the use of adjacent buildings,
and interruption of free passage to and from such buildings.
C. During the demolition of any building or structure the work shall be
kept thoroughly wetted down to prevent the spread of dust. The owner
or contractor shall provide water and necessary connections therefore.
The Building Inspector may require construction of a suitable fence
around the work site where conditions indicate that the safety of the
public requires such fence.
D. All buildings and structures to be demolished shall be completely razed
and all materials shall be removed from the site and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. All materials,
including, without limitation, every installation, part of a building or
accessory building or other improvement on the premises, whether
above or below grade, shall be completely removed from the site. No
part of any basement or infrastructure below grade shall remain.
E. The premises shall be cleared of all debris and components of the
building or structure, and the site filled, leveled and seeded within
seven days of completion of the demolition.
A. No existing building or structure of any type or kind shall be moved into
the Village or moved from one lot in the Village to another lot in the
Village unless authorized by a special use permit approved by the
Planning Commission, after the Building Inspector has evaluated the
building or structure in question and submitted a written report
thereon to the Planning Commission. In considering the granting of
such authorization, the following standards shall be considered:
§ 390-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-33
1:361
(1) The type and kind of construction of the existing building or
structure in relation to its strength and whether or not said
building or structure may be a fire hazard.
(2) Whether or not the type and age of the building or structure to be
moved is in keeping with the type and age of such buildings and
structures which are adjoining and in the neighborhood
surrounding the lot to which the building or structure is to be
moved.
(3) Whether or not the type and kind of materials used in the
construction of the building or structure to be moved relate to or
are in keeping with the type and kind of materials used in the
construction of other buildings and structures adjoining and in the
neighborhood surrounding the lot to which the building or
structure is to be moved.
B. Following Planning Commission approval, a building permit shall be
obtained prior to moving and relocating the building or structure.
(1) The relocated building or structure shall comply with all the
requirements of the zoning district in which the relocation site is
located.
(2) The building to be relocated shall be inspected, at the expense of
the applicant, by the Building, Electrical, Mechanical, and
Plumbing Inspectors prior to being moved to verify that the
building meets all the current Michigan Construction Code
requirements. If any code violations or deficiencies are found
during the inspection, the building must be brought into
compliance prior to occupancy.
C. The permit holder shall be responsible to pay for all costs incurred by
the Village which are attributable to the building relocation.
D. The premises from which the building or structure is moved shall be
cleared of all debris and components of the building or structure as
required in § 390-32D, and the site filled, leveled, and seeded within
seven days of the building or structure relocation.
E. The Village may require a performance bond to ensure against damage
to Village roads or public property, to cover the costs expected to be
incurred by the Village attributable to the building relocation, and to
provide for timely completion of the relocation of the building and site
restoration of the previous site.
F. The applicant shall notify in writing all property owners and occupants
along the proposed relocation route regarding the time of the move,
route, and approximate times of street blockages, trees proposed to be
trimmed or removed, and times of the interruption of services such as
electric service, phone service, and cable TV and Internet connections.
Such notice shall be given a minimum of 48 hours in advance of the
§ 390-33 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-33
1:362
§ 390-34. Site preparation and excavation. [Amended 6-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 312]
§ 390-35. Outdoor lighting. [Amended 6-26-2009 by Ord. No. 312]
proposed move. The applicant shall provide a list to the Village of the
owners and occupants notified.
G. As part of the application for a special use permit, the applicant shall
provide a projected timetable for the move including the following:
(1) Primary date and rain date of the move.
(2) Site restoration of the original building location.
(3) Schedule of construction on the new building site.
(4) Date final occupancy of the building will occur.
A. Land filling, mining, and other land-form contour changes to create a
buildable area or to remove or stockpile topsoil, sand or earth shall not
be undertaken, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and applicable county, state, and federal requirements. No
person shall undertake any activity such as grading, clearing, cutting,
and filling, excavating, or tree removal in preparation for a use or
structure which requires site plan review and approval until the
proposed use or structure is authorized by a development permit.
B. Any excavation or foundation to be left open overnight and/or for more
than 24 hours must be fenced to prevent endangerment of life or
property.
A. Intent and purpose: To create and maintain safe nighttime
environments for both pedestrians and drivers on public and privately
owned roadways and rights-of-way, by minimizing brightly lighted
surfaces and lighting glare, to preserve the restful quality of nighttime,
by eliminating intrusive, artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily
contributes to "sky glow," and to reduce light pollution from lighting
luminaires and light trespass onto adjacent properties. The following
requirements shall be considered by the Planning Commission and
Zoning Administrator in the review of all site plans submitted for
approval under the terms of this chapter.
B. General standards.
(1) Regulated lighting. All exterior lighting shall be regulated by this
section, including, but not limited to the following types:
(a) Parking lot lighting and site lighting for commercial, industrial
and institutional developments.
(b) Canopy lighting.
§ 390-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-35
1:363
(c) Multiple-family development parking lot lighting and site
lighting.
(d) Privately owned roadway lighting.
(e) Building facade lighting.
(f) Residential yard lights.
(g) Other forms of outdoor lighting which, in the judgment of the
Zoning Administrator, or, at his discretion, the Planning
Commission, are similar in character, luminosity and/or glare
to the foregoing.
(2) Lighting plan. The following information must be included for all
site plan submissions and where site plan approval is not required,
some or all of the items may be required by the Zoning
Administrator prior to lighting installation:
(a) A site plan drawn to a scale of one inch equaling no more than
30 feet showing the buildings, landscaping, parking and
service areas, and location and type of all proposed outdoor
lighting.
(b) Analyses and luminance level diagrams showing that the
proposed installation conforms to the lighting level standards
in this article. Diagrams shall indicate illumination levels at
ground level based on no greater than a twenty-five-foot oncenter
grid and shall project 25 feet onto adjacent properties
or to the setback limit line, whichever is greater. Illumination
levels should also be measured for all surrounding streets at
the public right-of-way.
(c) Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures, including
mounting heights, photometric data, designation as
Illumination Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
"cutoff" fixtures, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps
(bulbs), and other descriptive information on the fixtures.
(d) The lighting plan shall provide a design for illuminations in
accordance with this section.
(3) Standards. All exterior lighting, including freestanding, canopy,
pole and building mounted, shall be fully shielded and directed
downward to prevent off-site glare. Lighting shall be designed and
constructed to meet the following standards:
(a) Lighting design shall ensure that direct or directly reflected
light is confined to the development site and pedestrian
pathways.
(b) Lamps and luminaires shall be shielded, hooded and/or
louvered to provide a glare free area beyond the property line
§ 390-35 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-35
1:364
and beyond any public right-of-way, and so the light source is
not directly visible from beyond the boundary of the site.
(c) Canopy lighting shall be fully recessed.
(d) The light from any illuminated source shall be designed so that
the light intensity or brightness shall not exceed 10
footcandles within any part of the site and one footcandle at
any property line, except where the property abuts a
residential district or use where a maximum of 0.5 footcandle
is permitted.
(e) All light fixtures, including building mounted fixtures, shall be
full cutoff fixtures as defined by IESNA and shall have onehundred-
percent cutoff above the horizontal plane at the
lowest part of the point light source. The light rays may not be
emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal
plane.
(f) No light fixture may be mounted higher than 20 feet above the
average grade of the site, except for approved outdoor
recreation area lighting.
(g) Outdoor recreation area lighting may use standard color metal
halide sources and standard sports lighting fixtures if they are
mounted at a sufficient height and properly equipped with
baffling, glare guards or lenses to meet the requirements of
this section. Outdoor recreation area lighting requires site plan
approval by the Planning Commission.
(h) There shall be no lighting of a blinking, flashing, or fluttering
nature, including changes in light intensity, brightness or color.
(i) Beacon, strobe, and search lights, laser light sources or any
similar high-intensity lights for outdoor advertisement or
entertainment are prohibited.
(j) No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner
so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control
devices.
(k) On-site lighting shall be the minimum necessary to comply with
Michigan Building Code requirements for safe egress. Parking
lot lighting shall not be operational after business hours.
Limited security lighting is permitted.
(l) Unshielded floodlights are prohibited.
(4) Exempted areas and types. The following types of outdoor lighting
are exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that such
lighting uses a one-hundred-watt or less incandescent bulb and
except where such lighting creates a hazard or nuisance from glare
or spill light:
§ 390-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-35
1:365
(a) Residential decorative lighting such as porch lights, low-level
lawn lights and special seasonal lights such as Christmas
decorations and similar lighting associated with single-family
detached housing.
(b) Sign lighting as regulated in Article XXII hereof.
(c) Lighting necessary for road or utility construction or
emergencies.
(d) Streetlights located within a public right-of-way.
(e) Lighting for a permitted temporary event such as a circus, fair,
carnival, or civic event.
§ 390-35 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-35
1:366
§ 390-35.1. Prohibition of recreational marihuana establishments.
[Added 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 355]
A. Marihuana establishments, as authorized by and defined in the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act115 (the "Act"), are
prohibited in all zoning districts, and shall not be permitted as home
occupations under Article V of this chapter.
B. No use that constitutes or purports to be a marihuana grower,
marihuana safety compliance facility, marihuana processor, marihuana
microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana secure transporter or
any other type of marihuana related business authorized by the Act,
that was engaged in prior to the enactment of this section, shall be
deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of
the Code; that use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming
status.
115. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27951 et seq.
§ 390-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-35.1
1:367
C. Violations of this section are subject to the violations and penalties
pursuant to § 390-216 of this chapter.
D. This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to
the transportation of marihuana by marihuana secure transporters
through the Village to the extent provided by the Act, and does not
supersede rights and the regulations under Article V of this chapter
with respect to medical marihuana facilities established pursuant to the
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.116
116. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-35.1 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-35.1
1:368
ARTICLE IV
Sexually Oriented Businesses117
§ 390-36. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to minimize the negative secondary
effects associated with sexually oriented businesses through regulating, but
not excluding, the location and operation of sexually oriented businesses
within the Village. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses,
because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational
characteristics which cause negative secondary effects upon nearby
residential, educational, religious and other similar public and private land
uses. The regulation of sexually oriented businesses is necessary to ensure
that their negative secondary effects will not adversely impact the health,
safety and general welfare of Village residents, nor contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of surrounding areas. The provisions of this
article are to not intended: i) to violate the guarantees of the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 5 of the
Michigan Constitution of 1963; ii) to deny adults access to sexually oriented
businesses and their products; iii) to deny sexually oriented businesses
access to their intended market; or iv) to legitimatize activities which are
prohibited by Village ordinance, state or federal law. The Village further
states that it would have passed and adopted what might remain of this
article following the removal, reduction or revision of any portion of this
article found to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 390-37. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article only, unless otherwise specifically stated:
ADULT ARCADE — A commercial establishment that offers coin-operated
(or for any other form of consideration) electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors, video
or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment that has as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade, and as one of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one
or more of the items set forth in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this definition.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or any other visual representations or media
(1)
A.
117. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 285, Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 390-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-37
1:369
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BOOKING AGENCY — A business engaged in
for financial remuneration, either directly or indirectly, wherein the owner,
operator or agent books performances for dancers, comedians, musicians,
entertainers or burlesque performers, taking a fee, commission or
percentage of any money from the patron or performer for services
rendered, when the performances are characterized by exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that
does any of the following:
which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities; or
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve offering for sale or rental the material
identified in Subsection A(1) and (2), above, and still be categorized as
an adult bookstore or adult video store.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic
reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
or
C.
Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or
performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of
an audience or customers.
D.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic
reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the
availability of any of the above;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 12
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for
a period of time that is less than 12 hours.
C.
§ 390-37 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-37
1:370
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment that,
for any form of consideration, regularly shows films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media, that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features a person or persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
DATING SERVICE — A business engaged in for financial remuneration,
either directly or indirectly, where arrangements are made to match a
person of the same or opposite sex to a patron or patrons, for social or
entertainment purposes, either on or off the premises of the dating service.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide, or date for another person, who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business who furnishes, offers to furnish,
or advertises the furnishing of escorts for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises upon the human
body of another by rubbing, kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand
or hands, or with any mechanical or bathing device, with or without
supplementary aids, for nontherapeutic purposes. The systematic and
scientific manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body by a statelicensed
health care professional for therapeutic and/or rehabilitative
purposes shall be considered a therapeutic massage and not restricted by
this article.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any commercial establishment where nontherapeutic
massage is made available for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE SCHOOL — Any place, establishment or facility which provides
instruction in the theory, method and practice of nontherapeutic massage.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who displays specified
anatomical areas is provided in order to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any form of consideration, but does not include:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — Knowingly or intentionally displaying
in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person
including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an
admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque
An educational institution funded, chartered, licensed or recognized by
the State of Michigan; or
A.
A private artist's studio where the private artist employs or contracts
with the model to be observed and depicted solely by the private artist.
B.
§ 390-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-37
1:371
covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of the nipple and areola. "Public nudity" does not include:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any real property or an appurtenance to real property
that is owned or leased by the State of Michigan, any local unit of
government of the State of Michigan, a public agency, or by a college or
university of the State of Michigan and may include a structure, enclosure,
facility, or complex, including a court, mall, park, or other area, feature
or element; a "public place" shall also mean a business or an educational,
refreshment, entertainment, recreation, health, or transportation facility,
or institution of any kind, whether licensed by any agency of government
or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to
the public.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A commercial establishment that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any of the following:
A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or areola
is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;
A.
Material as defined in Section 2 of Michigan Act 343 of 1984, as
amended,118 or any similar successor statute; or
B.
Sexually explicit visual material as defined in Section 3 of Michigan Act
33 of 1978, as amended,119 or any similar successor statute.
C.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity.
B.
A. Adult arcade;
B. Adult bookstore or adult video store;
C. Adult entertainment booking agency;
D. Adult cabaret;
E. Adult motel;
F. Adult motion-picture theater;
G. Adult theater;
H. Dating service;
I. Escort agency;
118. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 752.362.
119. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.673.
§ 390-37 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-37
1:372
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Are defined as follows:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Are defined to include any of the
following:
§ 390-38. Zoning district.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, sexually
oriented businesses shall be permitted only as a special land use subject to
Planning Commission approval within the Waterfront Overlay District.
§ 390-39. Special land use approval requirements.
Special land use approval shall not be granted to any sexually oriented
business unless it meets all of the following enumerated requirements. Any
sexually oriented business granted special land use approval shall continue
to comply with all of the requirements of this section at all times while the
business is operational.
J. Massage parlor;
K. Massage school;
L. Nude model studio; and
M. Sexual encounter center.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
The erotic fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not
limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, and/or masturbation;
B.
Sexual arousal or gratification using animals or violence, actual or
simulated;
C.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C of this definition, above.
D.
A. No sexually oriented businesses shall be located on a parcel that is
within 500 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(1) For purposes of this Subsection A, and Subsections B and C below,
the distance between a proposed sexually oriented business and 1)
another sexually oriented business, 2) the boundary of any land
zoned residential, or approved as a planned unit development for
residential purposes, or 3) land used for any single or multiple-
§ 390-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-39
1:373
family residence, village, county or state park, school, library,
licensed child-care facility, playground, church or place of worship,
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line
of the parcel of land upon which the proposed sexually oriented
business is to be located to 1) the nearest property line of the
parcel of land used for the other sexually oriented business, 2)
the nearest boundary of the land zoned residential, or approved
as a planned unit development for residential purposes, or 3) the
nearest property line of the parcel of land used for a single or
multiple-family residence, village, county or state park, school,
library, licensed child-care facility, playground, church or place or
worship.
B. No sexually oriented business shall be located on a parcel that is within
350 feet of the boundary of any land zoned residential, or approved as a
planned unit development for residential purposes.
C. No sexually oriented business shall be located on a parcel that is within
350 feet of any single- or multiple-family residence, any Village, county
or state park, any school, library, licensed child-care facility,
playground, church or place of worship.
D. No sexually oriented business shall be located within any principal or
accessory building or structure already containing a sexually oriented
business.
E. The proposed use shall conform to all requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
F. The proposed use shall be in compliance with all other ordinances of
the Village and with all statutes, laws, rules and regulations of the
county, state and federal government and, to the extent required, all
governmental approvals have been obtained.
G. The outdoor storage of garbage and refuse shall be contained, screened
from view and located so as not to be visible from the neighboring
properties or the adjacent right-of-way of a public street or private
road.
H. Any sign or signs proposed for the sexually oriented business shall
comply with the provisions of Article XXII, Signs, of this chapter, and
shall not otherwise include photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or
pictorial representations of specified anatomical areas, specified sexual
activities or obscene representations of the human form, and may not
include animated or flashing illumination. Entrances to the proposed
sexually oriented business must be posted on both the exterior and
interior walls, in a location clearly visible to those entering and exiting
the business, and using clearly marked lettering no less than two inches
in height stating that:
(1) "Persons under the age of 18 are not permitted to enter the
premises"; and
§ 390-39 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-39
1:374
§ 390-40. Application for special land use approval.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, applications
for special land use permits and site plan approval submitted by sexually
oriented businesses will be governed by this article.
(2) "No alcoholic beverages or any type are permitted within these
premises unless specifically allowed pursuant to a license duly
issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission."
I. No product or service for sale or gift, or any picture or other
representation of any product or service for sale or gift, shall be
displayed so as to be visible by a person of normal visual acuity from the
nearest adjoining right-of-way of a public or private road or a
neighboring property.
J. Hours of operation shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday. All sexually oriented businesses shall remain closed
on Sundays and legal holidays.
K. All off-street parking areas shall comply with Article XXIII, Parking
Regulations, of this chapter and shall be illuminated after sunset during
all hours of operation of the sexually oriented business, and until one
hour after the business closes. The illumination shall be designed to
provide a minimum level of brightness of one footcandle, with a 3:1
uniformity ratio. The illumination shall not reflect on and shall be
screened from adjoining properties.
L. Any booth, room or cubicle available in any sexually oriented business,
except an adult motel, that is used by patrons for the viewing of any
entertainment characterized by the showing of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities shall:
(1) Be handicap accessible to the extent required by the law;
(2) Be unobstructed by any floor, lock or other entrance and exit
control device;
(3) Have at least one side totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view of any occupant at all times from the
adjoining aisle;
(4) Be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity can, by
looking into the booth, room or cubicle from its entrance adjoining
the public lighted aisle, clearly determine the number of people
within; and
(5) Have no holes or openings in any side or rear walls not relating to
utility, ventilation or temperature control services or otherwise
required by any governmental building code authority.
A. An application for a special land use permit provided under this article
for a sexually oriented business shall be filed with the Zoning
§ 390-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-40
1:375
§ 390-41. Hearing.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed special land use not
more than 45 days following the date the Zoning Administrator receives the
completed application. At least five but not more than 15 days in advance
of such hearing, notice shall be published in a local newspaper of general
circulation and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom
real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property
in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property in question. The notice of the public hearing shall
contain the time and place of the hearing, the description of the property in
question, the use being proposed, and when and where written comments
will be accepted.
§ 390-42. Decision.
Administrator on the proper forms supplied by the Village. An
application shall not be deemed complete until all required information
and necessary documentation has been provided to the Village by the
applicant or the applicant's agents and representatives.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 12 copies of a site plan as
required by and provided for in Article XXIV, Site Plan Review, and any
other data required by the Zoning Administrator indicating how the
proposed sexually oriented business will conform to the requirements
set forth in § 390-39.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a legal description of the
property, either by metes and bounds or by subdivision lot and block,
and a street address.
D. The application shall be accompanied by a fee to be established by
resolution of the Village Council to cover the expense of considering
and making a decision on the application.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a final
decision on the special land use application and site plan approval shall
be made by the Planning Commission within 75 days of the receipt of
the completed application by the Zoning Administrator. The Planning
Commission shall base its decision upon the applicant's compliance
with the requirements set forth in § 390-39. The decision on the site
plan approval shall be made according to the standards set forth in
§ 390-189 of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions in
conjunction with the approval of a special land use permit for a sexually
oriented business. The conditions imposed shall be limited to conditions
necessary to ensure that the sexually oriented business will not be
unreasonably detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
§ 390-40 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-42
1:376
§ 390-43. Appeals.
The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. Notwithstanding
any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, in the event the Planning
Commission denies an application for special land use permit, or approval
of a site plan, or both, for a sexually oriented business, the applicant shall
not be allowed to appeal the Planning Commission's decision to the Village
Council nor the Zoning Board of Appeals. The applicant shall be entitled to
prompt judicial review of the Planning Commission's decision in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
welfare of the Village; nor unreasonably injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted; nor unreasonably impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted under this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission shall incorporate its decision in a written
statement containing the conclusions that specify the basis of the
decision and any conditions imposed.
§ 390-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-43
1:377

ARTICLE V
Home Occupations
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
§ 390-44. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish regulations intended
to ensure that home occupations remain subordinate to the residential
use, that the residential viability of the dwelling is maintained, and to
ensure that home occupations shall not be a detriment to the character and
livability of the surrounding neighborhood. It is recognized that excessive
commercial activity, such as traffic, odors, deliveries and signage may
undermine the residential character of a neighborhood. Therefore, a home
occupation shall meet the standards set forth in this article, and shall
be located and constructed so that the average neighbor, under normal
circumstances, will not be aware of its existence.
§ 390-45. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article only, unless otherwise specifically stated:
MARIHUANA also known as MARIJUANA also known as CANNABIS — The
term shall have the meaning given to it in Section 7601 of the Michigan
Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.7106, as referred to in
Section 3(d) of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated
Law, MCLA § 333.26423(d). Any other term pertaining to marihuana used
in this article and not otherwise defined shall have the meaning given to it
in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act120 and/or the general rules of the
Michigan Department of Community Health issued in connection with that
Act.
MEDICAL USE OF MARIHUANA — The acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation
of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marihuana
to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition,
as defined under the Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, MCLA
§ 333.26421 et seq.
PRIMARY CAREGIVER — A person who is at least 21 years old and who
has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has
never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs.
§ 390-46. Requirements.
A. All home occupations shall be registered with the Zoning Administrator
on forms provided by the Village and may require a fee as determined
by Village Council from time to time. The registration form shall be
120. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-46
1:379
accompanied by such information as is necessary to demonstrate
compliance with this article.
(1) For all home occupations that will be conducted in a rental dwelling
unit, the operator of the home occupation shall provide a signed
statement from the property owner which states that the property
owner knows the type and scope of the home occupation to be
conducted on their property and granting the tenant permission to
operate the home occupation.
B. Home occupations shall at all times comply with all federal, state and
local laws including, but not limited to, building, housing, property
maintenance, fire and other codes and ordinances.121
C. The operator of the home occupation shall make the dwelling unit
within which the home occupation is conducted his/her legal and
primary residence, where all activities such as sleeping, eating,
entertaining and other functions and activities normally associated with
home life are conducted.
D. No person, other than members of the family residing in the dwelling,
shall be engaged in the conduct of the home occupation.
E. The use of the dwelling for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and not more than
20% of the floor area of the dwelling shall be used for the conduct of the
home occupation.
F. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling or
any other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation.
G. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the confines of
the dwelling.
H. There shall be no sale of products or services on the premises where the
home occupation is located except those that are produced or used in
the normal conduct of the home occupation. On-site sale of
merchandise shall be limited to:
(1) Items commonly traded or collected or occasionally bought and
sold by hobbyists such as stamps, coins, comics, etc., but not
including motor vehicles or firearms.
(2) Crafts and artistic products produced on site.
I. The home occupation shall not generate traffic in a greater volume than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, or in any
case no more than 10 vehicular trips per day. Any need for parking
generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met with the
121. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 127, Building Regulations; Ch. 263, Property Maintenance; and
Ch. 177, Fire Prevention, of this Code.
§ 390-46 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-46
1:380
provision of suitable off-street parking to be located without utilizing
any portion of any required yard.
J. No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odors detectable to the normal
senses off of the premises on which the home occupation is located. In
addition, no equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation
which causes visual or audible interference in any radio, television,
cellular or wireless service off the premises or causes fluctuation in the
line voltage off the premises.
K. No outdoor storage or display of materials, equipment, merchandise or
products shall be permitted.
L. The home occupation shall use only mechanical and electrical
equipment which is similar in power and type to that used for household
purposes and hobbies.
M. Home occupations shall not require exterior alterations or involve
construction features not customary in dwellings. No new external
entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation shall be created.
N. Visits by customers, clients, students or patients to the premises in
which a home occupation is located shall be limited to the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. No more than two customers, clients, students or
patients shall be on the premises in which a home occupation is located
at any one time.
O. No sign is permitted for a home occupation.
P. The home occupation shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation shall be designed and constructed, and will
be operated and maintained, so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character
of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the area in which it is proposed.
(2) The home occupation shall be served adequately by public services
and facilities, including, but not limited to, streets, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer
facilities and schools.
(3) The home occupation shall not involve activities, processes,
materials and equipment or conditions of operation that will be
detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by
reason of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
Q. A home occupation shall include an individual's ability to operate as a
registered primary caregiver, as defined by and in compliance with the
General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health,
Michigan Admin Code, R 333.101 through R 333.133 (the General
Rules), the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law,
§ 390-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-46
1:381
MCLA § 333.26421 et seq. (the "Act") and the requirements of this
article. Nothing in this article, or in any companion regulatory
provision, adopted in any other provision of this Code, is intended to
grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal
prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or
possession of marihuana not in strict compliance with that Act and
the General Rules. Also, since federal law is not affected by that Act
or the General Rules, nothing in this article, or in any companion
regulatory provision, adopted in any other provision of this Code, is
intended to grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity
from criminal prosecution under federal law. The Act does not protect
users, caregivers or owners of the properties on which the medical
use of marihuana is occurring under the Federal Controlled Substances
Act. The following additional requirements for a registered primary
caregiver shall apply:
(1) The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in all
circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the
General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health,
as they may be amended from time to time.
(2) A registered primary caregiver must be located outside of a onethousand-
foot radius from any school, or library, as defined by the
Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, as amended MCLA
§ 333.7410, to insure community compliance with federal "Drug-
Free School Zone" requirements.
(3) Not more than one primary caregiver shall be permitted to service
qualifying patients per dwelling unit.
(4) No qualified patient, other than one qualified patient who resides
on the premises with the primary caregiver, shall be served on the
premises of the licensed primary caregiver.
(5) At no time shall more than one qualified patient and one licensed
primary caregiver be present on any property in the Village.
(6) All medical marihuana shall be grown, processed and contained
within the main building in an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible
on all sides and equipped with locks or other security devices that
permit access only by the registered primary caregiver or
qualifying patient, as reviewed and approved by the Village of
Spring Lake Zoning Administrator and the Spring Lake Ferrysburg
Police Department. Marihuana plants grown on the premises as
part of the home occupation shall not be visible outside of the
enclosed, locked facility in which they are grown.
(7) All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical
permits shall be obtained for any portion of the residential
structure in which electrical wiring, lighting and/or watering
devices that support the cultivation, growing or harvesting of
marihuana are located.
§ 390-46 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-46
1:382
(8) If a room with windows is utilized as a growing location, any
lighting methods that exceed usual residential periods between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shall employ shielding methods,
without alteration to the exterior of the residence, to prevent
ambient light spillage that may create a distraction for adjacent
residential properties.
(9) The outdoor growth and/or cultivation of medical marihuana plants
is prohibited.
(10) Marihuana shall not be consumed in any area visible to the public
or occupants of adjacent properties.
(11) Nothing in this section shall be construed to encourage or condone
violations of state or federal law.
(12) A licensed primary caregiver shall be permitted as a home
occupation in the Village of Spring Lake only as long as the
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act permits the activity. Changes to
the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act may invalidate the home
occupation permit. Because the state Act is not under the control of
the Village of Spring Lake, the home occupation permit for a
licensed primary caregiver does not grant the operator of the home
occupation any vested property rights or nonconforming use rights
that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this chapter or
any amendment to this chapter.
(13) Based on the interpretation of the Michigan Department of
Community Health, no "marihuana dispensary," "growing
cooperative" or "compassion club," as these terms are commonly
used in reference to the use and dispensation of medical
marihuana, shall be permitted anywhere in the Village of Spring
Lake.
§ 390-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-46
1:383

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Districts and Map
§ 390-47. Zoning districts.122
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Spring Lake is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts.
SFR-A Single-Family Residential - A
SFR-B Single-Family Residential - B
MFR-A Multiple-Family Residential - A
MFR-B Multiple-Family Residential - B
C Community Commercial
EED Eastern Entryway District
CBD Central Business District
CBD-1 Central Business District Core
O Office
P Public, Semi-Public
I Light Industrial
WOD Waterfront Overlay District
§ 390-48. Zoning Map and boundaries.
§ 390-49. Interpretation of Zoning Map.
Where due to scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the Zoning Map there
is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any
zoning district boundary, the exact location of such boundary shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator. In making such determination,
the Zoning Administrator shall consider and apply the following rules of
interpretation:
A. The locations and boundaries of the above zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map, as the same may be amended
from time to time, and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully
described herein.
B. The Zoning Map shall be kept on display in the Village Hall and
descriptions accompanying enacted amendments to the Zoning Map
shall be displayed adjacent to the map until such time as the map is
corrected. The Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the current
zoning status in the Village.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-49
1:385
§ 390-50. Zoning of vacated areas.
Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the Village is vacated
by official governmental action and when the lands within the boundaries
thereof attach to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, alley or
public way, such lands shall automatically and without further governmental
action acquire and be subjected to the same zoning regulations as are
applicable to the lands to which same shall attach.
§ 390-51. Zoning of filled lands; uses on or over water.
A. Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets,
alleys or highways, the center lines of said streets, alleys or highways or
such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Village boundary lines
shall be construed as following such Village boundaries.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be
construed as following the center line of the railroad right-of-way.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the center lines of
streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at
such distances therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance
is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of scale shown
on the Zoning Map.
F. Boundaries following the shoreline of a river, lake, bayou or other body
of water shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of
a change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual
shoreline.
G. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
rivers, lakes, bayous or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
H. In every case where land has not been specifically included with a
zoning district, the same is hereby declared to be in the SFR-A District.
A. Whenever any fill is placed in any river, lake, bayou or any other body of
water, the land thus created shall automatically and without further
governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the same
zoning regulations and be used for the same purposes as are permitted
under this chapter for such adjoining lands. No use of the surface of any
lake or stream shall be permitted for any purpose not permitted on the
land from which the use emanates.
B. Any use which is located on or over the surface of any river, lake, bayou
or other body of water shall be subject to the same zoning regulations
§ 390-49 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-51
1:386
and be used for the same purposes as are permitted under this chapter
for the land from which the use emanates.
§ 390-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-51
1:387

ARTICLE VII
Waterfront Overlay District (WOD)
§ 390-52. Intent.
The Waterfront Overlay District is a supplementary zoning district which
applies to designated lands, as shown on the Zoning Map, simultaneously
with one of the other zoning districts established in this chapter, hereinafter
referred to as the "underlying" zoning district. Lands included in the
Waterfront Overlay District are characterized by uses which are strongly
oriented toward recreational experience and enjoyment of the waterways
and shorelines of the Village. It is the intent of the Waterfront Overlay
District to provide regulations in addition to those contained in the
underlying zoning district pertaining to lands located in the resort
waterfront areas of the Village. The purpose of these regulations is to
recognize the unique physical, economic, and social attributes of resort
waterfront properties and to ensure that structures and uses in this zoning
district are compatible with and protect these unique attributes.
§ 390-53. Permitted uses.
§ 390-54. Application procedures.
The following materials shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at
least 21 days prior to the meeting at which the Planning Commission is to
consider the request for approval of a waterfront development:
§ 390-55. Notice and hearing.
A. Land, structures and buildings in this zoning district may be used only
for those uses listed as either a permitted use or special land use in the
underlying zoning district in which the land is located.
B. All uses of land, structures and buildings in this zoning district shall be
considered as special land uses subject to the procedures and
standards contained in this article, regardless of their inclusion as
permitted uses by right in the underlying zone district.
A. Twelve copies of a site plan containing all information required by
Article XXIV, provided that the Zoning Administrator may waive any of
the submittal requirements contained in Article XXIV, if, in his opinion,
such information is not necessary for the review of the proposed
waterfront development.
B. A legal description, either by metes and bounds or subdivision lot and
block, and a street address.
C. A completed application on a form provided by the Village.
D. Payment of the application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, as
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council.
§ 390-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-55
1:389
§ 390-56. Planning Commission action; standards for approval.
Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve,
approve with conditions or deny the proposed waterfront development,
based upon its review and consideration of materials submitted with the
application and comments received at the public hearing. The Commission
shall approve, or approve with conditions, a waterfront development only
upon a finding that all of the following standards for approval are complied
with:
§ 390-57. Design requirements for waterfront development.
All waterfront developments shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with the following requirements:
A. Upon receipt of an application for approval of a waterfront
development, the Zoning Administrator shall cause notice to be given,
in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act. The notice shall:
(1) Describe the nature of the proposed waterfront development.
(2) Describe the property which is the subject of the application, by
both legal description and street address.
(3) State when and where a public hearing on the proposed waterfront
development will be held.
(4) State when and where written comments will be received
concerning the proposed waterfront development.
B. Following notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed waterfront development, for the purpose of receiving
public comment on the request.
A. Waterfront development shall be designed so as to be harmonious with
the existing or intended character of the resort waterfront area of the
Village as expressed in the Village of Spring Lake Master Land Use
Plan.
B. Waterfront development shall be served adequately by public services
and facilities, such as streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer facilities and schools.
C. Waterfront development shall comply with the design requirements
contained in § 390-57, with applicable special land use specific
requirements contained in Article XXV, and with applicable site plan
review standards contained in Article XXIV.
A. Waterfront developments shall maintain, to a reasonable extent, open
and unobstructed views to the waterfront from adjacent properties,
roadways, and pedestrianways.
§ 390-55 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-57
1:390
§ 390-58. District regulations.
B. Waterfront developments shall be designed to provide uninterrupted
public pedestrian access to and/or along the shoreline of the property at
locations as required by the Planning Commission. The waterfront
development shall provide a duly recorded, public pedestrian access
easement to accomplish such access, and shall include construction of
improved pedestrian pathways or walkways in accordance with
standards established by the Village for such purpose.
C. When construction of the pedestrian pathways required in Subsection
B, above, would not result in a functional or useful pedestrian
circulation route, because of the lack of completion of planned facilities
on adjacent property, the construction of such pathways may be
deferred, provided that such construction shall be secured by a
performance guarantee in accordance with Article XXVII of this
chapter.
D. The design of waterfront developments shall take into account
environmental factors that affect the shoreline, in particular, erosion,
pollution and protection of wildlife. Applicants shall present evidence
which demonstrates that these factors have been considered and
adequately addressed.
E. Waterfront developments shall be designed in accordance with the site
plan review standards contained in Article XXIV.
A. Regulations pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
required yards, and minimum residential floor area shall be as required
by the underlying zoning district.
B. Maximum building height shall be subject to the following limitations,
unless the requirements of the underlying zoning district are more
stringent, in which case the limitations of the underlying zoning district
shall be complied with:
(1) When any part of a building is located less than 50 feet from a
shoreline, the part of the building so located shall be subject to a
maximum building height of 25 feet.
(2) When any part of a building is located between 50 feet and 100 feet
from a shoreline, the part of the building so located shall be subject
to a maximum building height of 35 feet.
(3) When any part of a building is located greater than 100 feet from a
shoreline, the part of the building so located shall be subject to the
maximum building height limitations of the underlying zoning
district.
C. All other applicable district regulations shall be those provided for in
the underlying zoning district, except that, where more than one
limitation applies, the more stringent of the two limitations shall apply.
§ 390-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-59
1:391
§ 390-59. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-60. Signs.
As required in Article XXII for the underlying zoning district.
§ 390-59 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-60
1:392
ARTICLE VIII
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
[Amended 4-16-2012, by Ord. No. 327]
§ 390-61. Intent.
§ 390-62. Qualifying conditions.
A. Planned unit developments (PUDs) in the Village may be established in
any zoning district when approved by the Village Council in accordance
with the procedures specified in this article.
B. The primary purpose of this article is to encourage the creation of a
desirable and efficient working and/or living environments that are
designed and developed as integrated projects with harmonious land
uses and compatibility with surrounding areas and natural features. It
is the intent of this article to authorize the consideration and use of a
PUD for the following purposes:
(1) Provide for flexibility in the regulation of land development;
(2) Encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and
type of buildings and structures;
(3) Achieve economy, efficiency and sustainability in the use of land,
natural and historical resources, energy, and the provision of public
services and utilities;
(4) Encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and
adaptability;
(5) Encourage useful open space;
(6) Promote the enhancement of housing diversity, employment, traffic
circulation, pedestrian movement, and recreational opportunities
for the residents of the Village;
(7) Provide for the regulation of a variety of land uses not otherwise
authorized within a single zoning district;
(8) Create better living, working, and shopping environments; and
(9) Create developments that achieve the standards and best practices
of smart growth and sustainable, energy efficient design.
C. In order to accomplish these objectives, this article permits variation
from the conventional requirements found in the underlying zoning
district(s). The use of land and the construction and use of buildings
and other structures as a PUD shall be in conformance with the
procedures, standards, requirements, and conditions for eligibility
contained in this article.
§ 390-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-62
1:393
§ 390-63. Performance standards.
A proposed PUD shall take into account the following design considerations,
as they are necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations
and to ensure the compatibility of the project with adjoining properties and
the general area in which the property is located. The Planning Commission
shall review the preliminary development plan to evaluate whether each
of the following standards are appropriately addressed in the design and
development plan. In all instances the Planning Commission may
recommend exceptions where the imposition of the following standards
A. A PUD may be considered for any portion of the Village. However, the
applicant must demonstrate that the PUD would result in recognizable
and substantial benefits to the ultimate users of a development and to
the community in general, where such benefits would be unfeasible or
unlikely to be achieved under the conventional requirements of this
chapter.
B. The provisions of this article are not intended as a device for ignoring
the Zoning Ordinance, or the planning upon which it has been based. A
PUD shall not be accepted for consideration unless the following
requirements are met:
(1) Shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to be an integrated
and harmonious development, appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
(2) Shall be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, such as highways, streets, pedestrianways, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer,
telecommunications.
(3) Shall be compatible with the capacities of public services and
facilities it may affect.
(4) Shall be developed in accordance with the intent for a planned
development as contained herein.
(5) The parcel shall be under the control of one owner or group of
owners and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one
integral unit. Applications for a PUD must be made with the written
authorization of all owners of the site.
(6) Shall result in a development that is substantially consistent with
this chapter and sound planning principles.
(7) Shall result in a development that is substantially consistent with
the goals and objectives of the Village's Master Plan, including, but
not limited to creating a walkable, sustainable and attractive
community and protecting reasonable waterfront views and
provide waterfront enhanced access for all waterfront
developments.
§ 390-62 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-63
1:394
would result in patterns of development that would be out of character with
the development and/or with the surrounding area.
A. Every PUD shall adhere to the standards of the underlying zoning
district, unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission. The
proposed plan shall support the intent of the underlying zoning district
and §§ 390-62 and 390-63 of this article.
B. Every PUD shall adhere to the minimum design standards of the CBD-1
Zoning District and the principles of the Village Design Manual, except
that the Planning Commission may waive these standards under the
following conditions:
(1) Minimum height may be waived if a taller structure would not fit
the character of the immediate vicinity.
(2) Building material standards may be waived for building faces not in
the immediate view of the public.
(3) Shared wall requirements would not be practical in the scope of the
proposed design.
C. Fumes and odors. No fumes or odors shall be permitted at any property
line.
D. Dust and litter. During construction of a PUD, the terms of the debris
management and dust abatement shall be followed. Following
completion of development, no dust or litter shall be permitted to leave
a development site.
E. Artificial light. Artificial lighting shall be aesthetically designed and
shielded to prevent light from casting off the property, to the greatest
extent possible. Building surface reflectivity, on-site lighting and
landscape screening shall be planned and executed such that the
degree of light cast off the site shall not exceed one footcandle at the
PUD boundary. Exceptions may be made for decorative fixtures.
F. Traffic and access. Maximum daily traffic volumes shall be estimated
prior to development, and the site design shall be developed to
accommodate such volumes safely. In addition, the Planning
Commission may require a traffic impact study and contingency
provisions within the development to manage volumes that exceed such
estimate. Access shall be provided to regional arterial roadway through
on-site access or off-site cross-access easements. Where possible,
nonresidential development shall provide cross-access easements to
adjoining nonresidential development.
G. Stormwater runoff shall comply with the Village's Stormwater
Management Ordinance.123
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Stormwater Management; and see also Ch. 313, Stormwater:
Illicit Discharge and Connection.
§ 390-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-63
1:395
H. Every PUD shall comply with Chapter 358, Trees, of the Code of the
Village of Spring Lake.
I. Visual screening. A visual barrier, preferably consisting of mixed
evergreens and deciduous vegetation, shall be established to provide a
permanent opaque screen of service areas, dumpsters and loading
docks and a partial buffer to parking areas and similar less intrusive
elements, from surrounding residentially zoned or used property.
Where natural landscaping is not feasible, fences or walls may be
substituted if they are designed to complement the proposed
development and buildings and are generally compatible with
surrounding uses.
J. Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage, if permitted, shall be completely
screened from view from all off-site points with natural landscaping. If
natural landscaping is not feasible, fences or walls may be substituted,
if designed to complement and enhance the proposed development and
buildings and are generally compatible with surrounding uses.
K. Exterior signage shall conform to the requirements of Article XXII and
the signage plan submitted as part of the preliminary development
plan.
L. Landscaping shall conform to the requirements of Article XXI and
submitted as part of the preliminary development plan.
M. Off-street parking shall be provided in accord with the requirements of
Article XXIII of this chapter. In a mixed-use development, the applicant
shall propose shared parking arrangements to reduce pavement within
the development. For such shared parking arrangement, the applicant
shall provide for an enforceable mechanism to assure cooperation
among future building owners and occupants to assure the viability of a
shared parking arrangement. The minimum number of off-street
parking spaces shall be determined by considering each proposed use
and its likely peak hour parking demand. A maximum daily parking
demand matrix will be used to determine the peak hour demand for all
combined uses and the proposed PUD shall provide for not less than the
greatest peak hour requirement for the combined uses reflected in such
matrix. The use of deferred parking areas (or reserved interim green
areas) may be considered to calibrate the required parking standards
with evolving conditions.
N. All PUDs shall comply with the following guidance standards unless
specifically waived by the Planning Commission. The standards shall be
used as a guide in evaluating the size, bulk and dimensions of a
proposed PUD. For PUDs proposing more than one type of land use, the
appropriate guidance standards shall be applied for each such type of
use.
§ 390-63 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-64
1:396
§ 390-64. Standards for approval.
The Planning Commission and Village Council shall approve a PUD only if it
complies with each of the following standards:
§ 390-65. Application process and requirements.
The procedure for application, review and approval of a PUD shall be a
two-part process. The first part shall be an application and approval of a
preliminary development plan, which shall require review and approval by
both the Planning Commission and Village Council. The second part of the
review and approval process shall be the application for approval of a final
development plan for the entire project or for each phase of the project
as identified in the preliminary development plan review. During the final
development plan review, a PUD Agreement will also be developed by the
Planning Commission with final approval by the Village Council.
A. The proposed PUD is consistent with and promotes the intent of this
article and represents a development opportunity for the community
that could not be achieved through conventional zoning.
B. The proposed PUD complies with all of the qualifying conditions of
§ 390-62.
C. The proposed PUD is compatible with surrounding uses of land, the
natural environment and the capabilities of public services and facilities
affected by the PUD.
D. The PUD is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the
Village.
E. Safe and efficient ingress and egress has been provided to the property,
with particular reference to pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic
flow and control and access in case of fire or other emergency.
F. The design and placement of buildings and other structures, parking,
lighting, signs, refuse storage, landscaping and other elements of the
proposed PUD are compatible with surrounding properties and
properties within the PUD.
A. Preapplication conference.
(1) Prior to the submission of an application for a PUD, the applicant
shall meet with the Planning and Development Team for the Village
(which shall consist of those individuals so designated by the
Village Manager). The applicant shall present at such conference a
sketch plan of the development and the following information:
(a) A description of the property and disclosure of ownership
interest;
(b) Total number of acres included in the project;
§ 390-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-65
1:397
(c) A description of proposed land uses including the approximate
number of residential units and/or approximate number/type
and square footages of nonresidential development. This shall
include the general development concept, including structures
to be retained, remodeled or demolished an overall
architectural concept or development theme, and markets to
be served by the development;
(d) The relationship of the development to the surrounding
neighborhood;
(e) The approximate area of the proposed PUD to be devoted to
each use;
(f) A description of how the proposed PUD will relate to the goals
and objectives of the Village's Master Plan;
(g) All known natural resources, historical sites and natural
features including any views from the site to important natural
features and any impediments to development;
(h) The benefits that are expected to result from the PUD
pertaining to the subject site;
(i) Anticipated phasing plan with approximate time frame for each
phase.
(2) Based on the information presented, the Planning and
Development Team will advise the applicant of possible issues and
concerns the Village may want addressed should the PUD
application be submitted. However, any such initial input or
response from the Planning and Development Team shall not be
regarded as either conclusive or complete and the applicant shall
be so advised.
B. Preliminary development plan.
(1) Following the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit
for preliminary development plan approval. The review process will
be as follows:
(a) Work session. The applicant shall meet with the Planning
Commission in a work session prior to the required public
hearing. At the work session, the Planning Commission shall
review the preliminary development plan and shall make
reasonable inquiries of the applicant. The Planning
Commission shall determine whether the application is
complete and may ask questions of the applicant and seek
further information. The Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary development plan for consistency with the PUD
provisions of this chapter and may provide the applicant with
initial comments. Provided, however, that the Planning
§ 390-65 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-65
1:398
Commission shall not render any judgments concerning the
PUD request prior to the public hearing and the applicant
shall be advised that any initial comments of the Planning
Commission provided at the work session are subject to
change and shall not be construed as a final judgment of the
Village.
(b) Public hearing. Following the work session, the Planning
Commission shall schedule and conduct a public hearing in
accordance with the requirements of Section 306124 of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act of 2006 as amended.125
(c) Planning Commission approval. Following the public hearing,
the Planning Commission may proceed to render a judgment
on the proposed PUD preliminary development plan or table
the matter for further information and/or consideration. Any
decision made on the PUD preliminary development plan shall
be made as a recommendation to the Village Council. The
recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be
transmitted in written form to the applicant, and a copy of such
recommendations transmitted to the Village Council.
(d) Village Council approval. Upon a recommendation by the
Planning Commission, the preliminary development plan will
be presented to the Village Council for review and the Council
shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the PUD
application and preliminary development plan.
(2) Applicants for approval of a PUD shall submit a complete
application for review of a preliminary development plan to the
Zoning Administrator at least 21 days prior to review by the
Planning Commission. Such application shall contain all of the
following:
(a) All the information required for the preapplication conference.
(b) A complete application on a form supplied by the Village.
(c) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
(d) The name, address and seal of the professional engineer,
planner or architect that prepared the plan.
(e) A boundary and topographic survey including date, North
arrow, and scale which shall not be more than one inch equals
100 feet.
124. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3306.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-65
1:399
(f) A small scale sketch of the vicinity of the subject property,
locating the property in relation to properties, structures,
streets and uses within 500 feet of the PUD.
(g) Legal description of property including common street
address(es).
(h) All lot or property lines with dimensions.
(i) General location of all buildings within 100 feet of the property
lines.
(j) General location and size of all existing structures on the site.
(k) General location, size and architectural character of all
proposed structures on the site.
(l) General location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
streets, driveways, parking areas, including total number of
spaces and typical dimensions.
(m) General size and location of all areas devoted to open space.
(n) Details on the abutting zoning district(s) and the general
dimensions and approaches planned to achieve a gradual
transition between the proposed PUD and the surrounding
neighborhood.
(o) Location of existing vegetation, natural features and general
location and size of proposed landscaped areas and buffer
strips.
(p) A general signage plan, showing the type, location and
dimensions of all signs.
(q) A plan for debris management and dust abatement during
construction.
(r) An illustration of parking areas including traffic flow diagrams
and a detailed estimate of parking demand based on all
proposed uses.
(s) A narrative describing:
[1] The nature and concept of the project.
[2] The proposed density, number, and types of dwelling units
if a residential PUD.
[3] How the proposed project will be served by public water,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, gas, and
telecommunications which shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer.
[4] The phasing plan or staging plan.
§ 390-65 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-65
1:400
[5] Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property.
C. Final development plan.
(1) After receiving approval of the preliminary development plan by
the Village Council, the applicant shall submit a final development
plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission prior to
starting any construction.
(a) Standards for final development plan approval. Upon receipt of
a complete application for final development plan, the Planning
Commission shall review said application and either approve,
deny or approve with conditions the final development plan. In
making its decision, the Planning Commission shall find that
the proposed PUD meets the intent and qualifying conditions of
this article and that it is consistent with the preliminary
development plan.
(b) Conditions. In approving a final development plan, the
Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions.
Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following
requirements:
[1] Be designed to protect natural resources, the health,
safety, and welfare, and the social and economic well being
of those who will use the land use or activity under
consideration, residents, and landowners immediately
adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the
community as a whole.
[2] Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or
activity.
[3] Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this
chapter and the preliminary development plan, be related
to the standards established in this chapter for the land
use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to
ensure compliance with those standards.
(2) The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a PUD final
development plan shall be recorded in the record of the approval
action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent
of the Planning Commission and the landowner. The Planning
Commission shall maintain a record of conditions which are
unchanged. The final development plan, as approved, shall act as a
restriction upon the development. The development must conform
with the final development plan, and no building permit shall be
issued for any improvements that are not in compliance with said
plan.
§ 390-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-65
1:401
(3) The final development plan shall be submitted at least 21 days prior
to the meeting at which the plan will be considered by the Planning
Commission. The plan shall contain the same information required
for the preliminary development plan, the information listed below
as well as any other information specifically requested by the
Planning Commission in its review of the preliminary development
plan.
(a) Twelve copies of a final development plan, containing all of the
information required of a preliminary development plan and, in
addition thereto, all of the following:
[1] Proposed site elevation contours at two-foot intervals,
superimposed over existing site elevation contours at twofoot
intervals.
[2] Layout and dimensions of all existing and proposed
driveways, sidewalks, curb openings and parking areas;
parking areas shall include layout of proposed parking
spaces and aisles, with typical dimensions, total number of
spaces and method by which required number of spaces
was calculated noted.
[3] A detailed utility plan including location and type of
drainage, drainage calculations, size and location of
existing and proposed water and sewer lines, hydrants,
natural gas, electric, telephone, cable television and any
other proposed utility lines.
[4] Detailed architectural elevations of all sides of each
principal building type included in the PUD, drawn at scale
of one inch equals eight feet.
[5] A detailed landscape plan in compliance with Article XXI.
[6] Location, height and design of proposed fencing.
[7] Location, height and design of proposed exterior lighting,
including a photometric plan.
[8] Details on proposed signage including an illustration of all
proposed signage, location, their surface area, height and
nature of illumination.
(b) Summary data schedules containing the following:
[1] Dwelling unit density.
[2] Number and sizes of proposed dwelling units.
[3] Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
[4] Area and percentage of site covered by buildings.
§ 390-65 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-65
1:402
§ 390-66. Changes to approved PUD.
Changes to an approved PUD shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances.
[5] Area and percentage of site covered by pavement.
[6] Area and percentage of total open space.
[7] List of commercial or ancillary uses, with square footages
identified for each use.
D. PUD agreement.
(1) Prior to the issuance of any building permits or the commencement
of any site work and/or construction on any portion of the PUD, the
applicant shall enter into a PUD development agreement with the
Village. The agreement shall be in recordable form and shall set
forth the applicant's obligations with respect to the PUD. The
agreement shall describe all improvements to be constructed as
part of the PUD, and shall incorporate by reference the final
development plan submitted with the PUD application, other
documents which comprise the PUD, and all conditions attached to
the approval. The agreement shall also establish the remedies of
the Village in the event of default by the applicant carrying out the
PUD, and shall be binding upon all successors in interest to the
applicant. All documents shall be executed and recorded in the
office of the Ottawa County Register of Deeds.
(2) A draft of the agreement shall be prepared and reviewed by the
Planning Commission during the final development plan review.
The Planning Commission may submit its recommendation on the
PUD agreement to the Village Council for consideration. Village
Council must approve the agreement before any building permits
can be issued and before any site work and/or construction on any
portion of the PUD can commence.
Figure 1: Graphic representation of PUD approval process.
§ 390-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-66
1:403
§ 390-67. Time limit for approved PUD; extensions.
A. The holder of an approved PUD final development plan shall notify the
Zoning Administrator of any desired change to the approved PUD.
B. Minor changes may be approved by the Planning Commission upon
determining that the proposed revision(s) will not alter the basic design
and character of the PUD, nor any specified conditions imposed as part
of the original approval. Minor changes shall include the following.
(1) Reduction of the size of any building or sign;
(2) Movement of buildings or signs by no more than 10 feet;
(3) Landscaping approved in the final development plan that is
replaced by similar landscaping to an equal or greater extent;
(4) Changes in floor plans, of up to 5% of the total floor area, which do
not alter the character of the use or increase the amount of
required parking;
(5) Internal rearrangement of a parking lot which does not affect the
number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design;
(6) Changes required or requested by the Village, the county, or other
state or federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws
or regulations;
(7) Change of phases or sequence of phases, only if all phases of the
PUD have received final approval.
C. A proposed change not determined by the Planning Commission to be
minor shall be submitted as an amendment to the final development
plan and shall be processed in the same manner as the original PUD
application, including both preliminary and final development plan
review.
A. For each approved PUD, construction shall be commenced and shall
proceed meaningfully toward completion within one year from the date
of the approval of the final development plan by the Planning
Commission. If the Zoning Administrator determines this requirement
is not being complied with, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
owner/applicant in writing at least 14 days prior to the expiration of this
one-year time period.
B. The owner or applicant of the PUD may apply to the Planning
Commission for one extension of the original approval for an additional
term of one year. The Planning Commission may, in its discretion,
authorize this extension. In considering such authorization, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following standards:
(1) The PUD has encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the
reasonable control of the owner/applicant.
§ 390-66 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-67
1:404
(2) The PUD has a likelihood of now proceeding.
C. If the PUD has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully towards
completion at the end of the initial one-year time period, or the one
permitted extension thereof, then the PUD approval shall be
automatically invalid and void.
§ 390-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-67
1:405

ARTICLE IX
Single-Family Residential - A District (SFR-A)
§ 390-68. Intent.
The intent of this district is to provide for a sound and stable environment
primarily for single-family dwellings and other compatible, related uses.
Uses and requirements for this district should foster improvement of the
living environment for the residents of the Village and ensure quality
development.
§ 390-69. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
Land, buildings and other structures in this zoning district may only be used
for the following purposes by right:
§ 390-70. Special land uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV:
§ 390-71. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-72. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-73. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-74. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
A. Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes;
B. Foster-care family homes;
C. Family day-care homes; and
D. Home occupations.
A. Group day-care home.
B. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
C. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-74
1:407

ARTICLE X
Single-Family Residential - B District (SFR-B)
§ 390-75. Intent.
The intent of this district is to provide for a sound and stable environment
primarily for single-family dwellings and other compatible, related uses.
Uses and requirements for this district should foster improvement of the
living environment for the residents of the Village and ensure quality
development.
§ 390-76. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
Land, buildings and other structures in this zoning district may only be used
for the following purposes by right.
§ 390-77. Special land uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV.
§ 390-78. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-79. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-80. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
A. Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes;
B. Foster-care family homes;
C. Family day-care homes; and
D. Home occupations.
A. Two-family dwellings;
B. Group day-care homes;
C. Foster-care group homes;
D. Funeral homes; and
E. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
F. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-81
1:409
§ 390-81. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-81 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-81
1:410
ARTICLE XI
Multiple-Family Residential - A District (MFR-A)
§ 390-82. Intent.
The intent of this district is to provide for a variety of housing types and
compatible, related uses at a moderate density of development. Uses within
this district should be sensitive to adjacent uses. Housing developed within
this district should have the same degree of living quality expected from any
other residential district.
§ 390-83. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
Land, buildings and other structures in this zoning district may only be used
for the following purposes by right.
§ 390-84. Special land uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV.
§ 390-85. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-86. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-87. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
A. Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes;
B. Two-family dwellings;
C. Multiple-family dwellings;
D. Foster-care family homes;
E. Family day-care homes; and
F. Home occupations.
A. Group day-care homes;
B. Foster-care group homes; and
C. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
D. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-88
1:411
§ 390-88. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-88 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-88
1:412
ARTICLE XII
Multiple-Family Residential - B District (MFR-B)
§ 390-89. Intent.
It is the intent of this district to provide for a variety of housing types and
compatible, related uses at a density of development slightly higher than
the MFR-A District. Housing developed within this district should have the
same degree of living quality expected from any other residential district.
§ 390-90. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
Land, buildings, and other structures in this district may only be used for
the following purposes by right:
§ 390-91. Special land uses. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV:
§ 390-92. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-93. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-94. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-95. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
A. Multiple-family dwellings;
B. Foster-care family homes;
C. Family day-care homes; and
D. Home occupations.
A. Group day-care homes;
B. Foster-care group homes; and
C. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
D. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-95
1:413

ARTICLE XIII
Community Commercial District (C)
§ 390-96. Intent.
It is the intent of this district to provide areas outside of the Central
Business District for a wide variety of commercial uses. These uses should
be designed to fit into the neighborhood and not intrude upon the character
of surrounding uses.
§ 390-97. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings and other structures in this district may only be used for the
following purposes by right:
A. Retail food establishments whose primary business is the sale of food
products not prepared on the premises for consumption off the
premises, excluding gasoline sales.
B. Bakeries.
C. Retail businesses conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
D. Restaurants, not including drive-through restaurants.
E. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on
the premises, including barbershops or beauty shops, health and fitness
salons, photographic studios, laundry and dry-cleaning services, selfservice
laundries or similar uses.
F. Offices, executive and administrative.
G. Medical offices and clinics, not including the operation of a licensed
primary caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.126
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
H. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, not including drivethrough
facilities.
I. Business services, including mailing, photocopying and printing
services, data processing services, employment agencies, secretarial
and court reporting services, and similar uses.
J. Municipal parking areas.
K. Dwelling units, provided they are located on the second or higher story
of a building in which the first floor is occupied by a commercial use.
126. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-98
1:415
§ 390-98. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV.
§ 390-99. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-100. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-101. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
A. Restaurants including drive-through facilities.
B. Hotels, motels.
C. Automobile service stations.
D. Car washes, automatic or self-service.
E. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
F. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions including drivethrough
facilities.
G. Gasoline sales.
H. Retail businesses, a portion of which is conducted in the open air, such
as new and used auto, boat, recreational vehicle or manufactured home
sales or rental, nurseries, and greenhouses, lawn and garden centers,
produce markets and other similar uses.
I. Vehicle repair or storage establishments.
J. Veterinary offices.
K. Funeral homes.
L. Wholesale establishments and warehouses which sell packaged or
repackaged products on the premises.
M. Assembly operations consisting only of limited assembly, fastening and
packaging or repackaging of previously manufactured components.
N. Short-term rentals of permitted dwelling units. [Added 1-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-98 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-102
1:416
§ 390-102. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-102
1:417

ARTICLE XIV
Eastern Entryway District (EED)
[Added 4-29-2008 by Ord. No. 302]
§ 390-103. Intent.
The intent of the Eastern Entryway District (EED) is to maintain an
attractive gateway to the Village through the careful transition of existing
properties fronting Savidge Street. It is further the intent to retain
attractive elements of Village character found in the district. Special
attention is given to design elements that protect the integrity of
surrounding residential uses. It is the intent of the design regulations
to protect historic structures, deemphasize the negative impacts of stripcommercial
development; and to strike a balance between the needs of
the car and pedestrian by creating pleasant and safe surroundings for
pedestrians and adjacent residential uses.
§ 390-104. Permitted uses.
Land and/or buildings in the Eastern Entryway District may be used for the
following purposes by right.
§ 390-105. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV.
A. Residential units as part of a business use (e.g., a "home-work" unit
with a first floor shop and second floor or rear living area).
B. Retail establishments of less than 10,000 square feet, without drivethrough
facilities, conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
C. Restaurants without drive-through facilities.
D. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on
the premises, including barbershops or beauty shops, health and fitness
salons, and photographic studios.
E. Offices, executive and administrative.
F. Medical offices and clinics, not including the operation of a licensed
primary caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.127
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
G. Business services, including mailing, photocopying and printing
services, data processing services, employment agencies, secretarial
and court reporting services and similar uses.
127. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-105
1:419
A. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
B. Day-care centers.
C. Funeral homes.
D. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, which may include
drive-through facilities, provided:
(1) The drive-through facility shall be screened from adjacent
residential properties.
(2) The speaker system shall not be audible from the road right-of-way
or adjacent properties.
(3) Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the
operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend
into the public right-of-way nor does it interfere with internal
circulation of vehicles. No more than three stacking spaces shall be
permitted.
(4) Lighting of all drive-through facilities shall be one-hundred-percent
cutoff fixtures directed downward. All lighting shall be directed
away from adjacent properties and streets.
E. Pharmacies which may include drive-through facilities, provided:
(1) The drive-through facility shall be screened from adjacent
residential properties.
(2) The speaker system shall not be audible from the road right-of-way
or adjacent properties.
(3) Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the
operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend
into the public right-of-way nor does it interfere with internal
circulation of vehicles. No more than three stacking spaces shall be
permitted.
(4) Lighting of all drive-through facilities shall be one-hundred-percent
cutoff fixtures directed downward. All lighting shall be directed
away from adjacent properties and streets.
F. Vehicle repair or vehicle towing establishments, provided the storage
area complies with § 390-189G.
G. Other similar retail business or service establishments as determined
by the Planning Commission and when authorized by the Planning
Commission as a special land use. In considering such authorization,
the Planning Commission shall ensure the following standards and
those of Article XXV are met:
(1) The size, nature and character of the proposed use fit the scale and
character of abutting properties.
§ 390-105 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-105
1:420
§ 390-106. Prohibited uses.
§ 390-107. Design standards.
(2) The proximity of the proposed use to adjoining properties does not
create unreasonable negative impacts on the use and enjoyment of
nearby residential properties.
(3) The parking facilities provided for the proposed use are safe,
adequately sized and conveniently located.
(4) Any traffic congestion or hazard which will be occasioned by the
proposed use can be adequately mitigated.
(5) The design of the proposed use harmonizes, blends with, and
enhances adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
A. Drive-through restaurants.
B. Gasoline sales and automobile service stations with gasoline sales.
C. Car washes, automatic or self-service.
D. Retail businesses, a portion of which is conducted in the open air, such
as new and used auto, boat, recreational vehicle or manufactured home
sales or rental, nurseries and greenhouses, lawn and garden centers
and other similar uses.
A. Sidewalk and buffer area. Immediately adjacent to the road right-ofway,
the following shall be provided:
(1) A five-foot-wide sidewalk placed on the outermost edge of the
public right-of-way to optimize green space between the roadway
and a pedestrian.
(2) One street tree for each 25 feet of frontage, consistent with the
provisions of Article XXI, Landscape Regulations. [Amended
7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
(3) Wrought iron fence with brick pier accents shall be provided along
the roadway of any new development or substantially redeveloped
property. [See § 390-107D(13).]
B. Lighting and irrigation.
(1) On-site lighting shall comply with § 390-181B and shall be the
minimum necessary to comply with Michigan Building Code
requirements for safe egress. Parking lot lighting shall not be
operational after business hours. Limited security lighting is
permitted. All lighting shall be one-hundred-percent cutoff fixtures
directed downward and away from adjacent properties and streets.
(2) Landscaped areas shall be irrigated.
§ 390-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-107
1:421
C. Parking and access.
(1) Only one row of parking shall be provided in the front setback and
only if there is sufficient space for parking after the required
buffers are provided.
(2) Additional required parking shall be provided in side yards (behind
the front building line) or in the rear yard.
(3) Driveway improvements, including but not limited to drive
consolidation, relocation, drive sharing and cross-access
easements, may be required as part of the site plan review process.
(4) Traffic calming measures may be required as part of the site plan
review process.
(5) Where property depth permits, a rear access drive shall be
provided with cross-access easements granted to adjacent
properties.
D. Site and building standards. All new structures, major exterior
structural renovations, and additions to structures, shall adhere to the
following design standards:
(1) Existing site trees of over 10 inches in diameter shall remain on site
as much as practical. Building and parking lot placement shall
minimize tree loss. The Planning Commission may require a
performance guarantee for tree preservation.
(2) All new structures shall have a residential character which
incorporates the following:
(a) Shingled, pitched or hip roof with a minimum pitch of 6:12.
(b) A minimum of 40% windows on the face of any structure
fronting a street. Conversely, a maximum of 60% windows shall
be provided on the front face of any structure.
(c) Windows shall be provided on one side elevation but are not
required on rear elevations.
(3) Blank walls shall not face a public street. For building facades
exceeding 75 feet in length which face public streets, rights-of-way
and/or parks, no more than 30 feet of horizontal distance of wall
shall be provided without articulation or architectural design
variations to assure that the building is not monotonous in
appearance and to give buildings the appearance of small
individual storefronts.
(a) Acceptable variations include, but are not limited to:
[1] Recesses and projections along the building facade;
variations in depth must be a minimum of 18 inches.
§ 390-107 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-107
1:422
[2] Architectural details or features such as arches; changes
in vertical elements such as towers, cupolas, or changes in
roof design; contrasting bases, masonry courses, or
molding; pilasters and columns; stone accents;
colonnades; or porches.
[3] Enhanced ornamentation around building entryways;
ornamentation may include, but is not limited to, canopies,
paving treatments, change in roofline, porticos, larger
door openings and display windows, accent colors, arches,
arcades, distinctive door pulls, decorative lighting and
planters.
(b) The thirty-foot requirement may be varied by up to five feet
depending on actual building design, entry placement, and
other factors that make the thirty-foot requirement
impractical.
(4) The adaptive reuse of existing residential structures is preferred
over demolition of existing homes.
(5) Building materials for front and side elevations shall only consist of
the following:
(a) Brick or composite mimicking brick.
(b) Stone or composite mimicking stone.
(c) Nonreflective glass.
(d) Horizontal clapboard siding.
(e) Commercial-grade horizontal vinyl siding mimicking wood (at
least 0.044 inch thickness).
(6) Window awnings shall mimic classic designs depicted in the Village
Design Manual. High-gloss or bubble awnings are prohibited.
(7) In no case shall vertical siding, cinder blocks, or sheet metal be
considered an acceptable building cover.
(8) All sides of a building shall be finished with complimentary color
and materials as the major facade containing the principal
customer service entrance.
(9) Zero lot line may be permitted on one side yard, provided there is a
minimum distance of 10 feet between structures. Shared walls may
be permitted with adjacent properties, provided the separation
wall is properly fire-rated.
(10) In addition to public sidewalk, pedestrian ties between properties
and to adjacent neighborhoods or parks are strongly encouraged.
§ 390-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-107
1:423
(11) Sidewalk and trail accents that carry on the theme of brick pavers
or textured and contrasting materials currently found in the district
are strongly encouraged.
(12) The Planning Commission may require, during the site plan review
process, on-site amenities along street frontages, including but not
limited to trash receptacles, bike racks, seating areas and similar
facilities where appropriate.
(13) Special provision is made for applying the standards of this article
to developed sites which existed prior to the adoption of this
article. Therefore, when an existing site is undergoing
improvement or expansion, the objective of this article is to
gradually transition the existing site into compliance with the
minimum standards of this article in relation to the extent of the
expansion or change on the site. Compliance with the minimum
standards of this article is strongly encouraged.
(a) Additions to existing buildings which are 20% or less of the
existing building square footage may be permitted to continue
the existing roofline and siding materials where the existing
roof and siding materials are in very good condition and
unlikely to need upgrading or replacement in the near future.
The Zoning Administrator shall keep a log of the original size of
the structure prior to the addition. Subsequent additions are
permitted under this provision only up to 20% of the size of the
structure at the time of adoption of this article. Additional
enlargement of the building beyond 20% of the original size is
subject to the standards of this article.
(b) Alterations to existing buildings, the cost of which is less than
1/2 the value of the building, as determined by the most recent
assessment for purposes of taxation, exclusive of the market
value of the land, may be permitted to match existing exterior
materials and design, provided the structure is in good
condition at the time of the alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall keep a log of those structures altered
under this provision. Each structure may only be altered under
this provision one time. Additional alterations require
compliance with the standards of this article.
(c) In the case of a building addition or alteration which meets the
criteria established in § 390-107D(13)(a) and (b) above the
design standards in § 390-107A through C may be waived
under the following circumstances:
[1] The addition or alteration does not include any change to
the front setback area, sidewalk area, site landscaping or
parking areas.
[2] The expansion does not require an increase in the parking
requirement.
§ 390-107 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-107
1:424
§ 390-108. Deviations.
§ 390-109. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-110. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-111. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-112. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
[3] No site lighting will be changed or added.
A. For the purpose of this section, a "deviation" is defined as a modification
of one or more of the requirements of this section.
B. Deviations. Deviations from the requirements of § 390-107D may be
granted by the Planning Commission as part of the site plan review
process if the following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed construction is consistent with the overall intent of
these minimum development standards and requirements; and
(2) The applicant proves a practical difficulty in complying fully with
the provisions of this section, owing to conditions peculiar to the
land or structure and not the result of the action of the applicant,
would result from strict adherence to these standards and
requirements;
(3) That the deviation is no more than what is necessary to relieve the
applicant's practical difficulty;
(4) That the site plan otherwise meets the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the Planning
Commission as allowed by this section may appeal the decision to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 390-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-112
1:425

ARTICLE XV
Central Business District (CBD)
§ 390-113. Intent.
It is the intent of this district to provide for a central shopping and service
area to serve the Village residents and others shopping in the district. A
wide variety of uses are allowed in order to provide for the needs of these
shoppers.
§ 390-114. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings and other structures in this district may only be used for the
following purposes by right:
A. Retail food establishments whose primary business is the sale of
unprepared food products not prepared on the premises for
consumption off the premises, excluding gasoline sales.
B. Bakeries.
C. Retail businesses conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
D. Restaurants, not including drive-through facilities.
E. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on
the premises, including barbershops or beauty shops, health and fitness
salons, photographic studios, laundry and dry-cleaning services, selfservice
laundries or similar uses.
F. Offices, executive and administrative.
G. Medical offices and clinics, not including the operation of a licensed
primary caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.128
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
H. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, not including drivethrough
facilities.
I. Business services, including mailing, photocopying and printing
services, data processing services, employment agencies, secretarial
and court reporting services, and similar uses.
J. Public and private parking areas.
K. Dwelling units, provided they are located on the second or higher story
of a building in which the first floor is occupied by a commercial use.
128. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-115
1:427
§ 390-115. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV.
§ 390-116. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-117. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-118. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-119. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
A. Restaurants including drive-through facilities.
B. Automobile service stations.
C. Car washes, automatic or self-service.
D. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions including drivethrough
facilities.
E. Hotels, motels.
F. Funeral homes.
G. Indoor commercial recreation establishments, such as bowling alleys,
billiard parlors, and arcades.
H. Retail businesses, a portion of which is conducted in the open air, such
as new and used auto, boat, recreational vehicle or manufactured home
sales or rental, nurseries, and greenhouses, lawn and garden centers,
produce markets and other similar uses.
I. Marinas.
J. Gasoline sales.
K. Vehicle repair and storage establishments.
L. Veterinary offices.
M. Short-term rentals of permitted dwelling units. [Added 1-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 352]
§ 390-115 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-119
1:428
ARTICLE XVI
Central Business District Core (CBD-1)
§ 390-120. Intent.
It is the intent of the CBD-1 District to promote a traditional downtown
atmosphere which favors pedestrian activity and the consolidated design
concepts of a traditional downtown main street. The uses established in this
district are intended to complement one another to provide a concentration
of specialty retail and service uses with cultural and social activities that
support a high level of nonmotorized activity in the downtown core. The
district is further established to improve the sense of place in the Village;
improve the environment for business, including smaller, locally owned
businesses, to support a healthy economy by providing a vibrant mix of uses
including accessory residential units; and to strike a balance between the
needs of the car and pedestrian by creating pleasant and safe surroundings.
The area contained within the CBD-1 District is bound by Park Street,
Exchange Street, Buchanan Street, and the Grand Trunk Railroad right-ofway.
§ 390-121. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 300]
Land, building and other structures in this district may only be used for the
following purposes by right:
A. Retail establishments, without drive-through facilities, conducted
entirely within an enclosed building.
B. Restaurants, not including drive-through facilities.
C. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages.
D. Offices, executive and administrative.
E. Medical offices and clinics, not including the operation of a licensed
primary caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.129
F. Governmental offices, libraries, museums and community centers.
G. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, not including drivethrough
facilities.
H. Business services, including mailing, photocopying and printing
services, data processing services, employment agencies, secretarial
and court reporting services and similar uses.
I. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on
the premises, including barbershops or beauty shops, health and fitness
salons, photographic studios, and drop-off laundry facilities and drycleaning
services.
129. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-122
1:429
§ 390-122. Special land uses.
§ 390-123. Prohibited uses.
§ 390-124. Design standards.
With the exception of single-family structures, all new structures, major
exterior structural renovations, or additions to structures, shall adhere to
the following design standards:
A. Residential dwellings above the first floor, provided a minimum of 40
square feet of outdoor open space be provided for each dwelling unit.
Roof or balcony areas are acceptable open space.
B. Outdoor dining, roof or sidewalk cafes.
C. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, with drive-through
facilities.
D. Day-care center.
E. Indoor commercial recreational establishments.
F. Home occupations.
G. Hotels and motels.
H. Produce market.
I. Short-term rentals of permitted dwelling units. [Added 1-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 352]
A. Restaurants with drive-through facilities.
B. Automobile service stations.
C. Car washes, automatic or self-service.
D. Funeral homes.
E. Retail businesses, a portion of which is conducted in the open air, such
as new and used auto, boat, recreational vehicle or manufactured
homes sales or rental, nurseries and greenhouses, lawn and garden
centers and other similar uses.
F. Gasoline sales.
G. Vehicle repair or storage establishments.
H. Any use not specifically mentioned in this article.
A. All structures shall be a minimum of two stories in height except that
additions to existing one-story structures may be one story in height if
the square footage of the addition is less than 570 square feet.
§ 390-122 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-124
1:430
B. All buildings with flat roofs shall include parapet articulation on the
facade(s) of each building facing the street.
C. No side yards are permitted except that one pedestrian accessway may
be developed to access the rear of the site, subject to Planning
Commission approval during the site plan review process. In no case
shall there be another such pedestrian accessway within 100 feet
unless approved by the Planning Commission. Accessways shall be
landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Accessway width shall be a minimum of five feet and a maximum of 10
feet in width.
D. Buildings shall adjoin and align with neighboring structures. If an
adjacent structure does not exist, the front setback shall be no more
than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. The front setback shall be
landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and have
appropriate amenities (benches, bike racks, etc.) to enhance the street
atmosphere.
E. Detached accessory structures shall be behind the principal building
and a minimum of three feet from the side and rear property line and a
minimum of 10 feet from an alley.
F. No off-street parking or delivery areas shall be permitted in the front
yard of the property.
G. Any facade facing the street or rear yard shall have an entrance for the
public. Where building frontages exceed 50 feet in width, doors or
entrances with public access shall be provided at intervals averaging no
greater than 50 feet apart.
H. For buildings facing the street, no more than 50 feet of horizontal
distance of wall shall be provided without articulation of architectural
design variations to assure that the building is not monotonous in
appearance. Acceptable variations include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Recess and projections along the building facade. Variation in
depth must be a minimum of 10 feet.
(2) Architectural details or features.
(3) Enhanced ornamentation around building entryways.
I. All building walls which face a public road shall be comprised of at least
60% windows on the first floor and at least 40% windows on upper
floors. Reflective glass, bronze-tinted glass and frosted materials shall
be prohibited for ground floors and strongly discouraged on upper
floors. Window glazing shall be recessed from the outside of all building
walls.
J. All windows shall have lintels and sills. Rectangular window openings
shall be oriented vertically.
§ 390-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-124
1:431
§ 390-125. Exceptions.
K. Window awnings shall mimic classic design depicted in the Village
Design Manual. High-gloss or bubble awnings are prohibited.
L. Non-windowed areas of the first story of structures shall be comprised
of any combination of the following:
(1) Brick or composite mimicking brick;
(2) Decorative concrete block;
(3) Tone or composite mimicking stone;
(4) Horizontal clapboard siding;
(5) Commercial-grade horizontal vinyl siding mimicking wood (at least
0.44 gauge).
M. Areas above the first story may also be comprised of stucco or cement
board.
N. In no case shall vertical siding, cinder block, or sheet metal be
considered an acceptable building cover.
O. All sides of a building shall be finished with complimentary color and
materials as the major facade containing the principal customer service
entrance.
A. For the purpose of this section, an "exception" may be defined as a
request to waive one or more or the requirements of § 390-124A
through O.
B. Exceptions, as defined in this section, shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission through a site plan review process. Exceptions to the
requirements may be approved by the Planning Commission upon a
finding that the following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed construction is consistent with the overall intent of
these minimum design requirements; and
(2) The applicant proves a practical difficulty in complying with the
provisions of this section, owing to conditions peculiar to the land
or structure and not the result to the action of the applicant, would
result from strict adherence to these requirements;
(3) That the site plan meets the requirements of this chapter;
(4) That the exception is no more than what is necessary to relieve the
applicant's practical difficulty.
C. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the Planning
Commission as allowed by this section may appeal the decision to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 390-124 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-126
1:432
§ 390-126. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-127. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-128. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-129. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-129
1:433

ARTICLE XVII
Office District (O)
§ 390-130. Intent.
It is the intent of this district to provide for less intensive office and officerelated
uses providing services to residents of the Village and surrounding
areas.
§ 390-131. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings and other structures in this district may only be used for the
following purposes by right:
§ 390-132. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV:
§ 390-133. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
A. Offices, executive and administrative.
B. Medical offices and clinics, not including the operation of a licensed
primary caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.130
C. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on
the premises, including barbershops or beauty shops, health and fitness
salons, photographic studios, laundry and dry-cleaning services, selfservice
laundries or similar uses.
D. Group day-care homes.
E. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, not including drivethrough
facilities.
F. Business services, including mailing, photocopying and printing
services, data processing services, employment agencies, secretarial
and court reporting services, and similar uses.
A. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions including drivethrough
facilities.
B. Funeral homes.
C. Veterinary offices.
130. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
§ 390-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-134
1:435
§ 390-134. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-135. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-136. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-134 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-136
1:436
ARTICLE XVIII
Public and Semi-Public District (P)
§ 390-137. Intent.
It is the intent of this district to provide land for a variety of public and
semipublic uses.
§ 390-138. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings, and other structures in this district may only be used for
the following purposes by right:
§ 390-139. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV:
§ 390-140. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
§ 390-141. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
A. Churches and related facilities, such as youth centers and parsonages,
when located on the same lot or on a lot abutting the lot on which the
principal church building is located.
B. Public parks.
C. Governmental offices.
D. Public and private schools.
E. Libraries, museums and community centers.
F. Marinas, with no facilities for boat storage or boat repair.
G. Offices - administrative.
A. Governmental facilities, including, but not limited to, fire and police
stations, vehicle and equipment storage and maintenance facilities,
water and waste treatment facilities, water storage facilities.
B. Electric substations and gas regulator stations.
C. Parking lots.
D. Adult day-care facilities.
E. Community support facility.
§ 390-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-142
1:437
§ 390-142. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-143. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-142 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-143
1:438
ARTICLE XIX
Light Industrial District (I)
§ 390-144. Intent.
§ 390-145. Permitted uses.
Land, buildings and other structures in this district may only be used for the
following purposes by right:
§ 390-146. Special land uses.
The following special land uses may be approved by the Planning
Commission subject to the applicable general and specific standards in
Article XXV:
§ 390-147. District regulations.
As required in Article XX.
A. It is the intent of this district to provide areas for low-intensity
industrial facilities. The industrial uses permitted in this district are, by
necessity, of a light manufacturing and processing variety. The limited
amount of land in the Village which is suitable for these uses and the
close proximity of residential uses in virtually all areas of the Village do
not permit heavier industrial processes to occur without substantial
harm to these areas.
B. It is not the intent of this district to permit uses which, by reason of the
production of fumes, odors, noise, vibration, waste products, toxic
materials or other such nuisances, may be potentially harmful to the
environment or well-being of the Village and its residents.
A. Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, packaging and assembling
from previously prepared materials of food products, textile products,
metal products, plastic products, paper products, apparel goods,
furniture and fixtures, industrial machinery and equipment, electronic
and electric components and products and precision instruments.
B. Wholesale establishments and warehouses not selling retail on the
premises.
C. Offices.
A. Vehicle repair or storage establishments.
B. Automobile service stations.
C. Tool and die machinery shops.
D. Industrial plating.
§ 390-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-148
1:439
§ 390-148. Parking.
As required in Article XXIII.
§ 390-149. Signs.
As required in Article XXII.
§ 390-150. Site plan review.
As required in Article XXIV.
§ 390-151. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited from locating within the Village:
§ 390-152. Industrial performance standards.
All uses in this zoning district shall comply with the following standards,
which are deemed to be maximum permissible levels compatible with
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village:
A. Bulk storage of flammable liquids, liquid petroleum, acids, gases and
explosives.
B. Manufacturing of gas, coke or coal tar products, ammunition,
fireworks, or explosive manufacture and/or storage, stock yards,
slaughtering of animals or storage of animal offal or garbage, blast
furnace, drop forging, petroleum refining or other similar factories or
uses.
C. Other uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, by reason
of the production of fumes, noise, vibrations, odors, waster products,
toxic materials or other such nuisances, may be potentially harmful to
the environment or well-being of the Village and its residents.
A. Sound. Every use shall be so operated that the volume of sound
generated does not exceed 70 decibels, with a maximum increase of 10
decibels permitted for a maximum of 15 minutes in any hour at any
point on the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located.
B. Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible without use of
measuring instruments at any point on the lot lines of the lot on which
the use is located.
C. Smoke emission. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit
smoke equal to or exceeding a density of No. 2 on the Ringelman Chart,
as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, for any period or
periods aggregating more than four minutes in any 1/2 hour.
§ 390-148 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-152
1:440
D. Emission of particulate matter. Every use shall be so operated that it
does not emit particulate matter exceeding 0.2 grain per cubic foot of
flue gas at a stack temperature of 500° F.
E. Odor. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit noxious odor
in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point on the lot lines
of the lot on which the use is located, when diluted in the ratio of one
volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air, or so as to
produce a public nuisance or hazard.
F. Emission of glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or
heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely
obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any adjoining
lot.
G. Electromagnetic radiation. Applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission in regard to propagation of
electromagnetic radiation are hereby made a part of this chapter.
H. Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or
destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused
to be abated.
§ 390-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-152
1:441

ARTICLE XX
District Regulations
§ 390-153. Regulations applicable to front yards.
§ 390-154. Regulations applicable to side yards. [Amended 7-1-2010
by Ord. No. 319]
§ 390-155. General district regulations. [Amended 7-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 319]
A. Parking of vehicles in the front yard in the SFR-A and SFR-B Zoning
Districts and for single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling uses in
all zoning districts is restricted to a designated driveway, the width of
which shall not exceed any point 1/3 of the lot width, or 20 feet,
whichever is greater.
B. With respect to multiple-family dwellings in the MFR-A and MFR-B
Zoning Districts, and all uses in the I Zoning District, the required front
yard shall not be used for parking, loading, display or storage of
equipment or materials.
C. In the P, C and O Zoning Districts, parking, loading, display or storage
of equipment or materials shall not be permitted within 10 feet of the
front lot line, unless approved by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission, as part of its site plan review, may allow parking,
loading, and display or storage up to the front lot line, if the
Commission finds that no traffic safety hazard is created by allowing
such activity to occur. As a condition of approving such parking,
loading, display or storage up to the front lot line, the Planning
Commission may require installation of a decorative wall or solid
hedges, not exceeding 24 inches in height, at the front lot line.
A. A twenty-foot required side yard shall be provided on the street side of
all corner lots in all zoning districts, with the exception of the CBD
Zoning District.
B. In the C and O Zoning Districts, uses shall provide either a landscape
strip or a solid, uniform fence or wall, having a height of six feet along
the side lot line, as required by the Planning Commission as a condition
of site plan approval. If a landscape strip is required, it shall have a
minimum width of five feet, when located in the C Zoning District, and a
minimum width of 10 feet, when located in the O Zoning District.131
A. In the MFR-A and MFR-B Zoning Districts, there shall be maintained a
minimum distance between adjacent buildings on the same lot equal to
the height of the taller building.
B. All lots shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-156
1:443
§ 390-156. Schedule of District Regulations.
The Schedule of District Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 390-156 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-156
1:444
ARTICLE XXI
Landscape Regulations
[Amended 7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
§ 390-157. Scope.
A. Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the Village, preserves
natural features, improves property values, and alleviates the impact of
noise, traffic and visual distraction associated with certain uses.
Screening is important to protect less intensive uses from the noise,
light, traffic, litter and other impacts of more intensive, nonresidential
uses. The provisions in this article are intended to set minimum
standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and
screening, and for the protection and enhancement of the Village's
environment. More specifically, the intent of these provisions includes,
but is not limited to the following:
(1) Promote the implementation of the Master Plan;
(2) Define, articulate, and integrate outdoor spaces, architectural
elements, and various site elements;
(3) Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use
areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way;
(4) Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
residential uses that abut nonresidential areas, parking areas, and
other intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health,
safety and welfare, by requiring complementary landscaping
treatments and providing transitional areas adjacent to natural
areas;
(5) Reduce soil erosion and depletion by slowing the effects of erosive
winds and water;
(6) Increase stormwater retention, thereby helping to prevent
flooding;
(7) Provide reasonable standards to bring developed sites, which
existed prior to the adoption of these standards, into compliance
with the requirements contained herein;
(8) Recognize and preserve the aesthetic value of natural areas such as
woodlands, wetlands and floodplains within and adjacent to a
development site; and
(9) Encourage the preservation of larger, native trees that, once
destroyed, can only be replaced after generations.
B. When an application is required.
§ 390-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-157
1:445
(1) No site plan shall be approved unless it shows landscaping
consistent with this section. A separate landscaping plan shall be
submitted with all site plans as described in § 390-158 below.
(2) All required screens, buffers and landscaping plantings shall be
planted in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and a
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the screen, buffer
and landscape planting has been completed in accordance with the
approved plan. If a use is ready for occupancy between November 1
and March 31, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued,
provided a performance guarantee, as regulated in § 390-215, has
been provided in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the
landscape improvements. In any case, all required landscaping
must be complete by June 1 following issuance of the temporary
certificate of occupancy.
(3) The requirements in this section shall not apply to single-family and
two-family detached homes, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(4) Landscaping, screening and/or buffering in compliance with this
section are required for any use other than single-family and twofamily
detached homes as follows:
(a) For any work for which a site plan or building permit is
required for construction of a new building.
(b) For any work for which site plan review or a building permit is
required for a structural alteration, addition or repair to an
existing building where the estimated value of such
construction exceeds 100% of the state equalized value (SEV)
of the existing building. In such cases where site plan approval
or permit is required, the applicant shall be required to meet
the requirements of this section for the entire site.
(c) Any work for which site plan review or building permit is
required where the value of construction is less than 100% of
the state equalized value (SEV) of the existing structure, the
applicant shall be required to provide landscaping only for the
new construction and all areas disturbed during construction.
(d) Any new parking lot and any addition of 10 or more spaces to
an existing parking lot.
(e) Between residential uses and any other use as described in
§ 390-163, below.
(f) For any other section or provision of this chapter which
requires the structure or use in question to have landscaping
or screening.
§ 390-157 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-157
1:446
§ 390-158. Landscape plan.
Where landscaping is required, a landscape plan shall be provided for
review by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission. The landscape
plan shall demonstrate that all requirements of this section are met and
shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
(5) Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. Accordingly, unless
required as part of a screen, required trees and shrubs may be
planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(6) The requirements of this section are minimum requirements, and
under no circumstances shall they preclude the developer and the
Village from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
(7) Nothing in this section is intended to discourage the owners of
single-family and two-family detached homes from planting
additional landscaping and/or adding landscaping features such as
rain gardens and other water conservation methods.
A. A scale drawing of the site and proposed development thereon,
including the date, name and address of the preparer, parcel lines,
parcel area and North arrow. The scale of the drawing shall be not more
than one inch equals 20 feet.
B. Contour lines at minimum two-foot intervals shall be shown.
C. Proposed and existing man-made features, including proposed
buildings, structures, parking areas, mechanical equipment and fire
hydrants.
D. Setback lines and their dimensions.
E. Location of existing and proposed driveways and curb cuts.
F. Location of existing public and private rights-of-way and easements
contiguous to and on the property.
G. Calculations verifying compliance with the minimum numeric
requirements for greenbelts, buffer zones, parking lot landscaping,
berms, screens and other required landscaping. Required trees cannot
be double-counted.
H. Complete description of plant materials shown on the plan, including
common and botanical names, quantities, container or caliper sizes,
heights, spread and spacing at installation, proposed location of
plantings and other elements to illustrate compliance with the
standards of this section.
I. Identify grass areas and other methods of ground cover.
J. Description of the types of equipment and methods to be used to
irrigate the required landscape areas.
§ 390-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-158
1:447
§ 390-159. General requirements.
K. Identify a landscape maintenance program, including a statement that
all diseased, damaged or dead materials shall be replaced in
accordance with the standards of this section and identifying the
individual(s) or business(s) who will be responsible for continued
maintenance of the landscaping.
L. Location, height, elevation/section and material of proposed screening
walls, fencing, retaining walls and berming. Berms are to be delineated
by one-foot contours.
M. A tree survey establishing the location, species and assessment of the
general health and condition of all existing trees on the site with a sixinch
or greater diameter at breast height, their approximate height and
spread or crown diameter.
N. Identify which trees and other landscape elements are to be preserved.
O. A detailed description of either written or graphic form, indicating the
applicant's plans to protect the existing trees to be preserved from
damage during site development and construction such as dripline
fencing, tree wells and culverts.
P. The Zoning Administrator may permit less information to be shown on
the landscape plan based on the scope and scale of the project.
A. All areas not covered by buildings, parking or other structures shall be
treated with landscape materials including street trees, shrubs and
ground covers consistent with these provisions. The selected
combination of plant materials shall be a harmonious combination of
deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, vines and/or ground covers
arranged so as to present an aesthetically pleasing whole.
B. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 25% of any one
species. The use of trees native to West Michigan, and mixture of trees
from the same species association, is encouraged.
C. All unpaved areas of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover,
shrubbery, or other suitable live plant materials. A mixture of evergreen
and deciduous trees shall be planted on nonresidential parcels at the
rate of one tree per 1,000 square feet of any unpaved open area for
which specific landscaping requirements do not appear later in this
section.
D. Where a parkway exists, street trees shall be planted within the
parkway along public and private streets in all developments requiring
site plan approval. Trees shall be deciduous trees capable of achieving
a mature canopy diameter of at least 25 feet and shall comply with the
list of suggested trees in this section.
§ 390-158 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-159
1:448
E. Landscape areas larger than 1,000 square feet in area and landscape
areas within parking lots shall be provided with an underground
irrigation system. To encourage sustainable landscape practices and
the use of natural water sources, the Planning Commission may
approve an acceptable alternative water supply if the applicant/owner
can demonstrate the use of drought tolerant varieties and other natural
sources of irrigation such as swales and rain gardens. If the alternative
irrigation fails to maintain the landscaping in a healthy state, the
property owner shall be required to install traditional methods of
irrigation sufficient to maintain the plants.
F. Fractional plant requirements shall be rounded to the next highest
number.
G. Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not
obstruct or obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage
patterns on the site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety
of ingress and egress, and is subject to the clear vision corner
requirements of this chapter.
H. All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised standard or rolled
concrete curb, except where landscape islands in parking lots are being
utilized as part of a stormwater detention or conveyance system.
I. Exposed storage areas, trash receptacles and dumpsters, machinery
installations, service areas, loading docks, utility buildings and utility
structures such as electrical transformers, air conditioners and similar
features shall be screened from view from adjoining streets and
properties by a screen of sufficient height to obscure the view of the
equipment.
(1) Dumpster enclosures shall be sturdy and constructed of quality,
long-lasting wood, vinyl or masonry materials. If wood is used it
shall be finished and treated as often as necessary to maintain the
look of new wood. In no case shall wire or cyclone fencing materials
be permitted. The enclosure shall be placed on a concrete pad and
shall have opaque gates which compliment the screen materials.
J. The Planning Commission, or Village Council, as a condition of site plan
approval, special use permit approval or planned unit development
approval, may require installation of wrought iron, or material that
gives the appearance of wrought iron, fence with brick pier accents, as
seen in typical Village developments, or a solid brick wall or hedge, 24
inches in height, along street frontages for new development or
substantially redeveloped properties.
K. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in a healthy, neat and
orderly appearance, free from refuse, debris and weeds. All unhealthy
and dead plant material shall be replaced in the next appropriate
planting period.
§ 390-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-159
1:449
§ 390-160. Screening requirements.
Where screening is required, the screen shall consist of one of the following:
§ 390-161. Greenbelts.
L. The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may require a
performance guarantee per § 390-215 of this chapter to ensure proper
installation and maintenance of all required landscaping.
M. The Planning Commission and Village Council may lessen the
requirements of this section if site conditions make the strict
application of these regulations unreasonable, or may impose
additional requirements on landscaping, if such modification would
further the intent of this article, provide for sufficient buffering
between dissimilar uses and between expanses of parking and rights-ofway,
if any existing landscaping meets the intent of this article or if
native, drought-tolerant plant materials are used.
N. Existing healthy trees located within required setbacks and areas not
required for development shall be preserved, and may be counted
toward the number of trees required. The Planning Commission may
permit the removal of trees six inches or larger from other areas of the
site if the tree(s) is replaced with a like specimen elsewhere on the site.
A. A solid uniform wall, fence, or evergreen landscape material having a
height of at least six feet and sufficiently dense to obscure vision
through it. In no case shall wire or cyclone fencing materials be
permitted. High-quality, low-maintenance materials, such as brick and
vinyl, are strongly recommended. Wood fence may be permitted if it is
properly treated as often as necessary to maintain the look of new
wood.
B. A six-foot-tall berm designed with a maximum slope ratio of three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, with a minimum of a two-foot level area
at the top of the berm and with slopes protected with grass, spreading
shrubs, vines or other types of natural ground covers.
C. A berm may be used in conjunction with a wall, fence or landscape
screen to achieve the total of six feet in height.
D. Where berms are used, the plan shall depict a typical cross section
including the slope, height, and width of the berm and the type of
ground cover. Where a wall is used, the landscape plan shall depict
typical cross sections of the wall construction and footings.
A. Where required, a greenbelt shall be a landscaped strip at least 10 feet
in width.
B. The greenbelt shall be planted with living plant materials including all
of the following:
§ 390-159 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-161
1:450
§ 390-162. Minimum landscape material standards.
(1) Deciduous or evergreen trees not less than 12 feet in height.
Deciduous trees shall be spaced not more than 25 feet apart.
Evergreen trees shall be spaced not more than 10 feet apart. One
tree is required for every 25 feet of greenbelt length; and
(2) At least one row of dense shrubs not less than five feet in height
and spaced not more than five feet apart.
A. All plant material shall be hardy to Ottawa County, be free of disease
and insects and conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of
the American Association of Nurserymen.
B. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches at time of
planting, measured at four feet from grade.
C. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of
planting.
D. Deciduous ornamental trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches
at time of planting, measured at four feet from grade.
E. Deciduous shrubs shall be at least 30 inches in height at time of
planting with a minimum spread of 24 inches.
F. Spreading evergreen shrubs shall have a minimum height of 24 inches
at time of planting with a minimum width of 30 inches.
G. Ornamental grasses and perennials shall be a minimum pot size of two
gallons when planted.
H. The following are suggested plant species. Botanical species native to
West Michigan are identified with an asterisk (*). The use of native
species is encouraged.
Suggested Plant Species
Canopy trees Oaks*, Hard Maples*, Hackberry*, Sycamore*/Plane
Tree, Birch*, Honey Locust* (thornless varieties),
Sweetgum, Hophornbeam*, Linden*, Hickory* and
Hornbeam*
Evergreen trees Fir, Hemlock, Pine* and Spruce
Narrow
evergreens
Red Cedar, Arborvitae and Juniper
Ornamental
trees
Serviceberry*, Redbud*, Dogwood (tree form)*,
Hawthorn*, Flowering Crab, Flowering Pear,
Magnolia, and Rose of Sharon
§ 390-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-162
1:451
§ 390-163. Required landscaping.
The following chart defines site landscaping for front, side and rear yards
for each zoning district. In addition, Article XIV, Eastern Entryway District
(EED),and Article XXV, Special Land Uses, contain additional landscape
regulations.
Suggested Plant Species
Large shrubs Northern Bayberry, Dogwood (shrub form)*,
Cotoneaster, Forsythia, Mock-Orange, Sumac*,
Lilac, Viburnum*, Witchhazel*, Euonymus,
Ninebark*, Juniper (Hetz, Pfitzer, Savin), Yew
(Pyramidal, Japanese), and Dwarf Mugo Pine
Small shrubs Bayberry, Quince, Boxwood, Cotoneaster,
Euonymus*, Forsythia, Hydrangea, Holly*, Privet,
Potentilla*, Currant, Lilac, Viburnum* and Weigela
I. The following trees are not permitted as they split easily; their wood is
brittle and breaks easily; their roots clog drains and sewers; and they
are unusually susceptible to disease or insect pests. Existing trees of
these species may not be counted toward the required number of trees
for the development and need not be preserved on the development
site. The developer may remove plants of these species from the site.
Prohibited Varieties
Common Name Botanical Name
Box Elder Acer Negundo
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus
Ginkgo Ginkgo Biloba
Ash Fraxinus
Honey Locust (with thorns) Gleditsia Triacanthos (with thorns)
Eastern Cottonwood Populus Deltoids
Mulberry Morus species
Black Locust Robinia species
Catalpa Catalpa species
Chinese Elm Ulmus Parvifola
Silver Maple Acer Saccharinum
Willow Salix species
§ 390-162 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-163
1:452
Required Landscaping for Side and Rear Yards
Zoning
District Adjacent to
Required
Landscape
Elements Location
Additional
Requirements
Industrial All residential
zones and
uses
Greenbelt4
and screen2
Along the side
and rear
property lines
with the
screen
located on the
inner edge of
the greenbelt
Industrial All other
zoning
districts
except
Industrial
Greenbelt4 Along the side
and rear
property lines
Industrial Industrial
Zone
Greenbelt4 Along the side
and rear
property lines
Multiplefamily
dwelling uses
in the MFR-A
and MFR-B
SFR-A, SFR-B
and one- or
two- family
uses
Screen2 or
greenbelt1,4
Along the side
and rear
property line
Multiplefamily
dwelling uses
in the MFR-A
and MFR-B
All other
zoning
districts
Greenbelt4 Along the side
and rear
property lines
C, CBD,
CBD-1, EED,
O and P
All zoning
districts
Screen2 or
greenbelt1,4
Along the side
and rear
property lines
§ 390-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-163
1:453
Required Landscaping for Side and Rear Yards
Zoning
District Adjacent to
Required
Landscape
Elements Location
Additional
Requirements
C, CBD,
CBD-1, O and
P
Decorative
brick and
wrought iron
fence or solid
hedge1 and a
minimum fivefoot-
wide
landscaped
area3
Along
property lines
of all street
frontages
Required
where
parking,
loading or
storage has
been
permitted by
the Planning
Commission
in the front
yard, and
where
determined
by the
Planning
Commission
NOTES:
1. To be determined by the Planning Commission as a condition of site
plan approval.
2. The Planning Commission may require a taller screen based on site
conditions.
3. The landscaped area shall include one tree for every 25 feet and one
bush for every five feet of length.
4. No parking, loading or accessory uses are permitted in the greenbelt.
§ 390-164. Landscaping of off-street parking areas.
In addition to the site landscaping required in § 390-163 above, any offstreet
parking area containing 10 or more parking spaces shall be
landscaped according to the following requirements:
A. In the case of a shared parking lot, screening and greenbelts shall not
be required along the common property line.
B. The interior portion of the parking lot shall contain landscaped areas
consisting of one square foot of landscaped area for every 12.5 square
feet of pavement, or fraction thereof, and one deciduous tree for every
100 square feet, or portion thereof, of landscaped area provided.
C. Each landscaped area shall have a minimum of one tree. In addition to
the tree, each landscaped area shall be covered with living vegetative
materials such as shrubs, grasses, and flowers, and may include no
§ 390-163 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-164
1:454
more than twenty-percent natural mulch materials. The use of washed
rock ground cover is prohibited.
D. At least 25% of the deciduous trees within the landscape areas shall be
canopy trees.
E. The minimum size of each landscaped area shall be 100 square feet,
with a minimum width of five feet.
F. The landscaped areas shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in
order to break up and soften large expanses of impervious surface and
to define access and circulation patterns.
G. Sizes of plant materials at installation shall comply with the minimum
landscape material standards in § 390-162.
H. The Planning Commission may permit the required landscape areas to
be combined into larger areas if they find that the resulting landscape
area is of a higher quality and meets the intent of this article to visually
enhance the parking lot.
§ 390-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-164
1:455

ARTICLE XXII
Signs
§ 390-165. Scope.
A. Intent. This article is intended to regulate and limit the construction,
erection, reconstruction, placement, size and height of signs. A sign
shall not, by reason of its size, location, construction or manner of
display, create a hazard, confuse or mislead traffic, or obstruct vision
necessary for vehicular and pedestrian safety.
B. Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs are exempt from the
permit requirements of this article:
(1) One sign per street address not exceeding two square feet in area
and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers or names of
occupants of residential premises and bearing no advertising
message.
(2) Flags and insignia of the governments of the United States, the
State of Michigan and the Village of Spring Lake, except when
displayed in connection with commercial promotion.
(3) Signs, pennants and banners announcing civic occasions, festivals,
celebrations, sports events or arts and humanities events, as
authorized by the Village Council. Advertising symbols, logos or
titles identifying contributors to such event or occasion shall be
permitted, provided that such identification shall be limited to 15%
of the area of the sign, pennant or banner.
(4) Legal notices and identification, informational or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies.
(5) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
(6) Signs not exceeding two square feet in area per sign on the interior
portions of any lot which direct and guide traffic and parking on
private property, but bearing no advertising message.
(7) On-premises directional signs at driveways approved as part of a
site plan review process not exceeding two signs per property and
not exceeding four square feet in display area or four feet in height.
[Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord. No. 286]
(8) Real estate signs as regulated in § 390-169A.
(9) Political signs as regulated in § 390-169D.
(10) Construction signs as regulated in § 390-169E.
(11) Garage sale signs as regulated in § 390-169F. [Added 12-2-2014
by Ord. No. 340]
§ 390-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-165
1:457
§ 390-166. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign constructed of cloth, fabric, plastic, or
other durable, flexible material of professional quality, with or without a
structural frame. The term "banner" does not include pennants.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters,
sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the construction
or development of a recorded residential subdivision, site condominium
project, apartment complex, manufactured housing community, business or
industrial park, or other similar project which is in the process of being
developed. A development sign does not include a subdivision sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign bearing no written advertising, with the
exception of corporate logos or names, which directs vehicles or
pedestrians from a public or private right-of-way to private property for
purposes of traffic circulation or safety.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD — A sign on which copy changes
automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical
or electronic time and temperature units.[Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord.
No. 286]
C. Existing nonconforming sign. It is the intent of this section to permit the
continuance of a lawful use of any nonconforming sign existing as of the
effective date of adoption of this section, although such sign may not
conform to the provisions of this article. It is the intent that
nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended.
Further, it is the intent that nonconforming signs shall be gradually
eliminated and terminated upon their natural deterioration or
accidental destruction. The continuance of all nonconforming signs
within the Village shall be subject to the following requirements:
[Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord. No. 286]
(1) The burden of proving a sign is nonconforming shall rest with the
person claiming nonconforming status for the sign.
(2) The frame faces, supports, or other parts of any nonconforming
sign shall not be structurally changed, altered, substituted, or
enlarged unless the resultant changed, altered, substituted, or
enlarged sign becomes less nonconforming or conforms to the
provision of this article. Any nonconforming sign may be
diminished in size or dimension without jeopardizing its
nonconforming status.
§ 390-165 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-166
1:458
FLAG SIGN — A flag used to identify the name and/or logo of an on-site
business or organization, or to signify immediate business activity at the
property, such as "open," "sale," "antiques," "live music," etc. A flag sign
does not include the flag of the United States of America, the State of
Michigan Flag, and the Village of Spring Lake Flag.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign structurally separate from and not
attached to any building, which is attached directly to the ground surface in
a permanent manner, or supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces
attached to the ground surface in a permanent manner.
GARAGE SALE SIGN — A temporary sign used to advertise a residential
garage sale.[Added 12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 340]
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that identifies the business, facility,
development, owner or resident and/or street address and which contains
no other advertising.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign which is placed directly on the
ground surface, without the use of uprights, poles or other means to elevate
the sign face above the surrounding grade.
PENNANT — A series of small, often triangular, tapering flags made of
lightweight plastic, fabric, or other similar material, suspended from a rope,
wire, or string, often designed to move in the wind, as a device to call
attention to a land use or activity.
POLITICAL SIGN — Temporary signs or posters advertising a political issue
or candidate for political office.
132PORTABLE SIGN — A temporary sign which is designed to be moved
easily from place to place, that is not permanently attached to the ground
or to a building or other structure, that may be supported by wheels, a
portable stand, or a chassis, and may have provision for towing behind
a vehicle. The main sign face of a portable changeable message sign is
designed to hold manually changeable copy.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign attached to the wall of a building, with the face
of the sign which bears a message in plane approximately perpendicular to
the plane of such wall.
PYLON SIGN — A freestanding sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles, or other means which elevate the sign face above the surrounding
grade.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign indicating the availability of a lot,
business, residence or other facility for sale, lease or rent.
ROOF SIGN — A sign attached to and projecting from the roof surface of a
building.
132. Editor's Note: A definition of "portable sign" that preceded this definition of "portable
sign" was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 390-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-166
1:459
SANDWICH BOARD — A sandwich board is a portable A-frame type sign
hinged at the apex and folded into a sandwich position when transported or
stored.
Sandwich Board Sign
SIGN — Any object or device or part thereof which is used to advertise,
identify, display, or direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
motion, illumination or projected images and which is visible from a public
right-of-way or public waterway.
SUBDIVISION ENTRY SIGN — A monument sign that identifies or
otherwise states the name of a subdivision, site condominium development,
apartment complex, manufactured housing community, or other similar
development and containing no other advertising. A subdivision entry sign
does not include a development sign.
Subdivision Entry Sign
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign designed, constructed, or intended for use
for a limited period of time, often associated with special events or
sales.[Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
§ 390-166 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-166
1:460
VEHICULAR SIGNS — Any sign attached or applied to or painted on a
vehicle for the primary purpose of advertising or directing attention to a
product, service, entertainment, or commercial activity but does not include
words, graphics or other communication that serves to identify the vehicle
as one ordinarily and routinely used and operated in the course of the
business advertised.[Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 329]
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to the wall of a building, with the face of
the sign which bears a message in a plane approximately parallel to the
plane of such wall and not projecting from the wall more than six inches.
A sign attached to or displayed upon an awning, marquee or canopy is also
considered to be a wall sign, except that a corporate logo or corporate
name not exceeding six square feet in area attached to or displayed upon
such awning, marquee or canopy shall not be considered a sign.[Amended
12-26-2005 by Ord. No. 286]
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is applied or attached to, or located within,
three feet of the interior of a window on a structure which can be seen
through or from the window of the structure.[Amended 2-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 326]
§ 390-167. General provisions.
A. A sign not expressly permitted by this article is prohibited. A sign shall
pertain to the use or lot on which it is located, with the exception of
temporary signs as authorized in Subsection B, below.
B. Temporary or portable signs containing public messages concerning
special events sponsored by governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations may be erected without a permit in any zoning district,
but shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) No more than five such signs shall be displayed for each special
event. Such signs may be located either on or off the lot on which
the special event is held.
(2) The display of such signs shall be limited to the 21 days
immediately preceding the special event which is being advertised.
(3) Such signs shall have a maximum size of 32 square feet in area, and
a maximum height of five feet.
(4) Such signs shall be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of
the special event which is being advertised.
C. A sign which no longer pertains to the use of the property on which it is
located shall be removed, including the structure for such sign, within
six months from the time the use is discontinued. [Amended
12-26-2005 by Ord. No. 286]
D. Measurement of sign area and height.
§ 390-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-167
1:461
(1) The entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure
or similar character, together with any frame or other material or
color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate
such sign from the background against which it is placed;
excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is
placed, unless the supports or uprights contain writing,
representations, emblems or any figure of similar character in
which case the area of such shall be computed within the total sign
area.
Sign Area
(2) Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
included in determining the area of the sign, except that, where
two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more
than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken
as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the
area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. In the
case of a sphere, the total surface area of the sphere shall be
divided by two for purposes of determining the sign area.
(3) The height of any sign shall be measured from the mean grade.
E. All signs shall be stationary, and shall contain no visible moving parts or
images. Time and temperature numerals are exempt from this
provision.
F. There shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent illumination of any
sign. There shall be no electronic message board signs. Signs shall be
illuminated only by continuous indirect or direct lighting. All sign
illumination shall be employed in such a manner so as to prevent
intense or brilliant glares or rays of light from being directed at any
street or at any adjoining property. [Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord.
No. 286]
G. No sign shall be placed within or above any public right-of-way or upon
any utility pole except as otherwise permitted within the right-of-way of
a state-designated highway in accordance with the regulations
pertaining thereto, and except for projecting signs as permitted in this
article. Any projecting sign that is to be placed over a Village right-ofway
requires a license agreement with the Village prior to installation.
§ 390-167 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-167
1:462
Written permission from the Michigan Department of Transportation
(MDOT) is required for all signs to be installed over state rights-of-way.
H. The construction of any sign shall be such that it will withstand all wind
and vibration forces which can be normally expected to occur within the
vicinity. No sign shall be allowed to become unsightly through disrepair
or action of the elements.
I. Maintenance. All signs and sign structures shall conform to all
applicable codes adopted by the Village. Signs shall be installed in a
workmanlike manner and be maintained at all times in a state of good
repair, with all braces, bolts, clips, supporting frame, and fastenings
free from deterioration, insect infestation, rot, rust or loosening. All
signs shall be kept neatly finished, including all metal parts and
supports that are not galvanized or made of rust-resistant metals.
[Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord. No. 286]
J. No sign shall be placed in the clear vision area as shown in Article III,
Figure 7,133 nor in a similar clear vision area at the intersection of a
driveway or private road or access with a public or private road.
K. Temporary, searchlights, air filled balloons, signs animated by forced
air, and lighter-than-air signs are prohibited, except as otherwise
permitted in this article. [Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
L. Roof signs. Roof signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except
as authorized by special use permit in the C, CBD and EED Zoning
Districts only, following a public hearing held in accordance with the
procedures for approval of a special land use contained in Article
XXV.134
(1) In considering granting a special use permit for a roof sign, the
Planning Commission shall verify that the sign meets the following
requirements:
(a) Physical characteristics of the building, property, or building
and property in combination make a wall sign impractical.
(b) The roof sign will take the place of a wall sign.
(c) No portion of the roof sign will extend above the roof peak or
ridge line. Roof signs are not permitted on buildings with flat
roofs.
(d) The roof sign will not extend from the roof more than the angle
required to be parallel with the building wall below.
(e) That the need for the roof sign has not been created by the
applicant.
133. Editor's Note: Figure 7, Clear Vision Area, is located in § 390-11.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-167
1:463
(f) That there are extraordinary circumstances or unusual
conditions present that would warrant installation of the roof
sign.
(g) That the sign does not impair the intent and purpose of this
article.
(h) The total sign area and total number of signs is not increased
above what is permitted in this article for wall signs.
(i) That the roof sign will have no adverse impact on adjoining
property or the general welfare of the Village.
(j) That all other signs for the business meet the requirements of
this article.
(2) The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions in
conjunction with approval of a special land use which are deemed
necessary to 1) insure that public services and facilities will be
capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads
caused by the proposed special land use, 2) protect the natural
environment and conserve natural resources and energy, 3) insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and 4) promote the use of
land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions
imposed shall comply with the Zoning Enabling Act.
M. Temporary signs shall meet the following requirements: [Amended
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
(1) Banner signs are permitted as temporary signs in nonresidential
districts as follows: [Amended 2-20-2012 by Ord. No. 326]
(a) An annual banner and pennant permit is required to display a
banner(s) and shall be obtained before installation of any such
sign. An annual banner and pennant permit is required for
each business that will display a banner.
(b) The fee for the annual banner and pennant permit shall be
established by the Village Council and may be amended from
time to time.
(c) The annual banner and pennant permit is valid from January 1
through December 31 of the year in which it is issued. A new
banner and pennant permit must be obtained prior to the end
of the calendar year in order for the business to continue to
display a banner(s).
(d) The annual banner and pennant permit entitles the business to
display up to three banners on the premises. Banners may be
changed periodically while the permit is valid without
obtaining additional permits.
§ 390-167 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-167
1:464
(e) Banners shall be displayed for no more than 120 days in any
one calendar year.
(f) All banners shall refer to the business on the property on which
the banner is located.
(g) The total square footage of all banner signs displayed at any
one time shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(h) All banners shall be maintained in good, clean condition, neatly
hung, taut and secure.
(i) Banners shall not pose a hazard to public safety and may not be
located in any clear-vision area.
(j) Banners shall be located on the property of the applicable
business or institution, and shall not be located in any public
right-of-way.
(k) Attachment of a banner to utility poles and light poles shall be
prohibited.
(l) Banners shall not conceal architectural details or windows.
(2) Flag signs are permitted as temporary signs, without a permit, in
nonresidential districts as follows: [Amended 2-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 326]
(a) One flag sign shall be permitted per business establishment.
(b) The flag sign shall be no more than 12 square feet in size.
(c) The flag sign shall be displayed only during the hours a
business is open to the public. The entire flag, including the
structure, shall be removed during the hours that the business
is closed.
(d) The flag sign shall be permitted within any yard or attached to
the wall of the building. If attached to the wall of a building, the
flag sign must meet the following requirements:
[1] Be affixed to the wall at least six feet above the adjacent
grade; any portion of the flagpole over the public right-ofway
shall maintain a minimum clear space of eight feet
from the bottom of the flagpole to the ground.
[2] The top of the flagpole shall be not more than 15 feet
above the adjacent grade.
[3] The flagpole shall not project more than three feet from
the face of the wall to which it is attached.
§ 390-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-167
1:465
(e) The flag and its support shall not impede pedestrian
movement, and shall not present a hazard to people or
property.
(f) For businesses in the CBD-1, Central Business District Core,
whose property abuts a public sidewalk with flag stands
imbedded in the sidewalk, the flag may be displayed in the flag
stand in the sidewalk, instead of on the building, under the
following conditions:
[1] No more than one flag is permitted to be displayed at any
one time.
[2] The flag may only be located on the sidewalk when the
Village is not using the flag stands for the American Flag
or other community use.
[3] The flag, including the supporting structure, must be
removed during the hours that the business is closed, and
whenever requested to remove the flag by a Village official
or designated representative.
[4] The use of the sidewalk flag stand by any business fronting
on Savidge Street is subject to approval by the Michigan
Department of Transportation.
[5] All flag signs shall be maintained in good condition at all
times. Frayed or damaged flags shall be replaced or
removed upon the first signs of damage.
(3) Pennants are permitted in commercial districts as follows:
(a) A banner and pennant permit is required prior to installation of
any pennants.
(b) The fee for a banner and pennant permit shall be established
by the Village Council and may be amended from time to time.
(c) Pennants shall be displayed for periods of no more than 30
days. After 30 days, the pennants shall be removed from
display. The pennants may be displayed for no more than three
thirty-day periods in any one calendar year. There shall be an
interval of at least 30 days between display periods.
(d) The length of the string of pennants shall not exceed two times
the width of the building facade.
(e) Pennants shall be hung neatly, taut and secure.
(f) Pennants shall be maintained in good, clean condition at all
times. Frayed or damaged pennants shall be replaced or
removed upon the first signs of damage.
§ 390-167 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-167
1:466
§ 390-168. Sign permit required.
(4) Portable signs and portable changeable message signs are
permitted as temporary signs in nonresidential districts as follows:
(a) A temporary sign permit is required prior to installation of a
portable changeable message sign.
(b) The fee for the temporary sign permit shall be established by
the Village Council and may be amended from time to time.
(c) One portable changeable message sign is permitted per
business or use, regardless of the number of parcels occupied
by said business.
(d) The portable changeable message sign shall be displayed for a
period of no more than 30 days. A portable changeable
message sign is permitted for no more than three thirty-day
display periods in any calendar year. There shall be an interval
of at least 14 days between display periods.
(e) The portable changeable message sign shall be maintained in a
good, clean condition at all times. Damaged signs shall be
repaired or removed upon the first signs of damage.
(f) A portable changeable message sign shall not be lighted in any
manner.
(g) A portable changeable message sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and shall not exceed six feet in height.
(h) A portable changeable message sign shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from the front property line and 15 feet
from side and rear property lines.
(i) A portable changeable message sign shall not pose a hazard to
public safety. Such sign shall not be located in the clear vision
area or be located so that, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator or Chief of Police, the sign causes a visibility
problem for drivers or pedestrians.
(j) A portable changeable message sign shall be located on the
property of the applicable business or institution, and shall not
be located in any public right-of-way.
A. No freestanding sign, directional sign, subdivision entry sign,
identification sign, projecting sign, roof sign or wall sign shall be
erected, placed, constructed, reconstructed or modified except upon
issuance of a permit therefor by the Zoning Administrator, unless
specifically exempted from issuance of a permit by this article.
B. Application for a permit shall be made by submitting the following
information to the Zoning Administrator:
§ 390-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-168
1:467
§ 390-169. Signs permitted in all zoning districts. [Amended
6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 328]
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts in the Village:
(1) A completed application on a form provided by the Village;
(2) Payment of an application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, and
which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Village Council; and
(3) Plans and specifications for the proposed sign, in detail sufficient to
determine its compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. If the proposed sign conforms with the provisions of this article, a
permit shall be issued.
A. One real estate sign per street address, with a maximum height of 5 1/2
feet. The maximum area of such sign shall be six square feet for any
single-family or two-family dwelling use and 32 square feet for any
other use. Such sign shall only be displayed when the property is for
sale, lease or rent and shall not be illuminated. For properties with
shoreline frontage, an additional real estate sign of the same size and
height as otherwise permitted may be placed in the yard abutting the
shoreline. A real estate sign must be set back a minimum of five feet
from any property line. The sign shall be removed within 10 days after
completion of the sale or lease.
B. One off-premises real estate sign is permitted when all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) Shall be located in a commercial zoning district.
(2) Shall be associated with an approved site plan or PUD.
(3) Must be removed when 75% of the project is sold, rented, leased or
occupied.
(4) Shall be limited to 24 square feet in area per side. Sign may be twosided.
(5) Shall be limited to five feet in height above the natural grade.
(6) Shall be located at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way or
private road easement/driveway.
(7) Shall be located in private property with written permission
granted from the property owner.
(8) Shall be located outside of the clear vision area as defined by this
chapter.
(9) May be illuminated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 390-168 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-169
1:468
§ 390-170. Permitted signs in SFR-A, SFR-B, MFR-A and MFR-B
Districts. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
(10) Shall be made of wood, metal, or solid plastic and kept in good
condition.
(11) Shall not be located more than 500 feet from the subject property/
development being advertised, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Commission.
(12) Shall meet the intent of a development sign and/or a real estate
sign, as defined by this chapter, with the intent to direct people to a
specific development.
C. One development sign per project, not exceeding 32 square feet in area,
with a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet. The sign must be set back from
any property line a minimum of 1/2 of the required front setback for the
property or 10 feet, whichever is greater. The development sign must
be removed when 75% of the project is sold, rented, leased or occupied.
Development signs shall not be illuminated.
D. Political signs not exceeding seven square feet in area and 5 1/2 feet in
height. Political signs shall be removed within 10 days of the election to
which the sign pertains. Freestanding political signs must be set back a
minimum of five feet from any property line. Political signs may be
placed only on private property, with the permission of the property
owner, and not in any right-of-way. Political signs shall not be
illuminated.
E. One construction sign per site no larger than 32 square feet in area,
with a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet. The sign must be set back from
any property line a minimum of 1/2 the required front setback for the
property or 10 feet, whichever is greater. Construction signs may not be
erected until a building permit has been issued and construction has
begun. The sign shall be removed immediately upon completion of work
or issuance of any occupancy permit, whichever occurs first.
Construction signs shall not be illuminated.
F. Garage sale signs are permitted when all of the following conditions are
met: [Added 12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 340]
(1) Shall be limited to one on-premises location and three off-premises
locations.
(2) Shall be located on private property.
(3) Shall be limited to four square feet in area per side. Sign may be
two-sided.
(4) Shall be affixed to the ground and be freestanding.
(5) Shall be displayed for no longer than three days prior to the garage
sale and shall be removed upon the end of the garage sale.
§ 390-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-170
1:469
§ 390-171. Permitted signs in C, CBD, CBD-1 and EED Districts.
The following signs are permitted in the C, CBD, CBD-1 and EED Zoning
Districts, in addition to those permitted in § 390-169:
A. All signs in residential zoning districts shall be subject to a front yard
setback equal to 1/2 the required front yard otherwise applicable in
such zoning district.
B. The following signs are permitted in residential zoning districts, in
addition to those permitted in § 390-169:
(1) One plat entry sign or identification sign per public street or
private street entrance, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, with
a maximum height of five feet. Such sign shall not be placed closer
than 200 feet to any other such sign for the same plat or
development.
A. One monument sign per parcel.
(1) A monument sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall
have a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet.
(2) If a monument sign advertises two or more businesses located on
the same lot, the maximum sign area may be increased to 50
square feet.
(3) In the CBD, C and EED Zoning Districts, a monument sign must be
set back from any property line a minimum of 1/2 the required front
setback distance for the property or 10 feet, whichever is greater.
The monument sign must meet the design standards of the
district.135
(4) In the CBD-1 District, a monument sign must be set back a
minimum of two feet from any property line. The monument sign
must meet the requirements of the design standards for the
district.
(5) Up to 1/2 of the permitted area of the monument sign may include
an area for a manually changeable message. No electronic message
signs are permitted.
B. One or more wall signs.
(1) All wall sign(s) shall not exceed 15% of the area of the front face of
the building, but in any case shall not exceed 100 square feet. Wall
signs may be attached to any wall so long as no more than one wall
sign shall be placed on any wall.
C. One projecting sign.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-170 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-171
1:470
(1) One projecting sign is permitted on a wall facing a public street or
municipal public parking lot. A projecting sign shall not exceed 10
square feet in area, and shall not project more than three feet from
the building wall to which it is attached. Such sign shall have a
minimum ground clearance of eight feet.
D. Two directional signs per street entrance to a parking area with a
capacity of 10 or more vehicles. Each sign shall not exceed four square
feet in area, and shall have a maximum height of four feet. Such sign
shall contain no written advertising, with the exception of corporate
logos or corporate names.
E. One portable sign, or one portable changeable message sign shall be
permitted according to the regulations in § 390-167M(4). [Amended
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
F. Sandwich board signs shall conform to the following regulations. The
purpose of this type of sign is to permit businesses to utilize a portion of
the area adjacent to their places of business for the purpose of
pedestrian-scale advertising. [Amended 12-26-2005 by Ord. No.
286]
(1) Design.
(a) One sandwich board sign is permitted per customer
entrance.136
(b) Signs shall be limited to 12 square feet of sign face for each
side of the sign.
(c) Maximum sign face width shall be limited to 36 inches
measured from sign legs.
(d) Maximum sign height shall be limited to 4 1/2 feet measured
from the ground to the top of the sign.
(e) Sign bases shall be weighted with a minimum ten-pound
ballast, colored solid black, to ensure sign stability in windy
conditions.
(f) The sign frame shall be constructed as specified by Village
Council resolution.
(2) Placement.
(a) Signs must be truly portable and cannot be permanently
affixed to any structure or sidewalk, and must be removed at
the end of each business day.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-171
1:471
(b) If signs are placed on sidewalks, the sidewalk must be wide
enough to allow for at least five feet of width for unrestricted
pedestrian movement with sandwich board signs in place.
(c) Signs shall be placed to consider public safety including:
location and proximity of doorways; maximum distance
between pedestrian obstacles; location of crosswalks; and
other physical features of the location that affect sight
distance, accessibility and safety.
(d) Signs shall be placed a minimum of 48 inches from all
obstructions within the sidewalk right-of-way, including
newspaper boxes, outdoor tables/seating, trees and tree
grates, bicycle racks, trash receptacles and any other item
impeding pedestrian or wheelchair movement.
(e) Signs shall be placed a minimum of 10 feet from a building
corner or pedestrian crosswalk.
(f) Signs shall be placed a minimum of 10 linear feet from the base
of another sandwich board sign.
(3) Permits. Sign applicants are responsible to acquire any other
applicable county or state permits which may be required to allow
the placement of signs.
(4) Display. Signs may not be illuminated and may only be displayed
during business hours.
G. The total area of all window signs on any side of a building shall not
cover more than 25% of the window area. [Amended 2-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 326]
H. One vehicular sign is permitted per parcel, subject to the following:
[Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 329137]
(1) Shall only advertise the business, products or services offered on
the same premises.
(2) Shall be securely affixed to the interior or exterior of the vehicle.
(3) The total area of the sign shall not have a combined area of more
than 20 square feet.
(4) The vehicle shall be located in an off-street parking space.
(5) The vehicle shall be operable and registered.
(6) Shall only be displayed between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-171 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-171
1:472
§ 390-172. Permitted signs in O Office District. [Amended 1-3-2011
by Ord. No. 321; 2-20-2012 by Ord. No. 326]
The following signs are permitted in the O District, in addition to those
permitted in § 390-169:
(7) Shall be displayed for no more than three thirty-day periods in any
one calendar year.
(8) Shall be maintained in good, clean condition at all times.
A. One monument sign per parcel:
(1) A monument sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall
have a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet.
(2) If a monument sign advertises two or more businesses located on
the same lot, the maximum sign area may be increased to 50
square feet.
(3) A monument sign must be set back from any property line a
minimum of 1/2 the required front setback distance for the
property or 10 feet, whichever is greater. The monument sign must
meet the design standards of the district.
(4) Up to 1/2 of the permitted area of the monument sign may include
an area for a manually changeable message. No electronic message
signs are permitted.
B. One or more wall signs per street, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Wall signs shall be permitted only on a building wall facing a street
or municipal public parking lot, except that one wall sign not
exceeding 20 square feet in area is also permitted on a non-street
side wall of a building if there is a public entrance into the building
on such non-street side.
(2) No more than one wall sign per occupant shall be permitted on a
single building wall. In addition, one directory-type wall sign shall
also be permitted on a building wall if the building has multiple
occupants.
(3) The total area of all wall signs attached to a single building wall
shall not exceed 20% of the area of the wall, or 50 square feet,
whichever is less.
C. One projecting sign per street frontage, not exceeding 10 square feet in
area, and not projecting more than three feet from the building wall to
which it is attached. Such sign shall have a minimum ground clearance
of eight feet.
D. One portable sign or one portable changeable message sign shall be
permitted according to the regulations in § 390-167M(4).
§ 390-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-172
1:473
§ 390-173. Permitted signs in I Light Industrial District. [Amended
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 321]
The following signs are permitted in the I Zoning District, in addition to
those permitted in § 390-169:
E. The total area of all window signs on any building shall not cover more
than 25% of the window area.
F. One vehicular sign is permitted per parcel, subject to the following:
[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 329138]
(1) Shall only advertise the business, products or services offered on
the same premises.
(2) Shall be securely affixed to the interior or exterior of the vehicle.
(3) The total area of the sign shall not have a combined area of more
than 20 square feet.
(4) The vehicle shall be located in an off-street parking space.
(5) The vehicle shall be operable and registered.
(6) Shall only be displayed between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(7) Shall be displayed for no more than three thirty-day periods in any
one calendar year.
(8) Shall be maintained in good, clean condition at all times.
A. One monument sign per parcel:
(1) A monument sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall
have a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet.
(2) If a monument sign advertises two or more businesses located on
the same lot, the maximum sign area may be increased to 50
square feet.
(3) A monument sign must be set back from any property line a
minimum of 1/2 the required front setback distance for the
property or 10 feet, whichever is greater. The monument sign must
meet the design standards of the district.
(4) Up to 1/2 of the permitted area of the monument sign may include
an area for a manually changeable message. No electronic message
signs are permitted.
B. One or more wall signs per street frontage, subject to the following
conditions:
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-172 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-173
1:474
§ 390-174. Permitted signs in P Public, Semi-Public District.
The following signs are permitted in the P Zoning District, in addition to
those permitted in § 390-169:
(1) Wall signs shall be permitted only on a building wall facing a street
or municipal public parking lot, except that one wall sign not
exceeding 20 square feet in area is also permitted on a non-street
side wall of a building if there is a public entrance into the building
on such non-street side.
(2) No more than one wall sign per occupant shall be permitted on a
single building wall. In addition, one directory-type wall sign shall
also be permitted on a building wall if the building has multiple
occupants.
(3) The total area of all wall signs attached to a single building wall
shall not exceed 20% of the area of the wall, or 50 square feet,
whichever is less.
C. Two directional signs per street entrance to a parking area with a
capacity of 10 or more vehicles. Each sign shall not exceed four square
feet in area, and shall have a maximum height of four feet. Such signs
shall contain no written advertising, with the exception of corporate
logos.
D. One portable sign, or one portable changeable message sign shall be
permitted according to the regulations in § 390-167M(4).
E. One vehicular sign is permitted per parcel, subject to the following:
[Added 6-18-2011 by Ord. No. 329139]
(1) Shall only advertise the business, products or services offered on
the same premises.
(2) Shall be securely affixed to the interior or exterior of the vehicle.
(3) The total area of the sign shall not have a combined area of more
than 20 square feet.
(4) The vehicle shall be located in an off-street parking space.
(5) The vehicle shall be operable and registered.
(6) Shall only be displayed between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(7) Shall be displayed for no more than three thirty-day periods in any
one calendar year.
(8) Shall be maintained in good, clean condition at all times.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-174
1:475
§ 390-175. Deviations. [Amended 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 311]
A. One monument sign per parcel:
(1) A monument sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall
have a maximum height of 5 1/2 feet.
(2) If a monument sign advertises two or more businesses located on
the same lot, the maximum sign area may be increased to 50
square feet.
(3) A monument sign must be set back from any property line a
minimum of 1/2 the required front setback distance for the
property or 10 feet, whichever is greater. The monument sign must
meet the design standards of the district.
(4) Up to 1/2 of the permitted area of the monument sign may include
an area for a manually changeable message. No electronic message
signs are permitted.
B. One or more wall signs per street frontage, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Wall signs shall be permitted only on a building wall facing a street,
municipal public parking lot or shoreline frontage, except that one
wall sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area is also permitted on a
non-street side wall of a building if there is a public entrance into
the building on such non-street side.
(2) No more than one wall sign per occupant shall be permitted on a
single building wall. In addition, one directory-type wall sign shall
also be permitted on a building wall if the building has multiple
occupants.
(3) The total area of all wall signs attached to a single building wall
shall not exceed 20% of the area of the wall, or 50 square feet,
whichever is less.
C. One projecting sign per street frontage, not exceeding 10 square feet in
area, and not projecting more than three feet from the building wall to
which it is attached. Such sign shall have a minimum ground clearance
of eight feet.
D. One portable sign, or one portable changeable message sign shall be
permitted according to the regulations in § 390-167M(4).
A. For the purpose of this article, a "deviation" is defined as a modification
of one or more of the requirements of this article as outlined in the
following subsections.
B. Deviations from the dimensional requirements for setback, size, height
or total number of signs, of §§ 390-170, 390-171A through D, 390-172,
§ 390-174 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-175
1:476
390-173 and 390-174 may be granted by the Planning Commission if
the following criteria are met:
(1) That the proposed sign is consistent with the overall intent of the
sign standards and requirements in this article.
(2) That the applicant proves a practical difficulty in complying fully
with the provisions of this article, owing to conditions peculiar to
the land or structure and not the result of the action of the
applicant, that would result from strict adherence to the standards
and requirements of this article.
(3) That the deviation is no more than what is necessary to relieve the
applicant's practical difficulty.
(4) That the sign otherwise meets the requirements of this article.
(5) That the deviation is only dimensional and does not permit a sign
that would not otherwise be permitted in the zoning district.
C. The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions in
conjunction with approval of the deviation which are deemed necessary
to 1) protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources
and energy, 2) insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and 3)
promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner. Conditions imposed shall comply with the Zoning Enabling Act.
D. Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the Planning
Commission as allowed by this section may appeal the decision to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 390-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-175
1:477

ARTICLE XXIII
Parking Regulations
§ 390-176. Scope.
§ 390-177. Applicability.
In all zoning districts, after the effective date of this chapter, off-street
parking facilities shall be provided for any new building, structure, or
use, for any addition or enlargement to an existing building, structure,
or use, or for any change of use to an existing structure, according to
the standards in this article. For additions or enlargements to an existing
building, structure, or use, or change in use of an existing building or
structure, additional parking shall be required only for such addition or
enlargement, or incremental increase in required parking due to such
change in use, and not for the existing building or structure or previous use.
§ 390-178. Existing off-street parking facilities.
Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
and provided in connection with a building, structure, or use of land for
which off-street parking is required by this article, shall not be reduced in
number or dimensions to less than the minimum standards prescribed by
this article, nor shall such facilities be used to satisfy the standards of this
article for any other building, structure, or use of land.
§ 390-179. Maintenance of facilities.
All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article shall be
maintained free of accumulated snow, debris or other materials preventing
full use and occupancy of such facilities in accordance with the intent of this
article, except for temporary periods of short duration in the event of heavy
snowfall.
§ 390-180. Procedure for approval of parking area construction.
A. In order to reduce or prevent traffic congestion and shortage of parking
facilities in the Village, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with this article, in proportion to the need for
such facilities created by various uses of land, buildings, and
structures.
B. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be designed, maintained and
operated in a manner that will ensure their usefulness, protect the
public safety, and where appropriate, protect surrounding uses from
their impact.
A. No person shall construct a parking facility or cause any land to be used
for a parking facility, with the exception of parking facilities serving a
single-family dwelling, unless a certificate of zoning compliance for
such facility has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 390-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-180
1:479
§ 390-181. Parking facility design requirements. [Amended
7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
B. Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made by
submitting to the Zoning Administrator plans for the parking facility at
a scale not greater than one inch equals 50 feet. Such plans shall
identify existing lot lines, existing and proposed ground elevation
contours and two-foot intervals, parking stall dimensions, driveway and
aisle dimensions, type of curbing, location and size of all drainage
facilities, location, height, style and intensity of lighting, sidewalks,
proposed landscaping and proposed surface and base materials to be
used.
C. If the plans for such parking facility are in conformance with the
requirements of this article and other applicable provisions of this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance for the parking facility.
D. Construction of a parking facility for which a certificate of zoning
compliance has been issued shall be carried out in conformance with
the plans submitted in application for such certificate.
A. All parking facilities, with the exception of those serving single-family
dwellings and nonpublic areas used primarily for storage of vehicles,
shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt or concrete pavement and shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might
accumulate within or upon such area. No surface water from a parking
area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, not including a
public street, unless a watershed easement has been obtained.
Discharge of drainage into a public right-of-way or municipal storm
sewer shall require prior approval of the Village.
B. All illumination for or on any parking area shall be deflected away from
adjacent property and shall be installed in such a manner as to allow
the reduction of the amount of light during other than normal parking
hours each day. The source of illumination in all parking areas abutting
a residential zoning district or use shall not be more than 20 feet above
the parking surface.
C. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking area, by means of limited
and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. One-way
ingress driveways shall have a width between 12 feet and 15 feet, and
two-way ingress and egress driveways shall have a width between 24
feet and 30 feet.
D. Wheel stops or raised curbing shall be provided and located so as to
prevent any vehicle from projecting over lot lines.
E. Individual parking spaces shall be clearly identified and marked with
durable striping.
§ 390-180 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-181
1:480
F. Parking areas, with the exception of access driveways from public
streets, shall be located entirely within lot lines and shall not encroach
into any public right-of-way. With the exception of parking facilities
serving single-family or two-family dwellings, or parking facilities
accommodating less than four vehicles, off-street parking areas shall be
designed in a manner which avoids the necessity of vehicles backing
into any street.
G. Parking areas shall comply with the applicable provisions regarding
setbacks from lot lines and screening contained in Article XXI,
Landscape Regulations.
H. Dimensions of parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be in
accordance with the following requirements:
Minimum Aisle
Width
Parking Pattern
(See Figure 8)
Two-
Way
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Minimum
Space Width
(feet)
Minimum
Space
Length
(feet)
Parallel parking 18 12 9 25
Angle parking 30°
to 75°
24 12 9 21
Angle parking 76°
to 90°
26 15 9 18
Minor adjustments of the dimensions prescribed in this section may
be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if consistent with generally
recognized design standards for off-street parking facilities.
§ 390-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-181
1:481
§ 390-182. Off-site and joint parking facilities.
Figure 8 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A. All parking associated with any use shall be located in the same zoning
district as that use. With the exception of the CBD Zoning District, offstreet
parking areas shall be located either on the same lot as the use
served by the parking or on an adjoining lot under the same ownership
or control.
§ 390-181 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-182
1:482
§ 390-183. Schedule of off-street parking requirements.
B. CBD Zoning District.
(1) Within the CBD Zoning District, parking required by this article
shall be located within 300 feet of the building, structure, or use for
which it is intended, as measured from the nearest part of the
building or structure to the nearest part of the parking area.
(2) Within the CBD Zoning District, the parking requirements of this
article may be met by participation in a municipal or joint
community parking lot designed to serve a larger area, provided
plans for the community parking area have been approved by the
Village Council.
C. The parking requirements of this article may be met by a municipal or
joint community parking lot only if such parking facilities are located on
the same side of State Highway M-104 (Savidge Street) as the proposed
use to be served.
A. Each use shall provide at least the number of parking spaces required
in the following schedule. Where fractional requirements result from
the application of this schedule, the fraction shall be raised to the next
whole number. For any use not listed in this schedule, parking spaces
shall be provided in a quantity sufficient to make reasonable and
adequate provision for the highest expected volume of users.
[Amended 6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 305; 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
317]
Use
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
Single- and two-family
dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Group day-care homes and
foster-care group homes
1 space per 4 clients, plus 1 space per
each employee
Churches, theaters,
auditoriums, assembly areas
and gymnasiums
2 spaces per 5 seats or 8 feet of pew
length
Schools, elementary and
middle
1.5 spaces per classroom, plus amount
required for auditorium or gymnasium
seating
Schools, secondary 1 space per 8 students, plus 1.5 spaces
per classroom, plus amount required
for auditorium or gymnasium seating
Retail businesses 1 space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 390-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-183
1:483
Use
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
Offices 1 space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Banks, credit unions and
savings and loans
1 space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Indoor commercial
recreational establishments
1 space per 3 persons allowed within
maximum occupancy permitted by
building code
Restaurants 1 space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Hotels, motels 1 space per guest room, plus amount
required for other uses on the
premises, plus 1 per employee
Business services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Wholesale establishments 1 space per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Industrial uses 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross
manufacturing area, plus amount
required for office space on the
premises
Private marinas 0.75 space per boat slip or rack
storage bin, plus amount required for
other ancillary uses
Public transient marinas 5 spaces per boat slip
B. Where the property owner/applicant can demonstrate that the required
amount of parking is excessive, the Planning Commission may defer
construction of the required number of parking spaces if the following
conditions are met: [Amended 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 304]
(1) An area of sufficient size to meet the parking space requirements of
this article is retained as open landscaped space.
(2) The owner agrees in writing to construct the additional parking at
the direction of the Planning Commission based on observed usage
within six months of being informed of such request in writing by
the Zoning Administrator.
(3) A written legal agreement to construct the deferred parking, as
drafted by the Village Attorney at the applicant's expense, shall be
signed by the applicant.
(4) The site plan shall note the area where parking is being deferred,
including dimensions and dotted parking lot layout.
§ 390-183 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-183
1:484
§ 390-184. Required off-street loading and unloading spaces.
(5) A stormwater management plan for the completed parking area,
including any deferred spaces, must be submitted and approved by
the Village Engineer.
(6) The Village may require a performance bond to cover the estimated
construction cost of the deferred parking with refund in two years
if the additional parking is not found to be necessary.
(7) A permit shall be required prior to construction of the deferred
parking area.
C. The Board of Appeals, as a matter upon which the Board of Appeals is
required to pass under this chapter, may reduce the number of parking
spaces required by this section to such level as the Board of Appeals
shall determine to be appropriate if the Board of Appeals is satisfied,
based on the evidence presented to it, that the number of spaces
required by this section are excessive for the proposed use. In acting on
an application pursuant to this subsection, the Board of Appeals shall
follow the procedures and conduct a hearing as specified in § 390-204.
As is provided in § 390-205, the Board of Appeals may impose
conditions in connection with an affirmative decision to reduce the
number of required parking spaces including requiring the applicant to
retain sufficient open land area so as to permit the construction of
additional parking spaces in a quantity sufficient to comply with the
requirements of this section. If the Board of Appeals makes an
affirmative decision to reduce the number of parking spaces required
by this section, the Board of Appeals shall have the right, at any time
and on its own motion, to consider requiring the construction of
additional parking spaces required by this section. Before acting to
require the construction of additional parking spaces as provided in the
immediately preceding sentence, the Board of Appeals shall first follow
the procedures and conduct a hearing as is required in § 390-204.
A. Provision of off-street loading/unloading spaces shall be required for
construction of any building 20,000 square feet or greater in gross floor
area, or for any expansion of 2,000 square feet or more in gross floor
area of any existing building of 18,000 square feet or greater in existing
gross floor area, in the C, CBD, and I Zoning Districts, as follows:
Building Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Required Number of Spaces
20,000 to 50,000 2
Above 50,000 3
B. Off-street loading/unloading spaces shall have minimum dimensions of
10 feet in width, 25 feet in length and unobstructed height of 14 feet.
§ 390-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-184
1:485
C. Any loading space located closer than 50 feet to any residential zoning
district or use shall be completely screened from such district or use by
a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height or a landscape screen
consisting of a dense, evergreen vegetative buffer not less than six feet
in height at the time of planting.
D. Adequate space shall be provided so that vehicles using required
loading/unloading spaces are not required to use a street for
maneuvering.
§ 390-184 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-184
1:486
ARTICLE XXIV
Site Plan Review
§ 390-185. Required site plan review.
§ 390-186. Application procedure.
Application for site plan review shall be made by submitting the following
materials to the Zoning Administrator at least 21 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which the site plan is to be considered:
§ 390-187. Required site plan contents.
A. Site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission shall be
required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction,
reconstruction, erection or expansion of any building or structure in
any zoning district, prior to the initiation of any special land use in any
zoning district, and prior to the initiation of any new use of land not
requiring a building permit, with the exception of the following:
(1) Permitted uses in the SFR-A and SFR-B Zoning Districts.
(2) Accessory buildings and structures accessory to a single-family
dwelling or two-family dwelling in any zoning district.
(3) Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings in the MFR-A
Zoning District.
(4) Family day-care homes and foster-care family homes in any zoning
district.
B. The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that the use of land and
proposed structures thereon are in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter, other ordinances of the Village and state and
federal statutes.
A. Twelve copies of a site plan containing all of the information required in
§ 390-187.
B. A completed application on an appropriate form provided by the
Village.
C. Payment of an application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, and which
shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Village
Council.
A. A site plan submitted in accordance with this article shall contain all of
the following information: [Amended 7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
(1) The date, North arrow and scale. The scale shall not be more than
one inch equals 20 feet.
§ 390-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-187
1:487
(2) The name and address of the individual responsible for the
preparation of the site plan.
(3) A sketch drawn to scale sufficient to locate the property within the
Village.
(4) The property size in acres and square feet.
(5) All existing and proposed lot lines with bearings and dimensions,
including setback lines and existing easements.
(6) The location of all existing structures, street rights-of-way,
pavement, parking areas and driveways within 100 feet of the
subject property.
(7) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures
on the subject property, including but not limited to accessory
flagpoles, fences, walls, bulkheads, docks, storage sheds,
transformers, air conditioners, generators and similar equipment,
and the method of screening where applicable.
(8) For any structure located in the one-hundred-year floodplain, as
determined by the Federal Insurance Administration Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be indicated.
(9) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed drives,
sidewalks, curb openings, signs, curbing, unloading areas,
recreation areas, common use areas and areas to be conveyed for
public purpose and use. Parking areas shall be shown, including the
dimensions of a typical space and aisle. The total number of
parking spaces to be provided and the method by which required
parking was computed shall be noted on the site plan.
(10) Locations of exterior site lighting shall be shown, including
specification of the height and style of fixtures.
(11) Location of exterior trash facilities, including type of screening.
(12) The existing zoning of all properties abutting the subject property.
(13) Size and location of existing and proposed sewer and water supply
systems, and storm sewers, including valves, hydrants, manholes,
stormwater intakes and cleanouts.
(14) Locations of all other utilities on the site, including but not limited
to natural gas, electric, cable television and telephone.
(15) The location and size of all existing and proposed subsurface and
surface water drainage facilities, established floodplain areas,
bodies of water or other unbuildable areas if present on the site.
(16) Existing and proposed elevation contours shall be shown at twofoot
intervals. Direction of drainage flows shall be indicated. If
§ 390-187 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-187
1:488
§ 390-188. Planning Commission review and action.
applicable, the boundary of any area within the one-hundred-year
floodplain, as determined by the Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be identified.
(17) Exterior building elevations and specifications for materials to be
used on all structures including calculation for the percentage of
windows for each floor.
(18) Location and design of all signs and advertising features, including
diagram of height and size of signs.
(19) A landscape plan showing required planting and buffering features
that comply with this chapter.
B. The following documentation shall accompany the site plan:
(1) The name and address of the property owner and petitioner, if
different, and proof of ownership or option to purchase by the
petitioner.
(2) Typical elevation views, with dimensions, of all sides of each
principal building type.
(3) Summary schedules with the following information, as applicable,
shall be provided:
(a) Total site area.
(b) Net site area exclusive of right-of-way.
(c) Minimum, maximum and average lot area.
(d) Number, size and bedroom mix of dwelling units proposed, list
of commercial uses proposed, and the gross floor area of each
use.
(e) Area and percentage of site coverage by buildings, pavement
and open space.
(4) A legal description of the subject property, and a street address.
C. The Zoning Administrator may waive any of the requirements of
§ 390-187A and B if, in his opinion, such information is not necessary for
the review of the site plan.
A. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing on a proposed site
plan, if it deems such a hearing desirable. If a public hearing is held,
notice shall be given in the same manner as specified for a public
hearing on a special land use.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan and shall approve,
deny or approve with conditions the site plan, based on its conformance
§ 390-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-188
1:489
§ 390-189. Site plan review standards.
All site plans shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
with each of the following standards:
with § 390-189, Site plan review standards, and with all the applicable
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Village, and with
state and federal statutes.
C. The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions in
conjunction with approval of a site plan which it deems necessary to
ensure conformance with applicable provisions of this chapter and with
state and federal statutes.
A. Natural features preservation. Existing natural features of the site,
including vegetation, topography, water features and other such
features, shall be preserved to the greatest extent practical. Only those
areas under actual development shall be disturbed.
B. Building relationships. Buildings and structures shall be placed in an
orderly, nonrandom fashion such that an uncrowded, open appearance
is maintained. Open spaces shall be located and arranged in a manner
which provides view protection, visual relief, physical separation,
environmentally sensitive area protection and/or recreational value to
the site and surrounding properties.
C. Views. Views from adjacent properties and streets open to water areas
shall be preserved to the greatest extent practical. Placement and
height of buildings and locations of open spaces shall make reasonable
provision for protection of existing views of the significant visual
resources of the Village.
D. Driveways, parking, and circulation.
(1) Vehicular access to the site shall be designed to provide reasonable
access to the site, while minimizing the impact of driveways on the
efficiency and safety of traffic operations along the public
roadways.
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation facilities shall be designed so
as to provide for safe and efficient movement of vehicles and
pedestrians, in a manner which avoids conflict between vehicles
and pedestrians. Points of vehicular access to public streets shall
be limited to the minimum number required to provide reasonable
access to the site. On corner lots, driveway access should be
limited, where practical, to the street carrying the lower average
daily traffic volume at the time of review of the site plan. Factors to
be considered in determining whether to limit access to a street
carrying the lower average daily traffic volume shall include the
potential impact on adjoining uses along the side street, the extent
of frontage of the subject property along both streets, and the
§ 390-188 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-189
1:490
projected vehicular trip generation to and from the subject
property.
(3) Where possible, access driveways on opposite sides of a street shall
either be directly aligned, or offset a minimum of 150 feet,
measured between driveway center lines.
(4) Separation distance between driveways and between driveways
and public street intersections shall be maximized. At a minimum,
driveway-to-driveway spacing of at least 35 feet shall be provided,
measured between driveway throats at their narrowest point.
Driveway-to-intersection spacing of at least 10 feet shall be
provided, measured from the edge of the driveway throat to its
narrowest point, to the right-of-way of the intersecting street.
E. Surface water drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site
surface drainage so that the removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage
system. Temporary on-site storage to reduce peak runoff from the site
may be required. Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at
intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and will not create standing water in the paved areas.
F. Utility service. All new utility distribution lines shall be placed
underground.
G. Special features. Exposed storage areas, trash receptacles, machinery
installations, service areas, truck unloading areas, utility buildings and
structures and similar accessory areas should be screened from view
from adjoining streets and properties. This screening shall be in
accordance with Article XXI, Landscape Regulations.
H. Outdoor activity areas, such as pedestrian plazas or outdoor restaurant
seating, shall be designed and located to minimize conflicts with nearby
residential neighborhoods. Fencing or landscape screening shall be
used to protect adjoining residential uses from noise or other
disturbances from outdoor seating areas, which shall be consistent with
the provisions of Article XXI, Landscape Regulations. [Amended
7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
I. Emergency access. The site plan shall provide for adequate access to
the site and all buildings on the site by emergency vehicles.
J. Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be located and designed so that
illumination is directed away from adjacent properties and streets.
K. All landscaping shall be in accordance with Article XXI, Landscape
Regulations. [Amended 7-1-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
L. All structures shall adhere to the design standards of the district, as
applicable.
§ 390-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-189
1:491
§ 390-190. Construction in conformity with approved site plan
required.
§ 390-191. Time limit for approved site plans.
§ 390-192. Changes to approved site plans.
M. All structures shall provide an orderly transition to adjacent
development of a different scale.
N. The site plan shall provide outdoor common areas and associated
amenities for employees, customers, and/or residents which may
include public trash receptacles, bike racks, seating areas, recreations
areas, shade trees, bus stop turn-outs, and similar facilities where
appropriate.
A. Upon approval or conditional approval of a site plan by the Planning
Commission, the Planning Commission Chairman and the applicant
shall sign a minimum of three copies of the approved site plan. Signed
copies shall be provided to the applicant and the Building Inspector,
and one signed copy shall be made a part of the record of approval.
B. Following approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission,
construction of all improvements and other subsequent actions relating
to the activity authorized shall be in conformity with the approved site
plan.
A. A site plan approval granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for
one year from the date of approval. If construction has not commenced
by the end of this period, and if a written request for extension of the
approval has not been submitted by the applicant, the site plan
approval shall be deemed expired and no longer valid.
B. The Planning Commission may grant no more than one extension of the
site plan approval for a one-year period, upon submittal in writing by
the applicant of a request for an extension. The Planning Commission
shall grant such an extension only upon presentation of written
evidence indicating that construction of the project has been delayed by
factors beyond the reasonable control of the applicant and that
construction on the project is likely to proceed within one year.
A. Amendments to an approved site plan may be made, provided such
amendments are in conformance with this chapter, and provided such
amendments receive mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Village. Requests for approval of amendments shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of a request for an amendment to an approved site plan,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether such amendment
constitutes a major amendment to the site plan. Any change or
§ 390-189 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-192
1:492
amendment which results in any of the following shall be considered a
major amendment:
(1) Any change in the use or increase in the intensity of use of land,
buildings, or other structures.
(2) Any increase in the square footage or land coverage of buildings or
other structures.
(3) Any reduction in area or number of off-street parking spaces, aisles
or loading/unloading areas.
(4) Any reduction in street or driveway width or location.
(5) Any reduction in area of landscaped area or open space.
(6) Any reduction in number or size of plant materials, or substitution
of lesser-quality plant materials for those originally included in the
site plan.
(7) Any reduction in the level of intensity or degree of screening.
C. Major amendments to a previously approved site plan shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Planning Commission.
D. Any amendment to an approved site plan which is determined by the
Zoning Administrator as not being a major amendment may be mutually
agreed to by the applicant and the Zoning Administrator; provided,
however, that the Zoning Administrator may refer any proposed
amendment to the Planning Commission at his discretion, regardless of
whether such amendment is considered to be a major amendment.
E. Approved amendments to site plans shall be recorded on a revised copy
of the site plan meeting the requirements of § 390-187 and kept in the
office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
notify the Building Inspector and any other appropriate agencies or
individuals of the approved changes.
§ 390-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-192
1:493

ARTICLE XXV
Special Land Uses
§ 390-193. Purpose.
This article describes procedures and standards for approval of special land
uses. These uses, because of their unique characteristics, require special
consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the
community as a whole. The regulations and standards herein are designed
to allow reasonable uses of land while maintaining adequate provisions for
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 390-194. Application procedures.
§ 390-195. Notification and hearing; home occupations as special
land uses.
A. Application for approval of a special land use shall be made by
submittal of the following to the Zoning Administrator:
(1) Twelve copies of the site plan containing all of the information
required by Article XXIV, provided that the Zoning Administrator
may waive any of the submittal requirements contained in Article
XXIV which he deems not necessary or inapplicable.
(2) A legal description, either by metes and bounds or by subdivision
lot and block, and a street address.
(3) A completed application on a form provided by the Village.
(4) Payment of an application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, as
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council.
B. In cases where a public hearing on the special land use is required, the
application shall be submitted at least 21 days prior to the desired
public hearing date.
A. Procedure for special land uses:
(1) Upon receipt of an application for approval of a special land use,
the Zoning Administrator shall cause notice to be given, in
accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act. The notice shall:
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
(a) Describe the nature of the special land use request;
(b) Describe the property which is the subject of the special land
use request, by both legal description and street address;
(c) State when and where a public hearing on the special land use
request will be held; and
§ 390-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-195
1:495
(d) State when and where written comments will be received
concerning the special land use request.
(2) Following notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the special land use request, and the Planning
Commission shall thereafter be responsible for consideration and
action on the special use request, in accordance with the standards
for approval contained in this article.
B. Procedure for home occupation.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for approval of a home occupation as
a special use, the Zoning Administrator shall cause notice to be
given, in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act. This notice
shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the home occupation special use
request;
(b) Describe the property which is the subject of the home
occupation special use request, by both legal description and
street address;
(c) State that a public hearing before the Planning Commission
may be requested in writing by the applicant or a property
owner or occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the
property being considered for the home occupation special
use, within 10 days of the notice date;
(d) State when and where the home occupation special use
request will be considered; and
(e) State when and where written comments will be received
concerning the special land use request.
(2) If a written request for a public hearing is received within 10 days
of the date of notice by the applicant or by a property owner or
occupant of a structure located within 300 feet for the property
being considered for the home occupation, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause notice of a public hearing to be given, in
accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act. The notice shall contain
all of the information required by § 390-195A(1)(a) through (d).
above.
(3) Following notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the home occupation special use request, and the
Planning Commission shall thereafter be responsible for
consideration and action on the home occupation special use
request, in accordance with that standards contained in this article.
(4) If written request for a public hearing is not received within such
ten-day period, the Zoning Administrator shall thereafter be
responsible for consideration and action on the home occupation
§ 390-195 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-195
1:496
§ 390-196. Standards for approval; conditions of approval.
special use request, in accordance with the standards for approval
contained in this article; provided, however, that the Zoning
Administrator may, at his discretion, decline to take action
concerning the home occupation special use request, and instead,
initiate a public hearing and refer the home occupation special use
request to the Planning Commission for a hearing and action as
provided herein.
A. The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator, as applicable,
may approve, approve with conditions or deny the special land use
request, based upon review and consideration of materials submitted
with the application and comments received at the public hearing, if
one is held. The Commission or Zoning Administrator shall approve, or
approve with conditions, a special land use request only upon a finding
that all of the following standards for approval are complied with:
(1) That the use is designed and constructed, and will be operated and
maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance
with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and
that such use will not change the essential character of the area in
which it is proposed.
(2) The use is, or will be, served adequately by public services and
facilities, including, but not limited to streets, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer
facilities and schools.
(3) The use does not involve activities, processes, materials and
equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any
persons, property or the general welfare by reason of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
(4) The site plan proposed for such use demonstrates compliance with
the special land use specific requirements contained in § 390-199
of this article.
B. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, as applicable, may
impose reasonable conditions in conjunction with approval of a special
land use which are deemed necessary to 1) insure that public services
and facilities will be capable of accommodating increased service and
facility loads caused by the proposed special land use, 2) protect the
natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, 3)
insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and 4) promote the use
of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions
imposed shall comply with the Zoning Enabling Act.
C. The decision of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, as
applicable, shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions
specifying the basis of the decision and any conditions imposed. The
§ 390-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-196
1:497
§ 390-197. Approval term and expiration.
§ 390-198. Revocation of special land use approval.
The Planning Commission may revoke any special land use approval, or
take any other action allowed by law, if the applicant fails to comply with
any of the applicable requirements in this article, any conditions placed on
the original approval by the Planning Commission, or any other applicable
provisions of this chapter. Prior to revoking a special land use approval, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing and give notice of such
hearing in accordance with § 390-195.
§ 390-199. Special land use specific requirements.
decision and statement of conclusions, including conditions imposed
on any approval, shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the
Planning Commission or as part of an official record.
A. A special land use approval granted pursuant to this article shall be
valid for one year from the date of approval, unless approval is revoked
as provided in § 390-198, or the special land use has been initiated or
construction necessary for such use has been initiated and is
proceeding meaningfully toward completion, in which case the
approval shall remain valid indefinitely, unless the use is abandoned or
discontinued for six consecutive months.
B. If, by the end of this one-year period, the special land use has not been
initiated or the construction necessary for such use has not been
initiated or, if construction has been initiated, it is not proceeding
meaningfully toward completion, then the special land use approval
shall be deemed expired and no longer valid.
C. A special land use approval, including conditions imposed, is attached
to and shall run with the land for which the approval is granted, and
shall be binding upon subsequent owners and all occupants of the
subject land.
D. Applications for reapproval of an expired special land use approval shall
be considered in the same manner as the original approval in
accordance with the procedures in this article.
A. The special land uses for which specific requirements are provided are
as follows: [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320; 1-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 352]
(1) Automobile service stations.
(2) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drivethrough
facilities.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
§ 390-196 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:498
(4) Car washes, automatic or self-service.
(5) Electric substations and gas regulator stations.
(6) Foster care group homes.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Gasoline sales.
(9) Group day-care homes.
(10) Hotels, motels.
(11) Indoor commercial recreation establishments.
(12) Marinas.
(13) Restaurants, including drive-through facilities.
(14) Restaurants, not including drive-through facilities.
(15) Retail businesses, a portion of which are conducted in the open air.
(15.1) Short term rentals.
(16) Tool and die machinery shops.
(17) Two-family dwellings.
(18) Vehicle repair or storage establishments.
(19) Veterinary offices.
(20) Wholesale establishments and warehouses which sell packaged or
repackaged products at retail on the premises.
(21) Assembly operations consisting only of limited assembly, fastening,
and packaging or repackaging of previously manufactured
components.
(22) Parking lots.
(23) Adult day-care facilities.
(24) (Reserved)
(25) Community support facility.
B. The following requirements shall apply to any special land use
approved after the effective date of this chapter. Uses lawfully in
existence on the effective date of this chapter shall not be considered
nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures by reason of
noncompliance with the following requirements; provided, however,
that the Planning Commission may, as a condition of approval of any
special land use request for expansion or modification of such an
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:499
existing use, require reasonable measures to be taken to eliminate
existing noncompliance with these requirements.
(1) Automobile service stations.
(a) There shall be a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet and
minimum lot width of 100 feet.
(b) Pump islands shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any public
right-of-way of lot line.
(c) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a solid fence or wall six feet in
height shall be erected along the common lot line. Such fence
or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
(d) All repair work shall be conducted completely within an
enclosed building.
(e) Any materials or products stored outside and not for sale shall
be completely enclosed by a solid fence, wall or landscape
screen approved by the Planning Commission as part of the
special land use approval. Such fence, wall or landscape shall
be continuously maintained in good condition.
(f) In the event that an automobile service station use has been
abandoned or terminated for a period of more than one year,
all underground gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from
the premises.
(2) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drivethrough
facilities.
(a) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street. A one-way-in/one-way-out driveway shall be
counted as a single ingress/egress driveway.
(b) Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through facility shall
be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the
street. A minimum of five stacking spaces (including one space
at the drive-through facility) per each drive-through facility
station shall be provided in all cases. Spaces in addition to the
minimum required shall be provided if determined by the
Planning Commission to be necessary to ensure that traffic
does not extend into the street. Stacking shall be planned so as
to minimize conflicts with entering and exiting traffic,
pedestrians and parking areas.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 11-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 317]
(a) A bed-and-breakfast establishment shall only be permitted in a
single-family detached dwelling which shall be owner occupied
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:500
at all times. During temporary absences (up to 14 days in a
calendar year) the owner's designee must be on the premises.
(b) A bed-and-breakfast establishment shall only be permitted on
the following major streets in the Village: Savidge Street, West
Exchange Street, and Liberty Street.
(c) The bed-and-breakfast shall not alter the residential character
of the building or structure. The impact of the bed-andbreakfast
shall be no greater than that of a private home with
house guests.
(d) The rooms utilized for the bed-and-breakfast shall be a part of
the principal residential use and not specifically constructed
for rental purposes. Additions to the home to allow expansion
of the bed-and-breakfast are not permitted. The residence shall
not have or be converted to more rental rooms than the
number of bedrooms which exist at the time of enactment of
this article.
(e) The residential character of the dwelling shall be preserved,
and no structural alterations, construction features, or site
features of a nonresidential nature shall be permitted. No
accessory building shall be used for bed-and-breakfast
activities. The Planning Commission may permit the use of an
existing carriage house as a guest sleeping area for a bed-andbreakfast.
(f) The total number of bedrooms rented to guests shall not
exceed four.
(g) Meals may be served to overnight guests only and shall not be
served to the public at large. No cooking facilities are allowed
in individual rooms.
(h) No receptions, private parties, conferences, or other such
activities shall be permitted. No conference/meeting rooms
shall be permitted.
(i) Each sleeping room shall have a separate smoke detector
alarm. There shall be a fire extinguisher in proper working
order on every floor. There shall be at least two exits to the
outdoors from the premises.
(j) Lavatories and bathing facilities shall be provided for all
registered guests at a ratio of not less than one bathroom per
two guest bedrooms.
(k) The maximum length of stay for any guests of the bed-andbreakfast
operation shall be 14 consecutive days and not more
than 30 days in any one year.
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:501
(l) All bed-and-breakfast operations shall maintain a guest
register including name, address, phone number, and vehicle
license number, and indicating the dates of arrival and
departure, which shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning
Administrator or Code Official during reasonable hours.
(m) Exterior refuse storage facilities beyond what might normally
be expected for a single-family detached dwelling shall be
prohibited.
(n) Accessory retail and service uses, including but not limited to
gift shops, antique shops, restaurants, and bakeries shall be
prohibited unless the bed-and-breakfast establishment is
located in a commercial district where such uses are
permitted. Additional parking shall be provided for such
additional uses as required in § 390-183.
(o) Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of two
spaces for the residence plus one space for each permitted
guest room. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard. No
parking area shall be lighted except for a residential porch
light as regulated in § 390-35. A landscape buffer shall
separate the parking area from any adjacent residentially
zoned or used property.
(p) A complete floor plan and site plan, including off-street
parking, must be provided for review and approval of the
Planning Commission.
(q) Rooms utilized for guest sleeping shall not exceed two
occupants per room, not including children under the age of
12. Each room for guest sleeping shall contain at least 100 net
square feet of room size.
(r) Each dwelling utilized as a bed-and-breakfast establishment
shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State
Construction Code, Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing
Code, Mechanical Code, Property Maintenance Code, and Fire
Prevention Code enforced by the Village. The bed-andbreakfast
establishment shall secure all applicable state and
local permits or certifications.
(s) All signs for the bed-and-breakfast establishment shall comply
with the regulations in Article XXII of this chapter.
(t) Any property to be used for a bed-and-breakfast establishment
shall be suitable for transient lodging facilities. In this
connection, a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 271, Rental Units, Registration of, of
the Code of the Village of Spring Lake, and shall be subject to
periodic registrations and inspections as provided in said code.
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:502
(4) Car washes, automatic or self-service.
(a) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street. A one-way-in/one-way-out access shall be
counted as a single ingress/egress driveway. Sufficient
stacking capacity shall be provided to ensure that traffic does
not extend into the street. Self-service car washes shall provide
a minimum of four stacking spaces (including one in the wash
stall) per each washing stall. Automatic washes shall provide a
minimum of 15 stacking spaces (including two in the washing
facility). Spaces in addition to the minimum required shall be
provided if determined by the Planning Commission to be
necessary to ensure that traffic does not extend into the street.
Stacking shall be planned so as to minimize conflicts with
entering and exiting traffic, pedestrians and parking areas.
(b) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a solid fence or wall six feet in
height shall be erected along the common lot line. Such fence
or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
(5) Electric substations and gas regulator stations.
(a) Such facilities shall not be located on any lot which is closer
than 150 feet to any lot in a residential zoning district or any
lot occupied by a residential use.
(b) The facilities shall be completely enclosed by a fence having a
minimum height of eight feet above grade.
(c) Electric or gas regulator equipment and apparatus shall be set
back a minimum of 30 feet from all lot lines.
(6) Foster-care group homes.
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a quantity
sufficient to accommodate employees of the foster-care group
home.
(b) The home and property shall be maintained in a manner
consistent with the visible characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(7) Funeral homes.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be one acre, and minimum lot width
shall be 150 feet.
(b) An off-street vehicle assembly area shall be provided to be used
in support of funeral procession activities. This area shall be in
addition to the required off-street parking and its related
maneuvering area.
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:503
(c) A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main
building.
(d) The use shall not be located on a street that is, in the judgment
of the Planning Commission, primarily a residential street.
(8) Gasoline sales.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet and minimum lot
width shall be 100 feet.
(b) Pump islands shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any public
right-of-way or lot line.
(c) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a solid fence or wall six feet in
height shall be erected along the common lot line. Such fence
or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
(d) In the event that the use of the property for sales of gasoline
has been abandoned or terminated for a period of more than
one year, all underground gasoline storage tanks shall be
removed from the premises.
(9) Group day-care homes. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 320]
(a) The home and property shall be maintained in a manner
consistent with the visible characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(b) A dropoff/pickup area shall be provided for vehicles off the
public street. Such area shall be arranged so as to allow
entrance to the public street without backing of vehicles and so
as to minimize conflicts between pedestrians and traffic.
(10) Hotels, motels.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be one acre and minimum lot width
shall be 150 feet.
(b) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use or any land
in the P Zoning District, a dense, evergreen vegetative buffer
not less than six feet in height at time of planting shall be
erected along the common lot line. Such buffer shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
(11) Indoor commercial recreation establishments.
(a) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street. A one-way-in/one-way-out access shall be
counted as a single ingress/egress driveway.
(12) Marinas.
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:504
(a) There shall be no aboveground storage of gasoline, fuel oil or
other flammable liquids or gases.
(b) No building, structure, dock or parking area which is part of a
marina shall be located closer than 35 feet to any lot in the
SFR-A or SFR-B Zoning District.
(c) Required parking facilities shall not be used for storage of
boats or trailers for periods exceeding 72 hours, from June 1 to
September 10.
(13) Restaurants, including drive-through facilities.
(a) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street. A one-way-in/one-way-out access shall be
counted as a single ingress/egress driveway.
(b) Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through facility shall
be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the
public street. A minimum of 10 stacking spaces shall be
provided for the drive-through facility. Spaces in addition to
the minimum required shall be provided if determined by the
Planning Commission to be necessary to ensure that traffic
does not extend into the street. Stacking shall be planned so as
to minimize conflicts with entering and exiting traffic,
pedestrians and parking spaces.
(c) A minimum of three parking spaces shall be placed beyond the
pickup window to accommodate vehicles waiting for delivery of
orders.
(d) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a dense evergreen vegetative
buffer not less than six feet in height at the time of planting
shall be installed along the common lot line. The buffer shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
(14) Restaurants, not including drive-through facilities.
(a) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street. A one-way-in/one-way-out access shall be
counted as a single ingress/egress driveway.
(15) Retail businesses, a portion of which is conducted in the open air.
(a) Any materials or products stored or displayed in the open air
shall not extend into any required yard or occupy any required
parking or maneuvering areas for vehicles.
(b) Any materials or products stored outside and not for sale shall
be completely enclosed by a decorative fence, wall or
landscaped screen approved by the Planning Commission as
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:505
part of the special land use approval. Such fence, wall or
screen shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
(c) Lighting of outdoor display areas shall be shielded so as to
deflect light away from any residential use or residential
zoning district and shall not be placed so as to interfere with
vision of drivers on adjoining streets.
(15.1) Short term rentals: [Added 1-21-2019 by Ord. No. 352]
(a) If the subject lot does not meet the district minimum lot area or
has other dimensional nonconformities, the Planning
Commission may deny approval, or it may condition approval
on measures that mitigate potential adverse effects of
operating a short-term rental on the lot.
(b) Off-street parking shall comply with these requirements in
addition to any other requirements for the applicable zoning
district in question.
[1] A minimum of two off-street parking spaces located on the
subject property shall be provided per unit (up to six
occupants), plus one space for every three occupants over
six, based on approved occupancy for the dwelling unit.
[2] Any proposed expanded parking area must be shown on
the site plan and will be subject to review by the Planning
Commission and Zoning Administrator. Parking on the
grass is prohibited.
(c) Outdoor areas intended for the congregating of guests (e.g.,
porches, decks, pools and pool decks, gazebos, fire pits, etc)
must meet the following requirements, in addition to other
requirements established by this subsection.
[1] Fire pits shall meet the requirements of the fire code and
any other applicable codes.
[2] Patios and decks must be a minimum of three feet from any
property line.
[3] The planning commission may require an outdoor
congregating area to be fenced in or landscaped in order
to help buffer the short-term rental from neighboring
properties. The Village shall consider lot sizes in the area
and of the short-term rental, surrounding land uses,
topography, and other considerations deemed relevant by
the Village.
(d) The number of overnight guests in a short-term rental shall be
based on occupancy limits established by the International
Property Maintenance Code. No guest may sleep on couches,
the floor, in tents, or in trailers on the lot.
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:506
(e) The applicant shall submit a floorplan of the dwelling unit and
a site plan of the property drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8
inch equal one foot.
(f) No separate cooking facilities shall be allowed in sleeping
rooms.
(16) Tool and die machinery shops.
(a) All operations pertaining to tool and die machinery shops shall
be conducted completely within an enclosed building and
operated so as to keep noise from the operation from being
audible outside the building.
(b) Loading docks or other large openings in the building shall not
be located on a side abutting a residential use or zoning
district.
(c) Access to such facilities shall be located so as to:
[1] Not unduly adversely affect any adjacent residential areas;
and
[2] Not be located on a street serving primarily residential
areas.
(d) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a dense, evergreen vegetative
buffer not less than six feet in height at time of planting shall
be installed. Such buffer shall be continuously maintained in
good condition.
(17) Two-family dwellings.
(a) No special land use approval shall be granted by the Planning
Commission which results in a lot occupied by a two-family
dwelling being located closer than 250 feet to another lot
occupied by a two-family dwelling which is either located in a
zoning district in which two-family dwellings are a special land
use or which has been granted special land use approval.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with an enclosed garage
at least 10 feet by 20 feet in dimensions.
(18) Vehicle repair or storage establishments.
(a) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a solid fence or wall six feet in
height shall be erected along the common lot line. Such fence
or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
(b) All repair work shall be conducted completely within an
enclosed building.
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:507
(c) Any materials or products stored outside and not for sale shall
be completely enclosed by a solid fence, wall or landscape
screen approved by the Planning Commission as part of the
special land use approval. The fence, wall or screen shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
(19) Veterinary offices.
(a) Boarding of animals shall not be permitted except for brief
periods deemed necessary for medical observation or
treatment.
(b) Buildings in which animals are treated shall not be located
nearer than 50 feet to any adjacent dwelling. No outdoor
animal runs shall be permitted.
(c) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the P Zoning District, a solid fence or wall six feet in
height or a dense evergreen vegetative buffer not less than six
feet in height at time of planting shall be erected and
maintained along any common lot line. The buffer shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
(20) Wholesale establishments and warehouses.
(a) The architectural features of the facility housing the special
use shall conform with the character of buildings on adjoining
property.
(b) All operations pertaining to wholesale and warehouse facilities
shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building and
operated so as to keep noise from the operation inaudible
outside of the building. Materials may be moved from one
building to another on site, but no work may be conducted in
the open air.
(c) Loading docks or other large openings in the building shall not
be located on a side abutting a residential zoning district or
use.
(d) Access to such facilities shall be located so as to:
[1] Not unduly adversely affect any adjacent residential areas;
and
[2] Not be located on a street serving primarily residential
areas.
(e) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the Public, Semi-Public Zoning District, a dense
evergreen vegetative buffer not less than six feet in height at
the time of planting shall be installed along any common lot
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:508
line. The buffer shall be continuously maintained in good
condition.
(f) If a portion of the retail business is conducted in the open air,
the requirements of § 390-199B(15) shall be complied with at
all times.
(21) Assembly operations consisting only of limited assembly, fastening
and packaging or repackaging of previously manufactured
components.
(a) The architectural features of the facility housing the special
use shall conform with the character of buildings on adjoining
property.
(b) All operations pertaining to limited assembly, fastening and
packaging shall be conducted completely within an enclosed
building and operated so as to keep noise from the operation
inaudible outside of the building. Materials may be moved from
one building to another on site, but no work may be conducted
in the open air.
(c) Loading docks or other large openings in the building shall not
be located on a side abutting a residential zoning district or
use.
(d) Access to such facilities shall be located so as to:
[1] Not unduly adversely affect any adjacent residential areas;
and
[2] Not be located on a street serving primarily residential
areas.
(e) Where adjoining a residential zoning district or use, or any
land in the Public, Semi-Public Zoning District, a dense
evergreen vegetative buffer not less than six feet in height at
the time of planting shall be installed along any common lot
line. The buffer shall be continuously maintained in good
condition.
(f) Only limited assembly of previously manufactured components
is permitted. There shall be no process employed to transform
raw materials into components for assembly.
(22) Parking lots.
(a) All parking facilities shall comply with the parking facility
design requirements contained in § 390-181.
(23) Adult day-care facilities. [Amended 6-26-2009 by Ord. No. 313;
8-19-2013 by Ord. No. 334]
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:509
(a) For purposes of this section "participant" is defined as the
adult who is being supervised at the facility.
(b) The facility must be operated by a church or 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization as a not-for-profit operation.
(c) The applicant shall indicate the number of anticipated
participants and illustrate how they will be able to safely
accommodate them on site. Input or information from the Fire
Chief or other relevant reviewing agency is recommended.
(d) Hours of operation shall be limited to a period beginning at
6:00 a.m. and concluding at 11:00 p.m. seven days per week.
[1] Additional hours may be permitted from time to time, but
must be approved in advance by the Zoning Administrator,
or at their discretion, the Planning Commission.
(e) The facility is required to be operated in a single-family
dwelling, or a structure built to resemble a single-family
dwelling similar in style to a typical Village home with a homelike
atmosphere for the participants.
[1] The facility does not need to be owner occupied.
[2] The facility shall meet all ADA accessibility standards.
[3] All entrances used by participants must be covered by an
awning, roof or other building feature to protect
participants from the elements. Such awning or covering
may encroach into the side or front setback up to five feet,
but no closer than 10 feet to the property line. Installation
of such awning or covering shall be subject to the approval
of the Zoning Administrator.
[4] Building setback requirements shall be as required in the
SFR-A District (§ 390-156, Schedule of District
Regulations).
(f) The home and property shall be maintained in a manner
consistent with the visible characteristics of the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
(g) The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
(h) Outdoor recreation area shall be fenced.
(i) A dropoff/pickup area shall be provided for vehicles off the
public street. Such area shall be arranged so as to allow
entrance to the public street without backing of vehicles and so
as to minimize conflicts between pedestrians and traffic.
(j) Off-street parking shall be provided in the side or rear yard as
follows:
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:510
[1] One parking space for each regular employee on the
largest shift; plus
[2] One parking space for each vehicle operated by the
facility; plus
[3] One parking space for every 10 participants or a fraction
thereof.
[4] Parking areas shall be set back five feet from all property
lines, and the setback area shall be landscaped to buffer
adjacent properties from noise and headlights.
(k) All applicants must demonstrate that there will be adequately
trained personnel to staff or manage the facility.
(l) The facility may have one nonilluminated wall sign not
exceeding 20 square feet in area on the building wall facing the
public street. One additional sign which meets the same
requirements may be permitted over a major building entrance
facing the parking lot.
(m) Site lighting shall be of a residential nature, size, scale or
intensity, and shall be confined to the property on which the
facility is located.
(n) Unless otherwise stated in this article, all building additions,
accessory buildings and major site changes require an
amendment to the special use permit and site plan approval
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
(o) Such facility shall meet the requirements of the Veterans'
Administration for adult day-care facilities.
(24) Community support facility. [Added 2-1-2010 by Ord. No. 318]
(a) The facility must be operated by a church or 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization as a not-for-profit operation. The facility
must be located on property that has been removed from the
property tax rolls prior to the submission of the special use
application. The office(s) of the organization may be in the
facility.
(b) Any temporary transitional housing shall be subject to the
following:
[1] The number of residents is limited to one family per
dwelling unit.
[2] Each dwelling unit may be occupied by the same family for
no longer than six months in a twelve-month period.
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:511
[3] The organization shall provide details of their residency
requirements to the Planning Commission as part of the
special use permit application.
(c) The facility is required to be operated in a single-family
dwelling, or a structure built to resemble a single-family
dwelling, similar in style to a typical Village home.
[1] Building setback and height shall be as required in the
SFR-A District (§ 390-156, Schedule of District
Regulations).
[2] There may be no more than one principal structure per
parcel.
(d) The home(s) and property shall be maintained in a manner
consistent with the visible characteristics of the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
(e) The housing units need not be owner occupied.
(f) Food and clothing distribution and similar services may occur
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
(g) Delivery of food, clothing or other commodities to the facility
by semitrailer trucks is prohibited.
(h) Off-street parking shall be provided in the side or rear yard as
follows:
[1] One parking space for each regular employee or volunteer
on the largest shift; plus
[2] One parking space for each vehicle operated by the
facility; plus
[3] One parking space for every dwelling unit; plus
[4] Five spaces for the food and clothing distribution center or
other nonresidential use;
[5] Existing parking spaces in a garage or driveway may count
toward the total number of spaces required;
[6] Parking areas shall be set back five feet from all property
lines and the setback area shall be landscaped to buffer
adjacent properties from noise and headlights;
(i) The applicant shall submit a sign plan for the facility. The
Planning Commission shall review the sign plan based on the
size and location of the facility and the proximity of the facility
to residentially zoned or used properties. The Planning
Commission may limit the signage to less than what is
§ 390-199 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-199
1:512
permitted in the P Public, Semi-Public Zoning District if they
find that the proposed signs would have a negative impact on
the surrounding neighborhood.
(j) Site lighting shall be of a residential nature, size, scale and
intensity, and shall be confined to the property on which the
facility is located.
(k) Unless otherwise stated in this article, all building additions,
accessory buildings, major site changes or changes in use
require an amendment to the special use permit and site plan
approval per the requirements of this chapter.
(l) Any community support facility providing transitional housing
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 271, Rental Units,
Registration of, of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake.
§ 390-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-199
1:513

ARTICLE XXVI
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 390-200. Creation and membership.
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals, herein referred to as
the "Board of Appeals," the membership, powers and duties of which are
prescribed in this article.
§ 390-201. Composition.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the Village
Council. One member of the Village Council shall be appointed a member
of the Board of Appeals. In addition, not more than two alternate members
may be appointed by the Village Council. Each member and each alternate
member shall serve a term of three years from the effective date of his
or her appointment; provided, regular members of the Board of Appeals
serving in such position on the effective date of this chapter may continue
their term and any alternates appointed in 1989 shall be appointed one
for a term of two years, and one for a term of three years. The alternate
members of the Board of Appeals may be called as specified herein, to sit
as regular members of the Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular
member, if a regular member is absent from or unable to attend two or
more consecutive meetings of the Board of Appeals, or for a period of
more than 30 consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called
to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a
decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons
of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been called shall serve
in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall
have the same voting rights as a regular member of the Board of Appeals.
The decision of whether an alternate member shall sit in the absence of
a regular member shall be determined by the Chairman of the Board of
Appeals, and, if there is no Chairman, by a majority of the Board of Appeals'
members then in attendance at a duly called meeting of the same, and the
records maintained by the Clerk of the Board of Appeals shall reflect the
attendance and participation of any such alternate member.
§ 390-202. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Appeals shall have all jurisdiction and powers granted by the
Zoning Enabling Act, all jurisdiction and powers prescribed in other articles
of this chapter and the following specific jurisdiction and powers:
A. To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements,
permit, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector,
Zoning Administrator, or any other Village official in enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, permit,
decision or determination as in the Board's opinion ought to be made in
§ 390-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-202
1:515
§ 390-203. Granting of variances.
No variance in the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it is found from the
evidence that all of the following conditions exist:
§ 390-204. Application and hearing procedures.
the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
B. To hear and decide matters referred to the Board of Appeals or upon
which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under this chapter; and
C. If there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter in passing on an appeal, to
vary or modify any of the rules or provisions of this chapter relating to
the construction, or structural changes in, equipment, or alterations of
buildings or structures, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
A. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property in question which are different from
other properties in the same zoning district or result from conditions
which do not exist throughout the Village of Spring Lake.
B. That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right and that the need for such variance was not
created by the applicant. The possibility of increased financial return
shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance.
C. That the granting of such variance will not be of substantial detriment
to adjacent property or materially impair the intent and purposes of this
chapter or the public interest.
A. The following materials shall be filed with the Building Inspector before
consideration of an appeal for variance or ruling by the Zoning Board of
Appeals:
(1) A completed application form signed by the applicant or his/her
agent. Applicants other than the owner of the property must submit
evidence that the owner of the property is aware and approves of
the application.
(2) Payment of a fee which shall be established by resolution of the
Village Council, and which shall be nonrefundable.
(3) A legal description of the property involved in the request.
(4) A site plan, drawn to scale, sufficient to show the nature and extent
of the requested variance.
§ 390-202 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-204
1:516
§ 390-205. Conditions on variance appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions upon an affirmative
decision as provided in the Zoning Enabling Act.
§ 390-206. Official record; findings of fact.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare an official record for all appeals
and shall base its decision on this record. The official record shall include
the following:
§ 390-207. Decisions of Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. The Building Inspector shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
of the application materials and other evidence relevant to the
requested appeal. The Building Inspector shall take the actions
necessary to place the appeal on the agenda of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
C. Notice of the appeal shall be made in accordance with the procedures
of the Zoning Enabling Act.
D. Appellants for variances or other actions by the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be required to appear before the Board or be represented
by a representative who can speak for and make commitments on
behalf of the applicant.
E. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision,
or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in
favor of the applicant a matter upon which the Board of Appeals is
required to pass under a provision of this chapter, or to effect a
variation from the requirements of this chapter.
A. The relevant administrative records and orders issued relating to the
appeal.
B. The notice of the appeal.
C. Such documents, exhibits, photographs or written reports as may be
submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for its consideration.
D. The resolution of the Zoning Board of Appeals stating the conclusions of
the Board relative to the appeal, the basis for the decision and any
conditions imposed.
A. The decision and orders of the Zoning Board of Appeals in disposing of
the appeal shall be entered in the official record after they have been
signed by the Chairman and after written notice of the disposition has
been served either in person or by mail, upon the parties to the appeal,
the Village Building Inspector and the Village Clerk. The Chairman shall
§ 390-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-207
1:517
§ 390-208. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Inspector
certifies to the Board of Appeals after notice of appeal shall have been
filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may, on due
cause shown, be granted by the Board of Appeals or by the Circuit Court on
application, after notice to the Building Inspector.
§ 390-209. Appeal of decisions.
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final, provided that the
Board may, on its own motion or at the request of any interested party, at
any time subsequent to a decision on an appeal, grant a rehearing. In such
case, notice of the rehearing shall be given in accordance with the Zoning
Enabling Act. Any person having an interest affected by a final decision on
the appeal shall have the right of appeal to the Circuit Court as provided by
the Zoning Enabling Act.
§ 390-210. Limitations on powers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to hear appeals
from decisions of the Village Council or Planning Commission concerning
special land uses or planned unit developments.
sign the necessary orders to effectuate the decision within 10 days after
the Zoning Board of Appeals reaches its final decision.
B. The decision and orders of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall become
effective five days after the decision and orders are entered on the
official record unless the Board shall find immediate effect is necessary
to preserve property or personal rights and shall so certify on the
record.
C. A copy of the official record of the appeal shall be made available to the
parties to any appeal upon request and after payment of a reasonable
fee, as set by the Village Council, sufficient to recover the costs of
duplicating such material.
D. If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance to the appellant, such
variance shall be exercised (construction commenced and actively
continued) within six months from the date of such action, unless more
time is specifically granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 390-207 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-210
1:518
ARTICLE XXVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 390-211. Zoning Administrator.
§ 390-212. Amendments to provisions.
§ 390-213. Amendment procedure.
After initiation, amendments to this chapter shall be considered as provided
in the Zoning Enabling Act.
§ 390-214. Certificate of zoning compliance.
A. Where the provisions of this chapter authorize or direct the Zoning
Administrator to perform any act or carry out any function, such act or
function may also be carried out by a deputy or deputies designated by
the Zoning Administrator.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to grant certificates of
zoning compliance and to make inspections of premises necessary to
carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter, and to otherwise
carry out the duties assigned herein.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of
land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other
action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with, or prevent
violations of its provisions.
A. All applications for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the first
consideration by the Village Planning Commission.
B. Requests for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in
writing by the owner of the property requested for rezoning, or his
agent, the Planning Commission or the Village Council. In the case of an
amendment requested by the owner of the property requested for
rezoning, or his agent or designated representative, the request shall
include the following:
(1) The name and address of the person making the request and of all
persons having a legal or equitable interest in any land which is
requested to be rezoned;
(2) The nature of, reason for and effect of the requested amendment;
(3) If the requested amendment would require a change in the Zoning
Map, a full dimensioned map showing the land which would be
affected by the requested amendment, a legal description of such
land and the present zoning district of such land.
§ 390-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-214
1:519
§ 390-215. Performance guarantee.
As a condition of approval of a site plan, special land use or planned unit
development, the Planning Commission, or, in the case of a planned unit
development, the Council may require a bond or other financial guarantee
of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or components
of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and of users or
inhabitants of the proposed development. Such features or components,
hereafter referred to as "improvements," may include but shall not be
limited to roadways, curbs, landscaping, fences, walls, screens, lighting,
drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, utilities and similar items.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection,
alteration, expansion, moving or repair of any building or other
structure until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued
therefor. Issuance of such a certificate shall indicate that the use and
plans for which the permit is requested comply with this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of
any building, structure or premises, or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in
its use or structure, as permitted under the terms of this chapter, until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued hereunder by
the Zoning Administrator. The certificate shall state that the building,
structure, and lot and use thereof, conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of
zoning compliance.
D. Certificates of zoning compliance authorize only the use, arrangement
and construction set forth in the application and any appended plans,
and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter, and is punishable as provided by § 390-216.
Any change in approved plans shall occur only as provided for in this
chapter and shall require the issuance of an amended certificate of
zoning compliance.
A. Performance guarantees shall be processed in the following manner.
(1) Prior to the filing of a final site plan, a preapplication conference
may be held to provide an opportunity to the Village staff to inform
the applicant of the Village's requirements regarding performance
guarantees.
(2) Upon filing of the final site plan, the applicant shall prepare an
itemized cost estimate of the required improvements, which shall
then be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator. The amount of the
performance guarantee shall be 100% of the cost of installing the
§ 390-214 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-215
1:520
§ 390-216. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
required improvements, plus the cost of necessary engineering and
a reasonable amount for contingencies.
(3) The required performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash
deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety
bond acceptable to the Village.
(4) Upon receipt of the required performance guarantee, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for the
subject development or activity.
(5) The Zoning Administrator, upon written request of the obligor, shall
rebate portions of the performance guarantee upon determination
that the improvements for which the rebate has been requested
have been satisfactorily completed. The portion of the performance
guarantee to be rebated shall be in the same amount as stated in
the itemized cost estimate for the applicable improvement.
(6) When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall send written notice to the Village Clerk of completion
of said improvements.
(a) Thereupon, the Zoning Administrator shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall recommend to the Council approval,
partial approval, or rejection of the improvements with a
statement of the reasons for any rejections. If partial approval
is recommended, the cost of the improvement rejected shall be
set forth.
(b) The Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
obligor in writing of the action of the Council within 30 days
after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of
the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the
obligor shall be released from liability pursuant to relevant
portions of the performance guarantee, except for that portion
sufficient to secure completion of the improvements not yet
approved.
(7) A record of authorized performance guarantees shall be
maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the general
penalty in § 1-2 of the Code of the Village of Spring Lake.140
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-216
1:521
§ 390-217. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent, employee, or member of the Village Council, Planning
Commission or Board of Appeals shall be personally liable for any damage
which may accrue to any person or property as the result of any act,
decision or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of
his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.
§ 390-218. Fees.
The Village Council shall periodically establish by resolution a zoning fee
schedule, which shall specify those fees applicable to all permits,
certificates, approvals, applications or appeals required by this chapter. All
fees shall be paid to the Zoning Administrator, who shall promptly remit the
same to the Village Treasurer. The fee schedule shall be posted on public
display in the Village Hall and may be changed only by resolution of the
Village Council. No permit, certificate, approval, application or appeal shall
be issued or considered unless and until the fees therefor have been paid in
(1) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or when a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
(2) The owner of record or tenant of any building, structure, premises,
or part thereof, and any agent or person who commits, participates
in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty
of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
(3) The imposition of any fine, or jail sentence, or both, shall not
exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted or
any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent
to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the
provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue and
serve appearance tickets on any person with respect to any violation of
this chapter when there is reasonable cause to believe that the person
has committed such an offense. The Village, through its duly authorized
attorney, may prosecute in a criminal proceeding any violation of this
chapter. In addition, the Village, acting through its duly authorized
attorney, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove
any violation of this chapter.
C. Rights and remedies. The rights and remedies provided herein are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
§ 390-216 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-218
1:522
full, and payment of the required fee shall be a condition precedent to the
validity of any permit, certificate or approval.
§ 390-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-218
1:523

ARTICLE XXVIII
Wireless Communications Towers and Antennas
§ 390-219. Background.
§ 390-220. Purpose and goals.
A. The Village has received or expects to receive requests to site wireless
communications towers and antennas within its boundaries.
B. The Village finds that it is in the public interest to permit the siting of
wireless communications towers and antennas within its boundaries.
C. It is the Village's intent to permit the siting of wireless communications
towers and antennas within its boundaries.
D. It is the Village's intent to protect and promote the public health, safety
and welfare by regulating the siting of wireless communications towers
and antennas within its boundaries.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish several guidelines for siting
wireless communications towers and antennas. This article's goals are
to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers and antennas in nonresidential
areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers and antennas throughout the
Village;
(4) Promote the joint use of existing tower sites rather than
construction of additional towers;
(5) Promote the location of towers and antennas in areas where the
adverse impact on the Village is minimal;
(6) Promote the configuration of towers and antennas to minimize
their adverse visual impact through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Promote telecommunications services to the Village which are
quick, effective, and efficient;
(8) Protect the public health and safety of the Village and its residents;
and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
§ 390-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-220
1:525
§ 390-221. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Clock towers, bell steeples, church
spires, light poles, elevator bulkheads and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas
or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless communications signals or
other communications signals.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other building or structure upon
which an antenna is mounted, the distance measured from the finished
grade of the parcel at the center of the front of the building or structure to
the highest point on the tower or other building or structure, including the
base pad and any antenna.
LATTICE TOWER — A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts
and cross braces, forming a triangular or square structure, which often
tapers from the foundation to the top.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of the amendment of the ordinance adding
this article, or any tower or antenna for which no building and/or special use
permit were required, including permitted towers or antennas that have not
yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting
(i.e., without guy wires or other external means of support) lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers, used for the transmission or reception
of radio, telephone, cellular telephone, television, microwave or any other
form of telecommunication signals. The term includes the structure and any
support for the structure.
§ 390-222. Applicability.
B. To further these goals, the Village shall consider its Land Use Plan,
Zoning Map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers and new antennas in the
Village shall be subject to this article, except as otherwise provided in
this section.
§ 390-220 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-222
1:526
§ 390-223. General requirements.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas; television
antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of
any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur ratio station or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
C. Preexisting towers and antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 390-223F and G of this article, and the
general requirements of this chapter concerning preexisting structures
(i.e., § 390-25).
A. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of or on the
same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on
that lot.
B. Lot size. Even though antennas or towers may be located on leased
portions of a lot, the dimensions of the entire lot shall be used to
determine if the installation of a tower or antenna complies with the
regulations of the applicable zoning district, including but not limited to
setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such
requirements.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Zoning Administrator an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within one mile of the
Village borders, including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower or antenna.
D. Tower finish. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral
color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
E. Tower site. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting
and surrounding buildings.
F. Antenna color. An antenna and its supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the
antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
G. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
§ 390-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-223
1:527
H. State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised and applicable standards and regulations within six months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to comply with such revised and applicable standards
and regulations shall constitute grounds for the Village to seek a court
order, authorizing the Village or its designee to remove the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
I. Building codes; safety standards. The owner of a tower or antenna shall
ensure its structural integrity by maintaining it in compliance with
standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and
applicable standards published by the Electronic Industries Association
or any similar successor organization, as amended from time to time. If
the Village suspects that a tower or an antenna does not comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then the Village may proceed under applicable State of
Michigan law (i.e., Michigan Public Act 144 of 1992, as amended,141 or
any successor statute) or common law to bring the tower or antenna
into compliance or to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
J. Measurement. Tower setbacks and separation distances shall be
measured and applied to facilities located in the Village without regard
to municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
K. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article. They shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential public services, public utilities, or private
utilities.
L. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers and antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the Village have been
obtained; they shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Zoning Administrator.
M. Signs. No signs or advertising shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
The tower owner, however, may post a sign designating a person to
contact in an emergency, together with the person's telephone and
address.
N. Metal towers. Metal towers shall be constructed with a corrosionresistant
material.
141. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.539 et seq.
§ 390-223 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-223
1:528
§ 390-224. Permitted uses.
§ 390-225. Special use permits.
O. No interference. Towers shall not interfere with television or radio
reception on surrounding properties.
P. Paving requirement. All parking and drive areas must be paved as
provided in this chapter.
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
by right in any zoning district and shall not require a special use permit.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the Village are permitted uses, provided a
license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by the Village. This provision shall not be interpreted to
require the Village to approve a license or a lease.
(2) Antennas which are themselves not more than 30 feet in height and
located upon legally existing lattice electric transmission towers
are permitted uses.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special
use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning Commission.
(1) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under § 390-224 of
this article, then a special use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any
zoning district.
(2) Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the general procedures and requirements of this chapter
for specified uses, except as modified in this section.
(3) In granting a special use permit, the Planning Commission may
impose such conditions that the Planning Commission concludes
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower
or antenna on adjoining properties.
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer. Such an engineer shall certify
that the tower or antenna will be structurally sound and will comply
with all applicable building and other construction code
requirements.
B. Processing special use applications.
§ 390-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-225
1:529
(1) Information required. Applicants for a special use permit for a
tower or an antenna shall submit the following information, in
addition to any other information required by this chapter:
(a) A scaled site plan showing the location, type and height of the
proposed tower or antenna; on-site land uses and zoning;
adjacent land uses and zoning (even if adjacent to another
municipality); Land Use Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth
in § 390-225B(6); adjacent roadways; proposed means of
access; setbacks from property lines; elevation drawings of the
proposed tower or antenna and any other structures;
topography; parking; and other information deemed necessary
by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to assess
compliance with this article.
(b) Legal description of the lot and the leased portion of the lot (if
applicable), together with a copy of the deed or lease
pertaining to that lot.
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower or antenna
and the nearest dwelling, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other towers or antennas
described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant
to § 390-223C, the type of construction of those existing towers
or antennas, and the owners/operators of those existing towers
and antennas, if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing, finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with the requirements of this
article, and of all applicable federal, state, county or Village
laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant for a tower, indicating if
the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas
for future users.
(i) A description of the services to be provided by the proposed
new tower or antenna, and any alternative ways to provide
those services without the proposed new tower or antenna.
(j) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Village based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the
event the proposed tower or antenna is erected.
§ 390-225 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-225
1:530
(2) Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers or
antennas. In addition to any other standards specified in this
chapter for considering special use permit applications, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a special use permit under this
article:
(a) Height of the proposed tower or antenna;
(b) Proximity of the proposed tower or antenna to residential
structures and residential district boundaries;
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Surrounding topography;
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f) Design of the proposed tower or antenna, with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(g) Proposed ingress and egress to the proposed tower or antenna;
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers or antennas, alternative
tower structures, other structures, or alternative technologies
not requiring the use of towers or antennas or other structures,
as discussed below in this section;
(i) The effect of the proposed tower or antenna on the conforming
properties and the surrounding neighborhood; and
(j) Whether or not the proposed tower or antenna is located in
zoning districts or on structures where the Village intends at
least most towers and antennas in the Village to be located, as
subsequently described in this section.
(3) Village intentions concerning the location of most if not all towers
and antennas. The Village intends that most if not all towers and
antennas will be located as described below.
(a) The Village encourages the location of towers and antennas,
including the placement of additional buildings or other
supporting equipment used in connection with them, in any
industrial or heavy commercial zoning district.
(b) The Village encourages the location of antennas on existing
structures or towers consistent with the terms of Subsection
B(3)(b)[1] and [2] below.
[1] The Village encourages antennas on existing structures
which are not towers, as an accessory use to any
commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or
multifamily structure of eight or more dwelling units,
§ 390-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-225
1:531
provided the antenna does not extend more than 30 feet
above the highest point of the structure;
[2] The Village encourages antennas on existing towers,
provided that:
[a] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of one or more
additional antennas shall be of the same tower type as
the existing tower or a monopole.
[b] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna
may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not more
than once per tower and not to exceed 30 feet over the
tower's existing height [this additional height shall not
require an additional distance separation per
§ 390-225B(6)].
[c] The Village encourages the location of new towers in
nonresidential zoning districts, provided a licensed
professional engineer certifies the tower can
structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant; and provided the tower is
no more than 90 feet in height if for a single user, no
more than 120 feet in height if for two users, and no
more than 150 feet in height if for three or more users.
(4) Availability of suitable existing towers, antennas, alternative tower
structures, other structures, or alternative technology. No new
tower or antenna shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the Planning Commission that no existing tower,
antenna, alternative tower structure or alternative technology can
provide the services sought by the applicant without the erection of
the applicant's requested new tower or antenna. Evidence that no
existing tower, antenna, alternative tower structure, structure, or
alternative technology can provide the services sought by the
applicant may consist of the following:
(a) The applicant could demonstrate that no existing towers,
antennas, alternative tower structures, alternative technology,
or other structures are available within the geographical area
which meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(b) The applicant could demonstrate that existing towers,
antennas, alternative tower structures, or other structures are
not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements, and that their height cannot be increased to
meet such requirements.
(c) The applicant could demonstrate that existing towers,
alternate tower structures, or other structures do not have
§ 390-225 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-225
1:532
sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment, and that their
strength cannot practically be increased to provide that
support.
(d) The applicant could demonstrate that the proposed antenna
would cause electromagnetic interference with existing towers
or antennas, or that existing towers or antennas would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(e) The applicant could demonstrate that the costs to co-locate an
antenna exceed the costs of erecting a new tower or antenna.
(f) The applicant could demonstrate that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers, antennas, alternative
tower structures, and other structures unsuitable.
(g) The applicant could demonstrate that an alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or antennas
is cost-prohibitive or unsuitable.
(5) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required:
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. The setback is
measured from the perimeter or outside edge of the base of the
tower.
(b) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
setback requirements for the applicable zoning district.
(6) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers for which a special use permit is required:
(a) Separation of towers from off-site uses/designated areas.
Tower separation shall be measured from the perimeter or
outside edge of the base of the tower to the lot line of the offsite
uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1,
except as otherwise provided in Table 1. The separation
distance shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the proposed tower and the off-site
uses or designated areas, pursuant to a site plan of the
proposed tower.
[1] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards (listed in linear feet) established in
Table 1.
§ 390-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-225
1:533
Table 1
Off-Site Use/
Designated Area Separation Distance2
Single-family or twofamily
dwelling units1
200 feet or 3 times the height
of the tower, whichever is
greater
Unimproved single-family
or multiple-family
residential land which is
platted, has preliminary
subdivision plan approval
which is not expired, or
has PUD approval which
is not expired
200 feet or 3 times the height
of the tower, whichever is
greater
Other unimproved
residentially zoned lands3
100 feet or the height of the
tower, whichever is greater
Existing multiple-family
dwelling units
100 feet or the height of the
tower, whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses, if not covered by
any of the above
categories
None; only setbacks
established by this chapter
apply
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for
living purposes.
2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
3 Includes any unplatted residentially zoned properties
without a preliminary subdivision plan or development
approval, and any Multiple-Family Residential Zoning
District land.
(b) Separation distances between towers.
[1] Separation distances between towers shall be applicable
for and measured between the proposed tower and
preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be
measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the proposed base,
pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower.
[2] Separation distances between towers shall comply with
the minimum distances (listed in linear feet) established in
Table 2.
§ 390-225 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-225
1:534
§ 390-226. Accessory utility buildings.
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower or an antenna shall
be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment
and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district
where the tower or antenna is located. Ground-mounted equipment shall
be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of
Table 2
Existing Towers - Types
Proposed Tower Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet
in
Height
or
Greater
Monopole
Less
than 75
Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75 feet
in height or
greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole less
than 75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
(7) Security fencing. Towers for which a special use permit is required
shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height.
The towers shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing
devices.
(8) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is
required. The required landscaping shall be maintained for the
duration of the special use permit.
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property then used for dwellings, one-family or
multifamily, or included in a residential zoning district. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four
feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(b) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, the Planning
Commission may conclude that natural growth around the
property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer.
§ 390-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-226
1:535
nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 390-227. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter, any
antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower
shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Village
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned
antenna or tower within the 90 days shall be grounds for the Village to
proceed under applicable State of Michigan law to remove the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single
tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower.
§ 390-228. Expansion of nonconforming use.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, towers
that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with this
article shall not be deemed to be the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
§ 390-226 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-228
1:536
ARTICLE XXIX
Private Roads
§ 390-229. Purpose.
The regulations in this article have been adopted to assure that:
§ 390-230. Effect.
§ 390-231. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the regulations
in this article:
CLEAR AND PASSABLE — That the area is free of roots, brush, shrubs,
trees, debris or any other obstruction.
CURRENT FIRE AND SAFETY STANDARDS — The current fire and safety
standards as adopted from time to time by the Village Council.
DRAIN COMMISSIONER — The Ottawa County Drain Commissioner.
FIRE CHIEF — The chief officer of the Fire Department serving the
jurisdiction, or a duly authorized representative.
LATERAL CROWN — The slope of the horizontal cross section of a private
road, measured from the highest point of the road's upper surface to the
lowest point of the road's upper surface.
PRIVATE ROAD — Any privately owned, improved and maintained roadway,
path or trail which provides primary means of ingress and egress from a
public right-of-way for more than one parcel.
A. Private roads are designed, constructed and maintained to assure the
safe passage and maneuverability of private passenger vehicles, service
vehicles and emergency services vehicles in all seasons of the year;
B. Private roads are constructed of suitable materials to ensure safe
passage and long-term use;
C. Private roads will be constructed so as to protect against or to minimize
soil erosion and to prevent damage to the lakes, streams, wetlands, and
natural environment of the Village;
D. Private roads specifications meet current fire and safety standards.
A. This article shall apply to all private roads constructed from and after
the effective date of this article, except as otherwise provided in this
article.
B. Private roads existing before the effective date of this article shall
continue to exist as they previously did. When an existing private road
is extended and/or expanded, it shall comply with these regulations.
§ 390-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-231
1:537
ROAD AUTHORITY — The Village of Spring Lake Zoning Administrator or
current agency in charge of the roads within the Village.
§ 390-232. General regulations.
§ 390-233. Private road construction permit.
A. Authorized private roads are permitted in all zoning districts.
B. Frontage requirements. A parcel served by a private road shall
maintain frontage along the private road right-of-way equal to the
minimum lot width required for the zoning district in which the parcel is
located.
C. Extensions and/or expansions. Any extension of and/or expansion to a
private road in the Village shall be considered part of that private road,
and shall be constructed in a manner that complies with the
requirements of this article.
D. Stormwater. The private road shall be constructed with a stormwater
runoff management system as deemed necessary by the Village
Engineer and/or the Drain Commissioner to maintain predevelopment
rates of runoff from parcels served by the proposed private road and for
the right-of-way for the private road.
E. Watercourse or wetlands. The crossing of any watercourse or wetlands
by a private road shall be accomplished in a manner that satisfies the
requirements of the Village and any county or state agency having
jurisdiction.
F. Signage. The private road shall be given a name, as approved by the
Road Authority, the Village Assessor, and the Fire Chief. Street signs for
the private road shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
standards of the Road Authority. Temporary street signs shall be
installed at all street intersections when construction of new roadways
allows passage by vehicles. The addresses of the lots serviced by the
private road shall be permanently displayed on the dwellings located on
those lots and on their mailboxes. If the address displayed on the
dwelling cannot be seen clearly from where the driveway meets the
private road, then a permanent address must be placed where the
driveway meets the private road. Cost of all signs shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder for construction of the road.
G. Debris. Any debris resulting from the construction of a private road
shall be removed for appropriate disposal by the owner within 30 days
after completion.
H. Other ordinances. All Village water and sewer requirements and any
other relevant requirements of Village ordinances must be satisfied
with the construction of any private road.
§ 390-231 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-233
1:538
§ 390-234. Review and approval procedure.
A. No private road shall be constructed, extended or relocated unless a
private road construction permit has been applied for and obtained
under this article.
B. An application for a private road construction permit shall consist of the
following materials and documents.
(1) A completed application form containing the name(s) of the
owner(s) and any other parties having any legal interest in the
proposed private road, the property on which it is to be
constructed, and the property it is to serve;
(2) A survey of the proposed private road right-of-way prepared by a
Michigan registered and licensed land surveyor;
(3) A joint maintenance agreement which meets the requirements of
this article; and
(4) Twelve copies of a scale drawing, prepared by a Michigan
registered and licensed engineer, showing the following:
(a) The exterior boundaries of the lot or parcel on which the
private road will be constructed;
(b) The proposed layout, grade, elevation, dimensions, and design
of the private road right-of-way and roadway, including the
location of the proposed ingress and egress from the adjoining
public street(s)/road(s);
(c) The location of all public utilities, including water, sewer,
telephone, gas, electricity and television and/or media cable to
be located in or within 20 feet of the private road right-of-way;
(d) The location of any lakes, streams, wetlands, drains, septic
systems or private sewer systems within 100 feet of the private
road right-of-way;
(e) The proposed layout and location of lots to be served by the
proposed private road;
(f) The location of any other building or structures located or to be
located within 100 feet of the private road right-of-way;
(g) The location of all existing buildings or structures to be
serviced by the private road;
(h) A stormwater management plan for water runoff from the
private road.
A. Application for private road construction permits shall be subject to the
procedures applicable to site plan approval outlined in Article XXIV of
this chapter.
§ 390-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-234
1:539
§ 390-235. Maintenance and repairs.
§ 390-236. Indemnity.
As a condition of applying for and obtaining a private road construction
permit, all applicants for a private road construction permit and all owners
of a private road shall agree to indemnify and hold the Village, and anyone
else authorized by and acting on behalf of the Village to assist in the
private road review process, harmless from any claims for personal injury
or property damage arising out of the construction, use, maintenance,
inspection, review or repair of a private road.
§ 390-237. Maintenance agreement.
Applicants for a private road construction permit, and owners of the
property bordered by and serviced by a private road, shall provide the
Village with a recordable private road maintenance agreement. The
maintenance agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Village and
shall provide that the private road shall be privately maintained and
repaired to assure safe travel for all emergency vehicles at all times and
during all seasons of the year. This maintenance agreement shall be
recorded at the Ottawa County Register of Deeds and shall be a recordable
covenant running with the land, binding on all lots served by and bordered
by the private road. The maintenance agreement shall include the following:
B. Applicable fees shall be paid when a completed application is presented
for a private road permit.
A. Private roads shall be maintained in a manner that complies with the
provisions of this article.
B. All private roads shall be continuously maintained in such a way that
they will not constitute a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
Village's inhabitants or visitors. All private roads shall be continuously
maintained in such a way that they are readily accessible to and usable
by emergency vehicles in all types of weather.
C. All costs for the maintenance and repair of a private road shall be the
responsibility of the property owners served by the private road, as
specified in the joint maintenance agreement required by this article.
A. Financing improvement and/or maintenance. The maintenance
agreement shall include a method of initiating and financing any
improvement or maintenance of the private road as is necessary to keep
it in a reasonably good, usable and safe condition.
B. Method of apportioning costs. The maintenance agreement shall
include a method of apportioning the cost of improvement or
maintenance of the private road, together with a method to enforce
payment by providing that any amount remaining unpaid by the owner
of a lot serviced by the private road shall become a lien against that lot.
§ 390-234 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-237
1:540
§ 390-238. Certificate of compliance.
C. Village's option to improve and/or maintain. The maintenance
agreement shall include a procedure whereby the Village may, in its
discretion but without obligation, improve or maintain the private road
and assess the cost thereof to the owners of lots serviced by the private
road in a reasonably proportionate manner, such as road front footage,
without the need for any additional petition for the improvements or
maintenance from the lot owners.
D. Noninterference provision. The maintenance agreement shall include a
provision that the owner of each lot using the private road shall not
prohibit, restrict, limit or in any way interfere with normal ingress and
egress and other use(s) of the private road by the owners of the
remaining lots with an interest in the private road, including family
members, guests, trades people and others with legitimate purposes
who are traveling to or returning from any of the lots with an interest in
the private road.
E. Indemnity provision. The maintenance agreement shall include a
provision that all of the owners of lots with an interest in the private
road shall indemnify the Village from any liability whatsoever arising
from the purchasing, planning, constructing, inspecting, repairing,
maintaining, using and dedicating of the private road.
A. Upon completion of construction of the private road, the permit holder
shall provide the Building Inspector with a set of "as built" drawings
and sealed documentation from a Michigan-registered engineer
certifying that the private road has been completed in accordance with
the requirements of the permit issued. Authorized Village personnel
may inspect the private road to determine whether it complies with the
approved plans and permits as issued, but this inspection shall not
detract from the Village's ability to rely on the certification of a
Michigan-registered engineer concerning the private road. A certificate
of compliance shall be issued by authorized Village personnel if it is
determined that the private road has been constructed in compliance
with approved plans and the permit as issued.
B. If the completed private road does not satisfy the requirements of the
issued permit, the applicant(s) shall be notified of the noncompliance in
writing and shall be given a reasonable period of time within which to
correct the deficiencies. Failure to correct the deficiencies within the
time provided shall subject the applicant(s) to the penalties provided
for in this article.
C. Authorized Village personnel shall have the right to enter upon the
property where the private road is or will be located to conduct such
inspections as may be necessary to administer these regulations and
guarantee continued compliance.
§ 390-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-239
1:541
§ 390-239. Fees.
Application fees for permits required by this article shall be set by the
Village Council from time to time by resolution.
§ 390-240. Building permits for parcels on private roads.
No building permit shall be issued for any building, dwelling or structure
provided access by and having frontage on a private road unless the
maintenance agreement is recorded, a private road construction permit
has been issued by the Village, and an inspection by the Fire Chief has
determined that there is acceptable access in compliance with current fire
and safety standards.
§ 390-241. Approval by Road Authority.
No permit shall be issued for a private road until the applicant has
presented the Village with a curb-cut permit issued by the Road Authority,
or a letter from the Road Authority indicating that no such permit is
required.
§ 390-242. Performance guarantee.
§ 390-243. Miscellaneous provisions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions or rules shall apply:
A. The Village may require the applicant to post a bond or some other
performance guarantee in the form of cash, a bank letter of credit or
other surety to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article.
B. If required, the amount of the performance guarantee shall be equal to
the total estimated cost of construction of the private road as approved
by the Village.
C. The performance guarantee, or unspent portions of it, will be returned
to the applicant by the Village upon completion of the private road to
the standards required by this article.
D. The performance guarantee shall be processed in accordance with the
requirements of this article, and in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, including the requirement for periodic rebates of the
performance guarantee as portions of the construction of the private
road are completed.
A. The length of a private road shall be measured along the center line of
the road from the center line of the public road that the private road
touches to the end of the private road.
B. All private roads are subject to periodic inspection by the Fire
Department in order to ensure that the road is being properly
maintained according to current fire and safety standards.
§ 390-239 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-243
1:542
§ 390-244. Standards and requirements for private roads.
All private roads shall be subject to the following standards and
requirements.
C. The terms "maintenance" and "repair" include, but are not limited to,
the following: snow removal, grading, tree trimming, tree removal, and
reconstruction of a private road.
D. This article shall apply to all private roads which are constructed after
the effective date of this article, and to all private roads lawfully
existing at the time of the effective date of this article if they are
subsequently improved, extended, or expanded to serve a greater
number of parcels.
E. These regulations replace in their entirety any other regulations
applicable to the construction of private roads in the Village.
F. Construction of a private road is to be commenced within one year of
issuance of the permit, and the applicant is to proceed diligently to
completion of the road. If construction is not commenced within such
period and pursued diligently to completion, the permit shall expire and
the applicant shall reapply as provided in this article if the applicant
later decides to proceed. The period within which construction must be
commenced is subject to extension by the Village Council for good
cause shown and, as a condition of extension, the Village Council may
increase the amount of performance guarantee required.
G. The improved portion and the cleared and passable portion of any
private road shall be located in the middle of the right-of-way for the
private road.
A. Less than seven parcels served. Private roads which serve more than
one and less than seven parcels shall have the following minimum
improvements.
(1) A subbase of granular material (MDOT Class II) which is at least 12
inches in depth.
(2) An aggregate base course of compacted gravel, crushed concrete,
slag, or similar material which is at least six inches in depth for the
entire length of the road.
(3) The minimum width of the right-of-way shall be at least 33 feet for
the entire length.
(4) The minimum width of both the subbase and the aggregate base
course shall be at least 14 feet for the entire length of the road.
(5) The road shall have a vertical clearance of at least 13 feet six
inches for its entire length.
§ 390-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-244
1:543
(6) Roads which are at least 400 feet but less than 600 feet in length
shall provide a passing lane 20 feet wide and 60 feet in length.
Roads which are at least 600 feet but less than 800 feet in length
will provide two such passing lanes. Private roads greater than 800
feet in total length shall provide an adequate number of passing
lanes so as to allow uninterrupted Fire Department operations.
These passing lanes shall be constructed in the same manner as the
private road, using the same materials.
(7) The road grade shall not exceed 10%.
(8) The minimum width of the aggregate base course and an additional
two feet on each side must be clear, passable and maintained.
(9) The private road shall have a minimum lateral crown of 2% and a
maximum lateral crown of 7%.
(10) The owner of the property on which the private road shall be
constructed must record an easement for ingress and egress
purposes directly to and from a public street for the benefit of the
owners and users of the parcels which are served by the private
road. The easement shall also provide for the construction,
maintenance, and repair (as well as reconstruction) of the road and
utilities. In addition, a public easement shall be required for
municipal water and sanitary sewer. The easement shall benefit the
parcels which front on or abut to the private road. Additionally, the
owner of the property over which the private road is to be
constructed shall grant an easement to or for each utility company
or municipality which provides utility or emergency services to any
parcel which is accessed by the private road; the form and location
of the easement for utilities or emergency service must be
reviewed and approved by the utility company or municipality prior
to recording of the easement.
(11) The owner of the property on which the private road shall be
constructed must record a maintenance agreement with the
Ottawa County Register of Deeds which complies with the
requirements of this article.
(12) Any private road with less then seven parcels which was developed
or approved in conjunction with a development with seven or more
parcels must follow the standards of § 390-244B.
(13) The design layout, including but not limited to radius of turns and
culs-de-sac, shall be reviewed by the Fire Department to ensure
that emergency equipment can readily traverse the road. The
review by the Fire Department shall be based on the current fire
and safety standards. Any private road which dead ends shall have
a cul-de-sac which is designed and constructed in accordance with
the specifications of the current fire and safety standards and/or
the Road Authority. Standards of a private road system and
intersections with public roads shall provide adequate clear vision,
§ 390-244 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-244
1:544
safe turning and safe travel at the posted speed limit as determined
by the Road Authority, as if the private road were a public road
under the jurisdiction of the Road Authority.
B. Commercial zone or more than six parcels serviced. Private roads
which are in a commercial zone or which serve seven or more parcels
shall have the following minimum improvements, or meet current Road
Authority standards, whichever are more stringent.
(1) A subbase of granular material (MDOT Class II) which is at least 12
inches in depth.
(2) An aggregate base course of compacted gravel, crushed concrete,
slag, or similar material which is at least six inches in depth for the
entire length of the road.
(3) The minimum width of the right-of-way shall be at least 66 feet for
the entire length. Private roads using an approved curb and gutter
drainage system shall be at least 50 feet right-of-way in width for
the entire length, plus the curb and gutter.
(4) Bituminous paving overlay of the base course is required. The
bituminous paving and the bituminous mixture or content must
meet or exceed the then-current standards of the Road Authority
for public residential roads, excluding the requirement for curb,
gutter and storm sewer installation. The paving must also be able
to support the live load requirement of current fire and safety
standards.
(5) The road shall have a vertical clearance of at least 13 feet six
inches for its entire length.
(6) The minimum width of the aggregate base course and an additional
two feet on each side must be clear, passable and maintained.
(7) The private road shall have a minimum lateral crown of 2% and a
maximum lateral crown of 7%.
(8) The owner of the property over which the private road shall be
constructed must record an easement for ingress and egress
purposes directly to and from a public street for the benefit of the
owners and users of the parcels which are served by the private
road. The easement shall also provide for the construction,
maintenance, and repair (as well as reconstruction) of the road and
utilities. In addition, a public easement shall be required for
municipal water and sanitary sewer. The easement shall benefit the
parcels which front on or abut to the private road. Additionally, the
owner of the property over which the private road is to be
constructed shall grant an easement to or for each utility company
or municipality which provides utility or emergency services to any
parcel which is accessed by the private road; the form and location
of the easement for utilities or emergency service must be
§ 390-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-244
1:545
reviewed and approved by the utility company or municipality prior
to recording of the easement.
(9) The owner of the property over which the private road shall be
constructed must record a maintenance agreement with the
Ottawa County Register of Deeds which complies with the
requirements of this article.
(10) The design layout, including but not limited to radius of turns and
culs-de-sac, shall be reviewed by the Village Fire Department to
ensure that the Village's equipment can readily traverse the road.
The review by the Village Fire Department shall be based on the
current fire and safety standards. Any private road which dead
ends shall have a cul-de-sac which is designed and constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the current fire and safety
standards and/or the Road Authority. Standards of a private road
system and intersections with public roads shall provide adequate
clear vision, safe turning and safe travel at the posted speed limit
as determined by the road authority, as if the private road were a
public road under the jurisdiction of the Road Authority.
C. Maximum separation. A private road right-of-way which intersects a
public road right-of-way shall have a minimum separation from any
other private road right-of-way and any other public road right-of-way
equal to what the Road Authority would require as a minimum
separation between two public roads.
§ 390-244 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-244
1:546
ARTICLE XXX
Wind Energy Turbines (WETs)
[Amended 10-12-2009 by Ord. No. 315]
§ 390-245. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for siting wind energy
turbines (WETs). The goals are as follows:
§ 390-246. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL — The amount of background noise at a given
location prior to the installation of a wind energy turbine (WET) which
may include, but not be limited to, traffic, machinery, lawn mowers, human
activity, and the interaction of wind with the landscape. The ambient sound
level is measured on the dB(A) weighted scale as defined by the American
National Standards Institute.
ANEMOMETER — A temporary wind speed indicator constructed for the
purpose of analyzing the potential for utilizing a wind energy turbine (WET)
at a given site. This includes the tower, base plate, anchors, cables and
hardware, wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, data logger,
instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or
transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for
either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource
at a given location.
DECIBEL — A unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound
pressure and sound intensity. Decibels shall be measured on the dB(A)
weighted scale as defined by the American National Standards Institute.
DECOMMISSIONING — The process of terminating operation and
completely removing a wind energy turbine (WET) and all related buildings,
structures, foundations, access roads, and equipment.
MEDIUM WIND ENERGY TURBINES (MWET) — A tower-mounted wind
energy system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of
equipment which includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle,
rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other
A. To promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of a WET in order to
reduce the consumption of fossil fuels in producing electricity.
B. To preserve and protect public health, safety, welfare, and quality of life
by minimizing the potential adverse impacts of a WET.
C. To establish standards and procedures by which the siting, design,
engineering, installation, operation, and maintenance of a WET shall be
governed.
§ 390-245 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-246
1:547
components used in the system. The MWET has a nameplate capacity that
does not exceed 250 kilowatts. The total height does not exceed 150 feet.
NACELLE — The encasement which houses all of the generating
components, gear box, drive tram, and other equipment in a wind energy
turbine (WET).
NET-METERING — A special metering and billing agreement between
utility companies and their customers, which facilitates the connection of
renewable energy generating systems to the power grid.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library, business, or any other building used for public gatherings.
OPERATOR, WET — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of a wind energy turbine (WET).
OWNER, WET — The individual or entity, including their respective
successors and assigns, with equity interest in or ownership of a wind
energy turbine (WET).
ROTOR DIAMETER — The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by
the rotating blades of a wind energy turbine (WET).
SHADOW FLICKER — The moving shadow, created by the sun shining
through the rotating blades of a wind energy turbine (WET). The amount
of shadow flicker created by a WET is calculated by a computer model that
takes into consideration turbine location, elevation, tree cover, location of
all structures, wind activity, and sunlight.
SMALL STRUCTURE-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (SSMWET) —
Converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment which
includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower,
transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other components used in the
system. A SSMWET is attached to a structure's roof, walls, or other elevated
surface. The SSMWET has a nameplate capacity that does not exceed 10
kilowatts. The total height does not exceed 15 feet as measured from the
highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, antennas, and other similar
protuberances.
SMALL TOWER-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (STMWET) — A
tower-mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of equipment which includes any base, blade,
foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire,
inverter, batteries, or other components used in the system. The STMWET
has a nameplate capacity that does not exceed 30 kilowatts. The total height
does not exceed 120 feet.
STRUCTURE — Any production or piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but
not limited to, buildings, radio and television towers, sheds, signs, and
storage bins. As used with wind energy turbines, "structure" means any
building or other structure, such as a municipal water tower that is a
minimum of 12 feet high at its highest point of roof and is secured to frostfootings
or a concrete slab.
§ 390-246 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-246
1:548
TOTAL HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the ground level at
the base of the tower to the uppermost vertical extension of any blade, or
the maximum height reached by any part of a wind energy turbine (WET).
TOWER — A freestanding monopole that supports a wind energy turbine
(WET).
UPWIND TURBINE — A wind energy turbine (WET) positioned in a manner
so that the wind hits the turbine blades before it hits the tower in order to
avoid the thumping noise which can occur if the wind is disrupted by hitting
the tower before the blades.
WIND ENERGY TURBINE (WET) — Any structure-mounted, small, medium,
or large wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind generator, and includes the nacelle,
rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
§ 390-247. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the following:
§ 390-248. Siting and design.
All SSMWETs and STMWETs must be sited and designed in accordance with
the following:
A. This article applies to all WETs proposed to be constructed after the
effective date of this article.
B. Upwind turbines shall be required.
C. A small structure-mounted wind energy turbine (SSMWET) and a small
tower-mounted wind energy turbine (STMWET) shall be considered a
permitted use in all zoning districts and shall not be erected,
constructed, installed, or modified as provided in this chapter unless
appropriate Village permits have been issued to the WET owner(s) or
WET operator(s).
D. All WETs constructed prior to the effective date of this article shall not
be required to meet the requirements of this article; however, any
physical modification to an existing WET that materially alters the size,
type, equipment or location shall require a permit under this chapter, in
compliance with the standards of this article.
E. Medium wind energy turbines (MWETs) shall be prohibited in all zoning
districts within the Village.
A. Visual appearance.
(1) A SSMWET or STMWET, including accessory buildings and related
structures, shall be a solid, nonreflective, nonobtrusive color (e.g.,
white, gray, black). The appearance of the turbine, tower, and any
ancillary facility shall be maintained throughout the life of the
SSMWET or STMWET.
§ 390-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-248
1:549
(2) A SSMWET or STMWET shall not be artificially lighted, except to
the extent required by the FAA or other applicable authority, or
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
(3) A SSMWET or STMWET shall not be used for displaying any
advertising (including flags, streamers, or decorative items),
except for identification of the turbine manufacturer.
B. Ground clearance. The lowest extension of any blade or other exposed
moving component of a SSMWET or STMWET shall be at least 15 feet
above the ground (at the highest point of the natural grade within 30
feet of the base of the tower) and, in addition, at least 15 feet above any
outdoor surfaces intended for human use, such as decks, balconies or
roof gardens, that are located directly below the SSMWET or STMWET.
C. Noise control.
(1) Where an adjacent parcel contains a residential use or parks,
schools, hospitals or churches, the noise produced by the SSMWET
or STMWET may not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that
exists between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. along any
adjacent property line used for such purposes.
(2) Where no adjacent parcel contains a residential use or other use
listed above, the noise produced by the SSMWET or STMWET may
not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that exists between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the parcel, plus five decibels
dB(A).
D. Vibration. Vibrations shall not be produced which are humanly
perceptible beyond the property on which the SSMWET or STMWET is
located.
E. Shadow flicker. The SSMWET or STMWET owner(s) and/or operator(s)
shall conduct an analysis on potential shadow flicker at any occupied
building with direct line-of-sight to the SSMWET or STMWET. The
analysis shall identify the locations of shadow flicker that may be
caused by the project and the expected durations of the flicker at these
locations from sunrise to sunset over the course of a year. The analysis
shall identify situations where shadow flicker may affect the occupants
of the buildings for more than 30 hours per year, and describe measures
that shall be taken to eliminate or mitigate the problems. Shadow
flicker on a building shall not exceed 30 hours per year.
F. Guy wires. Guy wires shall not be permitted as part of the SSMWET or
STMWET.
G. Height. The total height of a SSMWET shall not exceed 15 feet as
measured from the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys,
antennas, and other similar protuberances. The total height of a
STMWET shall not exceed 120 feet.
§ 390-248 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-248
1:550
H. Setback. The setback for a SSMWET shall be a minimum of 15 feet from
the lot line, public or private street, or overhead utility lines. The
setback shall be measured from the furthest outward extension of all
moving parts. The setback for a STMWET shall be at least 150 feet from
any front lot line (or rear lot line in the case of a waterfront lot), and
shall be set back a distance equal to or greater than the total height of
the STMWET, as measured from the base of the tower, from all other lot
lines, public or private streets, public easements, or overhead public
utility lines.
I. Separation. If more than one SSMWET is installed on a lot, a distance
equal to the total height of the highest SSMWET must be maintained
between the base of each SSMWET.
J. Location. The SSMWET shall not be affixed to the wall on the side of a
structure facing a public or private street. A STMWET may only be
located in a rear yard of a lot that has an occupied building. A STMWET
may be located in a side yard or front yard of a lot that has an occupied
building, provided that it is set back at least 150 feet from the front lot
line (or rear lot line in the case of a waterfront lot), as measured from
the base of the tower.
K. Quantity. No more than three SSMWETs shall be installed on any lot of
residentially zoned or used property. The Planning Commission may
allow more SSMWETs on commercially or industrially zoned properties
if appropriate. No more than one STMWET shall be installed on any
residentially zoned or used property. The Planning Commission may
allow more STMWETs on commercially or industrially zoned or used
properties if appropriate. The Planning Commission shall consider the
size of the lot, the use of the lot, the location of the proposed WETs, the
use of and impact upon adjoining lots, and other relevant factors in
determining if additional WETs are appropriate. No more than three
SSMWETs or one STMWET shall be allowed on any single lot of
residentially zoned or used property, unless specifically approved by the
Planning Commission.
L. Electrical system. All electrical controls, control wiring, grounding
wires, power lines, and system components shall be placed
underground within the boundary of each lot at a depth designed to
accommodate the existing land use to the maximum extent practicable.
Wires necessary to connect the WET to the tower wiring are exempt
from this requirement.
M. Anemometers. If an anemometer is to be installed prior to, or in
conjunction with, a SSMWET or STMWET, it must be done so in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The construction, installation, or modification of an anemometer
tower shall require a zoning permit and applicable building,
electrical or mechanical permits and shall conform to all applicable
§ 390-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-248
1:551
§ 390-249. Zoning permit application requirements.
In addition to the standard information required on a zoning permit
application form, applications for SSMWETs and STMWETs shall also
include the following information/documentation:
local, state, and federal applicable safety, construction,
environmental, electrical, communications, and FAA requirements.
(2) An anemometer shall be subject to the minimum requirements for
height, setback, separation, location, safety, and decommissioning
of this chapter that correspond to the size of the SSMWET or
STMWET that is proposed to be constructed on the site.
A. A site plan (drawn to scale) showing the proposed location of all
components and ancillary equipment of the SSMWET(s) or STMWET(s),
lot lines, physical dimensions of the lot, existing building(s), setback
lines, right-of-way lines, public easements, overhead utility lines,
sidewalks, nonmotorized pathways, public and private streets, and
contours. The site plan must also include adjoining lots as well as the
location and use of all structures.
B. The proposed number, type, and total height of SSMWET(s) or
STMWET(s) to be constructed; including the manufacturer and model,
product specifications including maximum noise output (measured in
decibels), total rated generating capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter,
and a description of ancillary facilities.
C. Documented compliance with the noise requirements set forth in this
chapter.
D. Documented compliance with applicable Village, county, state and
federal regulations, including, but not limited to, all applicable safety,
construction, environmental, electrical, communications, and FAA
requirements.
E. Evidence that the utility company has been informed of the customer's
intent to install an interconnected, customer-owned generator and that
such connection has been approved. Off-grid systems shall be exempt
from this requirement.
F. For STMWET applications, a description of the methods that will be
used to perform maintenance on the STMWET and the procedures for
lowering or removing the STMWET in order to conduct maintenance.
G. Verification that the SSMWET or STMWET shall not interfere with
communication systems such as, but not limited to, radio, telephone,
television, satellite, or emergency communication systems.
H. Other relevant information as may be reasonably requested by the
Village.
§ 390-248 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-250
1:552
§ 390-250. Safety requirements.
All SSMWETs and STMWETs must be designed to meet the following safety
requirements:
§ 390-251. Decommissioning.
Any SSMWET or STMWET that is to be decommissioned shall be done so in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. If the SSMWET or STMWET is connected to a public utility system for
net-metering purposes, it shall meet the requirements for
interconnection and operation as set forth in the public utility's thencurrent
service regulations meeting federal, state, and industry
standards applicable to wind power generation facilities, and the
connection shall be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
B. The SSMWET or STMWET shall be equipped with an automatic
braking, governing or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled
rotation, overspeeding, and excessive pressure on the tower, rotor
blades and other wind energy components unless the manufacturer
certifies that a braking system is not necessary.
C. A clearly visible warning sign regarding voltage shall be placed at the
base of the SSMWET or STMWET.
D. The structural integrity of the SSMWET or STMWET shall conform to
the design standards of the International Electrical Commission,
specifically IEC 61400-1, "Wind Turbine Safety and Design" or IEC
61400-2, "Small Wind Turbine Safety," IEC 61400-22, "Wind Turbine
Certification," and IEC 61400-23, "Blade Structural Testing," or any
similar successor standards.
A. The WET owner(s) or WET operator(s) shall complete decommissioning
within six months after the end of the useful life. Upon request of the
WET owner(s) or WET operator(s) of the SSMWET or STMWET, and for
a good cause, the Zoning Administrator may grant a reasonable
extension of time. The SSMWET or STMWET will be presumed to be at
the end of its useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous
period of six months; the end of its useful life may also be established by
other facts and circumstances determined by the Zoning Administrator.
All decommissioning expenses are the responsibility of the WET
owner(s) or WET operator(s).
B. If the WET owner(s) or WET operator(s) fails to complete
decommissioning within the period prescribed above, the Village
Council may designate a contractor to complete decommissioning with
the expense thereof to be charged to the violator and/or to become a
lien against the property. If the SSMWET or STMWET is not owned by
the lot owner(s), a bond, security deposit or bank letter of credit must
be provided to the Village for the cost of decommissioning each
SSMWET or STMWET prior to construction.
§ 390-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-251
1:553
§ 390-252. Public inquiries and complaints.
Should an aggrieved property owner allege that the SSMWET or STMWET
is not in compliance with the noise requirements of this chapter, the
procedure shall be as follows:
C. In addition to the decommissioning requirements listed previously, the
STMWET shall also be subject to the following:
(1) Decommissioning shall include the removal of each STMWET,
buildings, electrical components, and any other associated
facilities. Any foundation shall be removed to a minimum depth of
60 inches below grade, or to the level of the bedrock if less than 60
inches below grade.
(2) The site and any disturbed earth shall be stabilized, graded, and
cleared of any debris by the WET owner(s) or its assigns. The site
shall be seeded to prevent soil erosion.
A. Noise complaint.
(1) Notify the Village in writing regarding concerns about noise level.
(2) If the complaint is deemed sufficient by the Village to warrant an
investigation, the Village will request the aggrieved property owner
deposit funds in an amount sufficient to pay for a noise level test
conducted by a certified acoustic technician to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) If the test indicates that the noise level is within chapter noise
requirements, the Village will use the deposit to pay for the test.
(4) If the SSMWET or STMWET owner(s) is in violation of the noise
requirements, the owner(s) shall reimburse the Village for the
noise level test and take immediate action to bring the SSMWET or
STMWET into compliance which may include ceasing operation of
the WET until chapter violations are corrected. The Village will
refund the deposit to the aggrieved property owner.
(5) If the WET owner(s) fails to correct the violation(s), the Village
Council may designate a contractor to make the corrections with
the expense thereof to be charged to the violator and/or to become
a lien against the property. If the WET owner(s) fails to reimburse
the Village for the noise level test the cost will become a lien
against the property.
§ 390-251 SPRING LAKE CODE § 390-252
1:554