CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Adopted, December 19, 1977 
Effective, March 1, 1978 
____________ 
Published 1978 By Order Of The City Commission 
____________ 

> 
Copyright, 1978 
Municipal Code Corporation 
Tallahassee, Florida 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Anthony G. Bosbous 
Mayor 
____________ 
Abby Baker 
Greg Collins 
Don Gerrie 
Shane Miller 
Tim Talentino 
Kathleen Twardy 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Oliver Turner 
City Manager 
____________ 
Steven Cannello 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Robin R. Troyer 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    Part I of this volume contains the Home Rule Charter of the City. Part II, the City Code, constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Sault Ste. Marie of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1957 Sault Ste. Marie City Code, as adopted by an ordinance adopted on April 2, 1957, and ordinances adopted by the City Commission subsequent thereto. 
    The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1957 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 7 is 7-4. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4 and 5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-5.1, 4-5.2, 4-5.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as Chapter 12.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President and Bill Carroll, Editor of Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the City Clerk, Mr. D. K. Strickland and the City Attorney, Mr. Thomas G. Moher, for their supervision, cooperation and interest during the progress of the work on this Code. 
December, 1977 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 189 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan; Establishing the Same, Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The City of Sault Ste. Marie Ordains: 
    Section 1.  The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 27, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before August 4, 1975, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2.  All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of March, 1978, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, adopted on final passage on or before August 4, 1975, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the 1st day of March, 1978. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, as provided in Section 1-6 of such Code. 
    Section 5.  Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and Section 1-6 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7.  A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by him/her to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of such Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the City Commission. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 8.  It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Sault Ste. Marie to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
    Section 9.  This ordinance shall become effective on the 1st day of March, 1978. 
/s/ D. K. Strickland 
City Clerk 
ADOPTED: December 19, 1977 
PUBLISHED: 
EFFECTIVE: March 1, 1978 
    WE HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing ordinance was adopted by the City Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan on the 19th day of December, 1977. 
Jerald A. Peters 
Mayor D. K. Strickland 
City Clerk  
    I HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing ordinance was published in the Evening News, a newspaper printed and circulated in the City of Sault Ste. Marie on January 6, 1978. 
/s/ D. K. Strickland 
City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
  
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 520-10  8-23-10 Included 33 521-10  9-28-10 Included 33 522-10 10- 4-10 Included 33 524-11  1- 7-11 Included 33 526-11  3- 7-11 Included 33 527-11  8- 8-11 Included 33 528-11  9- 6-11 Included 33 529-11  9- 6-11 Included 33 531-12  1- 3-12 Included 34 532-12  1-16-12 Included 34 533-12  6-18-12 Included 34 534-12 12- 3-12 Included 34 536-13  7-15-13 Included 35 537-13  8-19-13 Included 35 540-13  8-19-13 Included 35 541-13  9- 3-13 Included 35 542-13 12- 2-13 Included 36 543-13 12-16-13 Included 36 544-14  1- 6-14 Included 36 545-14  1-20-14 Included 36 546-14  2- 3-14 Included 36 548-14  4-21-14 Included 36 549-14  7-21-14 Included 37 551-14 10- 6-14 Included 37 552-14 10- 6-14 Included 37 553-14 10- 6-14 Included 37 554-14 11-17-14 Included 37 555-15  3- 2-15 Included 37 564-16  2-15-16 Included 38 558-15  4-20-15 Included 39 559-15  4-20-15 Included 39 560-15  8- 3-15 Included 39 561-15  8-17-15 Included 39 563-15 10-19-15 Included 39 566-16  4-18-16 Included 39 567-16  7- 5-16 Included 39 565-16  4- 4-16 Included 40 569-17  1-16-17 Included 41 570-17  3- 6-17 Included 41 571-17  3-20-17 Included 41 576-18  1-15-18 Included 41 577-18  4- 2-18 Included 42 578-18  4- 2-18 Included 42 580-18  4-16-18 Included 43 581-18  5-21-18 Included 43 582-18  5-21-18 Included 43 583-18  6-18-18 Included 44 584-18 11-19-18 Included 44 585-18 11-19-18 Included 44 586-18 11-19-18 Included 44 587-18 11-19-18 Included 44 588-18 11-19-18 Included 44 589-19  3- 4-19 Included 45 591-19  4-15-19 Included 45 592-19  4- 1-19 Included 45  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The city's Charter was voted upon and passed by the electorate at a special election held on February 27, 1952, to be effective May 1, 1952. The Charter was approved by Governor G. Mennen Williams on December 26, 1951. The original arrangement, including chapter and section numbers, headings and catchlines, has been retained. Amendments have been inserted in their proper places with the date of the election of each amendment enclosed within parentheses immediately following the amended section. If no history note follows a section it remains unchanged from the Charter as adopted in 1952. Additional words added for clarity are enclosed by brackets. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without comment. 
State constitution reference- Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 
State Law reference- Home rule act, MCL § 117.1 et seq., MSA § 5.2071 et seq. 
Note- As a part of Supp. No. 43, and at the direction of the city, the following provisions have been included herein: "State Law to Apply. Unless otherwise provided herein, the general election laws of the State shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedure relating to City elections and to the registration of electors within the City." 

CHAPTER 1. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Name and boundaries. 
    The name of this organized city is "City of Sault Ste. Marie." It is a body corporate and embraces the following described territory in the County of Chippewa constituting the present City of Sault Ste. Marie, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom in accordance with law: 
    Commencing at a point in the national boundary line in the St. Mary's River directly opposite to and in a line with the south line of fractional section seventeen, township forty-seven north of range one west; running thence easterly along the south line of fractional sections sixteen and seventeen and sections fifteen, fourteen, and thirteen, township forty-seven north of range one west, and the south line of sections eighteen and seventeen and fractional sections fifteen and sixteen, township forty-seven north of range one east, and said line produced to a point in the center of the principal or tug channel of the branch of the St. Mary's River entering into Lake Nicolet (formerly Hay Lake); thence northerly along the center of said channel to the said national boundary line in the main and steamboat channel of the St. Mary's River westerly until the same reaches the place of beginning; said description embracing fractional sections four, five, six, nine, fifteen and sixteen, and sections seven, eight, seventeen and eighteen of township forty-seven north of range one east; and fractional sections one, two, nine, ten, eleven, sixteen, and seventeen, and sections twelve, thirteen, fourteen, and fifteen, township forty-seven north of range one west, and the islands and bed of the St. Mary's River lying within the limits of said boundaries, all in the County of Chippewa and State of Michigan, according to its original government survey. 
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - Continuation of powers of former charter. 
    All powers, privileges and immunities not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter possessed by the City of Sault Ste. Marie by virtue of its incorporation as such and enumerated in the charter of the city adopted on June 26, 1917, including all amendments thereto in effect on the effective date of this charter, are hereby expressly retained by the city and shall constitute a part of the powers of the city even though not expressly enumerated herein. 
Section 2.2. - General powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the city and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including all powers, privileges and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their charters by Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.1 et seq., MSA § 5.2071 et seq.], as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
    The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, statute and this charter. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL § 117.4j(3), MSA § 5.2083(3). 
Section 2.3. - Further definition of powers. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the city under the Constitution and statutes, and those set forth throughout this charter, the city shall have power with respect to and may, by ordinance and other lawful acts of its officers, provide for the following, subject to any specific limitations placed thereon by this charter: 
(a)  The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the County of Chippewa and which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes, powers and duties of the city, either proprietary or otherwise; 
(b)  The maintenance, development, operation, leasing and disposal of city property subject to any restrictions placed thereon by statute or this charter; 
(c)  The refunding of money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions; 
(d)  The installation and connection of conduits for the service of municipally owned and operated electric lighting plants; 
(e)  The purchase or condemnation of the franchises and of the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in the cemetery, hospital, almshouse, electric light, gas, heat, water and power business; 
(f)  The establishment and vacation of streets, alleys, public ways and other public places, and the use, regulation, improvement and control of the surface of such streets, alleys, public ways and other public places and of the space above and beneath them, whether such be located within or without the limits of the city; 
(g)  The use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation to the owners thereof; 
(h)  A plan of streets and alleys within, and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond, the municipal limits; 
(i)  The use, control and regulation of streams, waters and water courses within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by statute; 
(j)  The securing by condemnation, by agreement or purchase, or by any other means, of an easement in property abutting or adjacent to any navigable body of water for the purpose of securing the privilege and right to construct, own and maintain along or adjacent to any navigable body of water an elevated structure of one or more levels for use as a vehicular or pedestrian passageway, or for any other municipal purposes, including a tunnel; 
(k)  The acquiring, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(l)  The acquiring, constructing, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the docking of water craft, hydroplanes and seaplanes, within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for use thereof, and for such purpose or purposes, to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(m)  Regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of oil and gasoline stations; 
(n)  The establishing of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population may be regulated by ordinance in accordance with statutory provisions governing zoning; 
(o)  The regulating of trades, occupations and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and for the prohibiting of such trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
(p)  Licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the city; 
(q)  The preventing of injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from anything which is dangerous, offensive or unhealthful, and for preventing and abating nuisances and punishing those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue or remove the same; 
(r)  The prescribing of the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended or revoked; requiring payment of reasonable sums for licenses; and requiring the furnishing of a bond to the city for the faithful observance of the conditions under which licenses are granted, and otherwise conditioning such licenses as the Commission may prescribe; 
(s)  The regulating of all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety and welfare, controlling and regulating the use of the air above the city by aircraft of all types; 
(t)  The prohibiting or regulating of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers within the city, and the right of the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever; 
(u)  The requiring of an owner of real property within the city to construct and maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or if the owner is unknown, to construct and maintain such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Section 10.9; 
(v)  The requiring of an owner of real property within the city to abate public hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the city within a reasonable time after the Commission notifies him that such hazard or nuisance exists, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to abate such hazard or nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property in accordance with Section 10.9; 
(w)  The compelling of owners of real property within the city to keep sidewalks abutting upon their property clear from snow, ice or other obstructions, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, to remove such snow, ice or other obstructions and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Section 10.9; 
(x)  The requiring, as a condition of approving plats of land or premises hereafter laid out, divided, or platted into streets and alleys within the city, that all streets shown on said plat be graded and graveled or otherwise improved, that all ditches, drains and culverts necessary to make such streets usable be constructed, that water mains and sewers be constructed, and that cement sidewalks be constructed in the proper places, all in accordance with city specifications. The city may accept a bond conditioned upon the installation of such of the foregoing improvements as it requires within such time as it determines. 
(y)  A system of civil service for the officers and employees of the city; 
(z)  (1) The regulation of ferries from the city or any place or landing therein to the opposite shore, or from any part of the city to another, and the imposition of such reasonable terms and restrictions in relation to the keeping and management of such ferries and the time, manner, and rates of carriage and transportation of persons and property as may be proper, and the provision for the punishment by proper fines and penalties for the violation of any ordinance regulating such ferries; (2) The licensing of ferries operating from one part of the city to another; (3) The provision by ordinance for a harbor master for the enforcement of all such ordinances and regulations as the Commission may lawfully enact and prescribe in respect to and over the navigable waters, harbors, wharves, docks, landings, and basins within the city and in respect to navigation, trade, commerce, and the prescription of the duties of the harbor master. The powers contained in this paragraph (z) are provided herein in accordance with the provisions of Section 18 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.18, MSA § 5.2097], which permit the inclusion in any revised charter of any power or provision contained in the charter to be revised. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL § 168.1 et seq., MSA § 6.1001 et seq. 

Section 3.1. - Qualifications of electors. 
    The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be electors of the city. 
State Law reference- Qualifications for registration as elector, MCL § 168.492, MSA § 6.1492. 
Section 3.2. - Election procedure. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general election statutes shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections except as such statutes relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers by partisan or non-partisan primary or by petition, MCL § 117.3(b), MSA § 5.2073(b). 
Section 3.3. - Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Sault Ste. Marie shall consist of one ward. The Commission shall from time to time establish by ordinance convenient election precincts. The precincts into which the city is divided on the effective date of this charter shall be the precincts of the city until otherwise provided for by the Commission. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for establishment of one or more wards, MCL § 117.3(e), MSA § 5.2073(e). 
Section 3.4. - Election date. 
    A regular city election shall be held on April 28, 1952, and on the first Monday in April of each odd-numbered year thereafter, but if some other date in the months of March, April, or May is fixed by law for the holding of the state biennial spring election, then the regular city election shall be held on the date so fixed. 
Editor's note- By resolution passed January 4, 1971, the city has opted out of the odd-year election provisions of MCL § 168.644a. et seq., MSA § 6.1644(1) et seq., and thus has chosen to follow the Charter provisions. 
Section 3.5. - Special elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Commission at least forty days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more special city elections shall be called in any one year than the number permitted by statute. 
Editor's note- MCL § 168.639, MSA § 6.1639, prohibits the county scheduling committee from approving a special election to be held within forty-five days of their approval. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL §§ 168.631, 168.639; MSA §§ 6.1631, 6.1639. 
Section 3.6. - Notice of elections. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any city election and of the officers to be nominated or elected and the questions to be voted upon shall be given by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided by statute for the giving of election notices by city clerks. 
State Law reference- Notice of election, MCL § 168.647 et seq., MSA § 6.1647 et seq. 
Section 3.7. - Voting hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by statute for the opening and closing of polls at state elections, subject to any statutory right of the Commission to adjust these hours to local time. 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, MCL § 168.720, MSA § 6.1720. 
Section 3.8. - Elective officers and terms of office. 
    The elective officers of the city shall be a Mayor, six Commissioners and a Municipal Judge, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the city at large. 
    At each regular city election, beginning in 1953, there shall be elected three Commissioners for a term of office of four years and at each regular city election, beginning in 1955, there shall be elected a Mayor for a term of office of two years. All such terms shall commence at 8:00 P.M. at the then prevailing local time on the Monday next following the regular city election at which they are elected. 
    At the regular city election in 1957 and every sixth year thereafter there shall be elected one Municipal Judge for a term of office of six years commencing at noon on the first day of January next following such election. 
    At the regular city election in 1952, there shall be elected those officers provided to be so elected in Chapter 18 of this Charter for the terms provided therein. 
Editor's note- There is no longer a municipal judge. The municipal court was abolished by MCL § 600.9921, MSA § 27A.9921. 
State Law reference- Election of certain officers mandatory, MCL § 117.3(a), MSA § 5.2073(a). 
Section 3.9. - Non-partisan primary election. 
    A regular non-partisan city primary election shall be held on April 14, 1952, and thereafter on the third Monday in February of each year in which a regular city election is to be held, but if some other date in the months of February, March or April of such year is fixed by law for the time of holding of the primary for the statutory biennial spring election, then the city primary election shall be held on the date so fixed. 
    If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective city office, valid and sufficient petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for such office to be elected at the following regular city election, then no primary election shall be held in respect to such office, and the Clerk shall publish notice of this fact and the reason therefor as part of, or at the time provided for, the publication of notices for such primary election. 
    Candidates equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to each city office at the next subsequent regular city election who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices. The names of such nominees, together with the names of persons for whom valid and sufficient petitions have been filed for offices with respect to which no primary election was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission to be placed upon the ballot for the next subsequent regular city election. 
Editor's note- See editor's note to Charter § 3.4. 
Section 3.10. - Affidavit of identity. 
    All persons who aspire to a City office and intend to file petitions for the primary election therefor, shall file a declaration of such intention with the Clerk no earlier than sixteenth Tuesday before and no later than 4:00 p.m. by the then prevailing local time on the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election. 
    All such declarations shall be accompanied by the Declaration of Intent and Affidavit of Qualifications provided for in Section 5.1. No person who has failed to file such declaration or affidavit shall be permitted to file a petition or become a candidate for any such office at said primary. The Clerk shall publish a list of perspective candidates who have filed such Declaration of Intent and Affidavit of Qualifications within fourteen days after the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election. 
    The Clerk shall publish notice of the time window for filing such Declaration of Intent and Affidavit of Qualifications and of the number of persons to be nominated to each office twenty-one days before the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election. 
(Res. of 6-7-10) 
Section 3.11. - Nominating petitions.[3] 
    The method of nomination for all candidates for City primary elections shall be by petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less then fifty nor more then one hundred registered electors of the City. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular City election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions then he is so permitted to sign, said signature shall be counted only to the extent he is permitted to sign in the order of the respective dates of filing the petitions containing such signatures. 
    Nominating petitions for candidates for regular City primary elections, and for elections for filing vacancies held pursuant to Section 5.7(b), shall be filed with the Clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election, or the twelfth Tuesday prior to the special election under Section 5.7(b). 
    The Clerk shall prior to every election, publish notice of the last time permitted for filing nomination petitions and of the number of persons to be nominated or elected to each office at least one week and not more then three weeks before such time deadline. 
(Res. of 6-7-10) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- As a part of Supp. No. 43, and at the direction of the city, the following provisions have been included herein: "The Charter language pertaining to filing nominating petitions for the regular city election is superseded by Michigan Election Law MCL 168.644e as amended under PA 44 of 2010 and PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition filing deadline is 4:00 p.m., [of the] 15th Tuesday prior to odd-year November election." 

Section 3.12. - Form of petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL § 168.544a., MSA § 6.1544(1). 
Section 3.13. - Approval of petition. 
    The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform with the forms provided and maintained by him, and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective city offices by this charter. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. Within three days after the last date for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make his final determinations as to the validity and sufficiency of each nomination petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for his respective elective city office by this charter and shall write his determinations thereof on the face of the petition. No petition shall be determined to be valid unless the declaration of intention and affidavit of qualifications provided for in Section 3.10 shall have been properly filed within the time prescribed therein. 
    The Clerk shall immediately notify in writing the candidate whose name appears thereon of his determinations. Such notice to any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient, or who is found not to be qualified, shall be delivered by personal messenger if possible. Any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient shall be allowed to file supplementary or replacement petitions before 5:00 P.M. on the fifth day after the last date for filing original petitions; thereafter no further petitions may be filed. 
Section 3.14. - Public inspection of petitions. 
    All nomination petitions filed shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Section 3.15. - Election commission. 
    An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the Clerk, the Attorney and the Treasurer. 
    The members shall serve without compensation. The Clerk shall be chairman. The Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by statute and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the City Commission. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
Section 3.16. - Form of ballot. 
    The form, printing and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to the provisions of statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all elections, the names of qualified candidates or nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be alternated systematically in the manner prescribed by statute for alternation of names in primary elections. 
    If two or more candidates or nominees for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names of each of said candidates or nominees on the ballots (or on labels or slips to be placed on voting machines when used), provided, that for any of such candidates who is an incumbent of such office, the occupation shall be designated as "Incumbent." Except as provided in this section there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates or nominees on the ballot. 
State Law reference- Arrangement of ballot, MCL § 168.706, MSA § 6.1706. 
Section 3.17. - Canvass of votes. 
    The Clerk and the members of the Commission shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes at city elections, except that if any of such persons are candidates for office or nomination at the election to be canvassed such person shall not serve as a canvasser at such election. The board of canvassers shall convene on the day following each city election at the usual time and place of meeting of the Commission and determine the results of the city election upon each question and proposition voted upon and what persons are duly nominated or elected to the several offices respectively at said election, and shall notify in writing the successful candidates or nominees of their election or nomination. The number of candidates for each office equal to the number to be elected or nominated to such office who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected or nominated. The Clerk shall make under the corporate seal of the city duplicate certificates of the determinations of the board and shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and the other in his own office. 
Editor's note- The board of canvassers is now appointed pursuant to MCL § 168.30a., MSA § 6.1030(1). 
Section 3.18. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with election statutes. Unless otherwise required by statute (a) the petition for a recount of the votes cast at any city election shall be filed with the Clerk by 5:00 P.M. by the then prevailing local time on the second full day after the board of canvassers has made its official determination of the result of the election at which such votes were cast, (b) any counter petition shall be filed by 5:00 P.M. on the next full day thereafter and (c) no officer shall be qualified to take office until final determination of any recount of the votes cast for such office. 
Editor's note- MCL §§ 168.866, 168.868, MSA §§ 6.1866, 6.1868, differ from the procedure in this section. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL § 168.861 et seq., MSA § 6.1861 et seq. 
Section 3.19. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the manner prescribed by statute. 
State Law reference- Recall, MCL § 168.931 et seq., MSA § 6.1951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. 1963, Art. II, § 8. 
CHAPTER 4. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of its officers, MCL § 117.3(d), MSA § 5.2073(d). 

Section 4.1. - Commission-manager government. 
    The city shall have the commission-manager form of government. 
Section 4.2. - The city commission. 
    There shall be a City Commission of seven members (in this charter called "Commission"), consisting of the elected Commissioners and the Mayor, who shall be deemed a member of the Commission for all purposes. The Commission shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "Commission" is used in this charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "Council," or any other term used in any statute or federal law in referring to municipal legislative or governing bodies. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a body vested with legislative power, MCL § 117.3(a), MSA § 5.2073(a). 
Section 4.3. - Compensation of mayor and commissioners. 
    The Mayor shall receive as compensation eight hundred dollars per year; each other Commissioner shall receive as compensation four hundred dollars per year. In addition the Mayor and each Commissioner shall receive the compensation for services performed as a representative on the County Board of Supervisors provided in Section 15.4. 
    Such compensation shall be paid monthly and except as otherwise provided in this charter shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid the Mayor or Commissioners for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the city during their tenure of office. However, the Mayor and Commissioners may, upon order of the Commission, be paid such necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city as are authorized and itemized. 
Editor's note- The compensation of elected officers is now determined by the local officers compensation commission. See Code of Ordinances chapter 2, article III, division 8, which was adopted pursuant to MCL § 117.5c., MSA § 5.2084(3). 
Section 4.4. - Election of mayor pro tem. 
    The Commission shall at its first meeting following each regular city election, after the newly elected members have taken office, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem for a term expiring at the first Commission meeting following the next regular city election. Such elections shall be by written ballot and by majority vote of the members of the Commission in office at the time. 
    In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Commission may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
Section 4.5. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Commission equal with that of other members of the Commission, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Commission. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies declared by the Commission may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(c)  The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Commission, this charter or any statute or laws of the United States shall require. 
(d)  Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such powers as this charter or the Commission shall specifically confer upon him. 
(e)  In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties. 
Section 4.6. - Administrative service. 
    The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Manager, Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Accountant, Court Clerk, Superintendent of Water, Superintendent of Public Works or Engineer (who shall preferably be a registered engineer), if the City Manager deems necessary a Purchasing Agent, and if the Commission deems necessary a Health Officer and a Harbor Master. The Commission may be ordinance create additional administrative offices and may by resolution combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
    The City Manager and Attorney shall be appointed by the Commission for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Commission and shall have their compensation fixed by the Commission. It is provided, however, that the City Manager shall not be removed from office within ninety days following any regular city election except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Commission. The Court Clerk shall be appointed by the Municipal Judge in accordance with Section 16.13, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Municipal Judge. His compensation shall be fixed by the Municipal Judge within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Commission. 
    All administrative officers of the city, except the City Manager, Attorney and Court Clerk and except administrative officers of independent boards and commissions shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period, subject to confirmation by the Commission. Such officers shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall have their compensation fixed by the City Manager in accordance with budget appropriations and subject to approval by the Commission. Such officers may be discharged by the City Manager at his pleasure without confirmation by the Commission. 
    Except as may be otherwise required by statute or this charter, the Commission shall establish by ordinance such departments of the city as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions of each department and the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the officers of each department, but the Commission may not diminish the duties or responsibilities of the office of City Manager. The City Manager may prescribe such duties and responsibilities of the officers of those departments responsible to him which are not inconsistent with this charter or with any ordinance or resolution. 
    All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the city or administrative officers or deputies (other than deputy court clerks), by, or under the authority of, this charter shall be deemed to be employees of the city. The head of each department shall have the power to hire and discharge the employees of his department, subject to the exception for deputy court clerks contained in Section 16.13. 
Editor's note- There is no longer a court clerk. The municipal court was abolished by MCL § 600.9921, MSA § 27A.9921. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election or appointment of a mayor, clerk and treasurer, MCL § 117.3(a), MSA § 5.2073(a); mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications, duties and compensation of its officers, MCL § 117.3(d), MSA § 5.2073(d). 
Section 4.7. - City manager-Appointment, qualifications, functions and duties. 
    The Commission shall appoint a City Manager within ninety days after any vacancy exists in such position. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his training and experience and without regard to his political or religious preferences. 
    During his tenure of office, he shall devote his entire time and energies to his municipal employment and shall not be actively engaged in any private business or employment, but this sentence shall not restrict his right to invest in businesses in which he is not actively engaged. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government. His functions and duties shall be: 
(a)  To be responsible to the Commission for the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the city government except the Attorney's department; 
(b)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(c)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(d)  To recommend an annual budget to the Commission and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Commission, and to keep the Commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(e)  To recommend to the Commission for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend Commission meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote; 
(f)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or as may be required of him by the Commission. 
Section 4.8. - Acting city manager. 
    The Commission may appoint or designate an Acting City Manager during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the City Manager from the city and shall fix his compensation. Such Acting City Manager shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Manager. 
Section 4.9. - Relationship of commission to administrative service. 
    Neither the Commission nor any of its members or committees shall dictate the appointment or employment of any person or in any way interfere with the City Manager or other administrative officer to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service (except the Attorney) solely through the City Manager, and neither the Commission nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
Section 4.10. - Attorney-Functions and duties. 
(a)  The Attorney shall act as legal adviser to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Commission and shall be responsible solely to the Commission. He shall advise any officer or department head of the city in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)  He shall prosecute such ordinance violations and he shall conduct for the city such cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as the Commission may request. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Commission may direct. 
(c)  He shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Commission and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)  He shall call to the attention of the Commission and the City Manager all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the city. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or by the Commission. 
(f)  He shall at all times cooperate with the City Manager and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Manager so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as herein provided. 
(g)  Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Commission may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein. 
Section 4.11. - Attorney and special counsel-Compensation. 
    The compensation set by the Commission for the Attorney shall be in contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be provided at the discretion of the Commission for appeals to, or litigation commenced in, the Federal Courts, the Circuit Court or State Supreme Court; for work requiring extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals; for legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the city; for condemnation proceedings or for other matters outside the scope of his normal duties. No such special compensation, nor any compensation to special legal counsel, shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement made in advance between the Commission and the Attorney or special counsel as to the extent and nature of the duties for which such compensation is to be paid. 
Section 4.12. - Clerk-Functions and duties. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the clerk of the Commission and shall attend all meetings of the Commission and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(b)  The Clerk shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the city the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Commission. 
(d)  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this charter. 
(e)  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter, by the City Manager or by resolution or ordinance of the Commission. 
Section 4.13. - Treasurer-Functions and duties. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city, any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the city or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall collect all moneys of the city the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other officers and employees of the city all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt, and he shall in all cases give a receipt therefor. 
(c)  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Commission may determine and shall report the same in detail to the Accountant. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall disburse all city funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this charter and procedures to be established by the Commission. 
(e)  The Treasurer shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district and city taxes as are conferred by statute upon township treasurers in connection with state, county, township and school district taxes upon real and personal property. 
(f)  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter, by the City Manager or by resolution or ordinance of the Commission. 
Section 4.14. - Assessor-Functions and duties. 
    The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by statute. He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter, by ordinance and by statute. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this charter, by the City Manager or by resolution or ordinance of the Commission. 
Section 4.15. - Accountant-Functions and duties. 
    The Accountant shall be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the city which shall conform to this charter, to any uniform system required by law and to generally accepted principles and practices of governmental accounting. 
Section 4.16. - Deputy administrative officers. 
    The Clerk, Treasurer, Manager and Assessor may appoint their own deputies subject to the written confirmation of the City Manager (except that the deputy of the Manager shall be confirmed by the Commission) and may terminate the status of their deputies at their pleasure, upon written notice to such confirming officer or body. Such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers except as the same may be from time to time limited by their superiors or by such confirming officer or body. 
Section 4.17. - Public library board. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Public Library of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, created by Local Act 319 of 1901, is continued and charged with the care, management and control of the municipal public library. Such Board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Commission, one annually on the first Monday in May, or as soon thereafter as may be. Such members shall have the qualifications for city board members prescribed in Section 5.1. The term of the members shall be five years beginning in May of the year in which they are appointed. The members of such Board shall serve without compensation. 
    The Board as provided in said Local Act shall be a body corporate, and, by way of example but without limitation, (1) may sue and be sued, (2) may acquire and hold property, (3) shall be responsible for the determination of library policies and the administration of the library, (4) shall employ, discharge and fix the compensation of library personnel, (5) shall promulgate rules and regulations for the library, (6) shall approve a budget for the library, and (7) shall expend library funds subject to the provisions of this section. 
    The City Treasurer, as provided in said Local Act, shall be the Treasurer of the Library Board of Trustees and shall have custody of all of the funds of the Board. All revenues of the library shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt, in accordance with Section 4.13(b). He shall disburse library funds only in pursuance of an order of the Board and a warrant signed by the president of said Board. 
    The Commission shall levy annually, as part of the July tax roll, any levies required for the support of the library in accordance with the Local Acts pertaining to such Board. The Commission may appropriate additional funds for the support of the library. 
    The control of the budget of the library shall be in accordance with the provisions of this charter for other city departments except that transfers of unencumbered appropriation balances from one account to another may be made by the Board. Accounting for library finances shall be done by the Accountant. The officer responsible for city purchasing shall make such purchases for the library as the Board or its officers may at their election request. 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for office and employment in city. 
    No person shall hold any elective office of the city unless he has been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the day of appointment to fill a vacancy and is also a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    The Municipal Judge shall, in addition, have the qualifications for that office prescribed in Section 16.3. 
    Each candidate for elective office shall file with his declaration of intention his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. 
    In accordance with the requirements of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.1 et seq., MSA § 5.2071 et seq.], no person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Commission or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
    The Commission shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members. 
    Each member of a city board or commission shall have been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately prior to the day of his appointment and shall also be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    All officers shall be citizens of the United States. 
    No elective officer may be appointed to any city office or be employed by the city during the term of office for which he was elected. 
Editor's note- The courts have held that residency requirements for elective office longer than the voter residency requirement are unconstitutional. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MCL § 117.3(d), MSA § 5.2073(d). 
Section 5.2. - Declaring vacancies in elective offices. 
    Any elective city office shall be declared vacant by the Commission before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; or 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualifies for, the office at the election at which such office should be filled; or 
(c)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; or 
(d)  In the case of any member of the Commission if such officer shall miss five consecutive regular meetings of the Commission or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the Commission and the reason therefor entered in its proceedings at the time of each absence; or 
(e)  If the officer is removed from office by the Commission in accordance with the provision of Section 5.4. 
Section 5.3. - Declaring vacancies in boards and commissions. 
    The office of any member of any board or commission (other than the City Commission) shall be declared vacant by the Commission before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; or 
(b)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; or 
(c)  If such officer shall miss three consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by such board or commission and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings at the time of each absence; or 
(d)  If the officer is removed from office by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4. 
Section 5.4. - Removals from office. 
    Removals by the Commission of elective officers or of members of boards or commissions shall be made for either of the following reasons: (a) for any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers by the Governor, or (b) for any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Commission shall be made only after hearing of which such officer has been given notice by the Clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Commission in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal may be under consideration, shall be required for any such removal. 
State Law reference- Removal of officers by Governor, MCL § 168.327, MSA § 6.1327. 
Section 5.5. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers and of members of boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Commission at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. A resignation shall create a vacancy in office. 
Section 5.6. - Filling vacancies in appointive offices. 
    Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Section 5.7. - Filling vacancies in the offices of mayor and commissioner. 
(a)  Except as provided in the other paragraphs of this section, vacancies in the offices of Mayor and Commissioner shall, within thirty days, be filled for the unexpired term of the officer whose office has become vacant, by appointment by a majority vote of the members of the Commission then in office of a person possessing the qualifications for the office. If a Commissioner be appointed as Mayor, such appointment shall not alter such appointee's term as a member of the Commission but shall create a vacancy in the office of Commissioner for the unexpired term of the former Mayor. 
(b)  If any vacancy in the office of Mayor or Commissioner is not so filled within the said thirty days after such vacancy occurs, or if four or five simultaneous vacancies exist in the offices of Mayor and Commissioners, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. Such special election shall be called by the Clerk within ten days after the occurrence of four or five simultaneous vacancies, or after the expiration of said thirty day period, as the case may be. The special election shall be held not less than forty days nor more than sixty days after the date on which it is called. 
    In connection with any such special election, no primary election shall be held and no declaration of intention shall be required. Candidates shall be nominated by petitions in a manner identical to that provided in Sections 3.11 to 3.13 inclusive, except that the affidavit of qualifications shall be filed with the petition; the names of all qualified candidates who file valid and sufficient nomination petitions within the time provided in Section 3.11 shall be certified to the Election Commission and placed on the ballot; and all other election provisions of this charter not inconsistent with this Section 5.7 shall govern. 
    At such election if there are vacancies in the office of Commissioner for varying unexpired terms, candidates equal to the number of vacancies for the longer unexpired term receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to fill such vacancies, and candidates equal to the number of vacancies for the shorter unexpired term receiving the next highest number of votes in order shall be elected to fill such vacancies. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no vacancy in the office of Commissioner shall be filled either by appointment or by special election if the term of office of the person whose office has become vacant expires within sixty days after the vacancy occurs. 
(d)  If six or seven simultaneous vacancies exist in the offices of Mayor and Commissioners, and notwithstanding Section 5.7(c), such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms by appointment by the Circuit Judge of Chippewa County. In case he is unable to act or fails to so act within ten days after such simultaneous vacancies occur, any remaining appointments shall be made by the Governor of Michigan. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the filling of vacancies resulting from recall. 
Editor's note- MCL § 168.639, MSA § 6.1639, prohibits the county scheduling committee from approving a special election to be held within forty-five days of their approval. 
Section 5.8. - Filling vacancies in the office of municipal judge. 
(a)  Vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the members of the Commission then in office of a person possessing the qualifications for the office for a term expiring on the Monday following the next regular city election. 
(b)  It is provided, however, that if, in 1953 or any sixth year thereafter, the vacancy occurs in the period beginning on the fiftieth day before the regular city primary election and ending on the day of the regular city election, it shall be so filled by appointment for a term expiring on the Monday following the regular city election in the second year following. 
(c)  It is further provided that if the vacancy occurs in the period beginning on the fiftieth day before the regular city primary election in 1955 and ending on December 31, 1957, or in the corresponding period beginning in any sixth year after 1955, it shall be so filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(d)  If an interim appointment is made under the provisions of paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term at the election immediately preceding the expiration of the interim term. 
Editor's note- There is no longer a municipal judge. The municipal court was abolished by MCL § 600.9921, MSA § 27A.9921. 
Section 5.9. - No change in term of office or compensation. 
    Except by procedures provided in this charter, the terms of office of the elective officers and of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers shall not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected or appointed and has qualified. Where several terms of Commissioners expire simultaneously, that Commissioner who was elected by the highest number of votes (or any appointee who filled his position) shall be deemed to be succeeded by the candidate who received the highest number of votes, that Commissioner who was elected by the second highest number of votes, by the candidate who received the second highest number of votes, etc. 
    The Commission shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after his service has been rendered. The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or decreased from the day he is elected until the end of the term of office for which he was elected. 
State Law reference- Permissible Charter provisions, MCL § 117.5(d), MSA § 5.2084(d). 
Section 5.10. - Oath of office and bond. 
    Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed for public officers by the Constitution and shall file the oath with the Clerk, together with any bond, required by statute, this charter or by the Commission. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date he is notified in writing of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Commission shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify. 
Section 5.11. - Compensation of employees and officers. 
(a)  The compensation of all employees and officers of the city whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the City Manager within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Commission. 
(b)  The respective salaries and compensations of officers and employees as fixed by, or pursuant to, this charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. 
    Such fees, commissions and compensations shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees and be paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the Accountant. The provisions of paragraph (b) of this section shall not apply to fees, commissions or other compensation paid by the County of Chippewa to any officer or employee serving as a city representative on the Board of Supervisors. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred for service in behalf of the city. 
Section 5.12. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all officers of the city whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Commission, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the city an official bond, in such form and amount as the Commission shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office, and will on demand deliver over to his successor in office, or other proper officer or agent of the city, all books, papers, moneys, effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his office, which may be in his custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Commission shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that he will, on demand, pay over or account for to the city, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all moneys received by him as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, city employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. The Clerk shall be custodian of all the bonds of all officers or employees, except that the Treasurer shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the Clerk. 
Section 5.13. - Delivery of office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days, or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Section 5.14. - Financial interest prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this section no contract or purchase involving an amount in excess of two hundred dollars shall be made by the city in which any elective or appointive officer or any member of his family has any financial interest, direct or indirect, other than the common public interest. A "Contract" shall for the purposes of this section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the city for a valuable consideration to be paid by the city, or is to be sold or transferred by the city, except the furnishing of personal services as an officer or employee of the city; and the term "member of his family" shall include only spouse, child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, sister, brother, half-sister, half-brother and the spouse of any of them. 
(b)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to members of a city board or commission (other than the City Commission) unless the contract or purchase is relative to the affairs of their respective board or commission. 
(c)  Without limiting the generality of paragraph (a) of this section, an officer shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a contract if he or any member of his family is an employee, partner, officer, director or sales representative of the person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made or of a sales representative of such person, firm or corporation. Ownership, individually or in a fiduciary capacity, by an officer or member of his family of securities, or of any beneficial interest in securities, of any corporation with which a contract is made or which is a sales representative of any person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made, shall not be deemed to create a financial interest in such contract unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such securities, so owned by such officer and the members of his family, shall amount to ten per cent of any class of the securities of such corporation then outstanding. 
(d)  A contract in which an officer or member of his family has a financial interest may be made by the city if the members of the Commission in office at the time having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the best interests of the city will be served by the making of such contract and if either such contract is made after comparative prices are obtained or if such members of the Commission having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the obtaining of comparative prices is not feasible in such particular case. Any Commission member may evidence his participation in either determination required by this paragraph by vote at a Commission meeting or by written instrument filed with the Clerk. 
(e)  Any officer who knowingly permits the city to enter into any contract in which he has a financial interest without disclosing such interest to the Commission prior to the action of the Commission in authorizing such contract, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. Except in the instances specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the unanimous determination (by vote or written instrument) of all members of the Commission that in a particular case an officer or member of his family will not have a financial interest in any contract to be entered into by the city shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or misrepresentation. 
(f)  No officer shall stand as surety on any bond to the city or give any bail for any other person which may be required by the charter or any ordinance of the city. Any officer of the city who violates the provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
Section 5.15. - Anti-nepotism. 
    The following relatives and their spouses (a) of any elective official or of his spouse, or (b) of the City Manager or of his spouse are disqualified from holding any appointive city office or any city employment during the term for which said elective official was elected or during the tenure of office of the City Manager respectively: spouse, child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother and half-sister. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election of said elective official or appointment of said City Manager respectively. 
Section 5.16. - Employee welfare benefits. 
    The Commission shall have the power to adopt and make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards and recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health or accident insurance. 
Section 5.17. - Retirement system. 
    For the purpose of providing retirement allowances for the employees of the city, the conditions of membership of the city in the State Municipal Employees' Retirement System created by Public Act 135 of 1945 [MCL § 38.601 et seq., MSA § 5.4001 et seq.] shall in no way be altered by the taking of effect of this charter. 
CHAPTER 6. - THE COMMISSION: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Section 6.1. - Regular meetings. 
    The Commission shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month. A regular meeting shall be held at 8:00 P.M. at the then prevailing local time on the Monday next following each regular city election. 
Section 6.2. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, the City Manager or any two members of the Commission on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Commission, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Commission are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Section 6.3. - Business at special meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Commission unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. 
    However, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Commission present consent thereto and all the members absent file their written consent. 
Section 6.4. - Meetings to be public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe. 
State Law reference- Mandatory Charter provision, MCL § 117.3(l), MSA § 5.2073(l). 
Section 6.5. - Quorum; adjournment of meetings. 
    A majority of the members of the Commission in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Commission but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
Section 6.6. - Compulsory attendance and conduct at meetings. 
    Any two or more members of the Commission may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
    The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings and any member of the Commission or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
    Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Commission in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 6.7. - Organization and rules of the commission. 
    The Commission shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting in the English language shall be kept by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting. 
(b)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(c)  No member of the Commission shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest other than the common public interest or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing so to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Commission shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. 
(e)  The proceedings of the Commission, or a brief summary thereof which shall include all roll call votes, shall be published within ten days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Commission. 
(f)  There shall be no standing committees of the Commission. 
Section 6.8. - Providing for public health and safety. 
    The Commission shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Commission shall constitute the Board of Health of the city, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute. 
Section 6.9. - Investigations. 
    The Commission or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Commission for the purposes stated herein may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this charter and such person when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. 
    It is provided further that, in case of failure on the part of any person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence as so ordered, the Commission may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of Chippewa County in requiring obedience to such summons or production of such books, papers and other evidence. The Circuit Court of Chippewa County, in case of contumacy or refusal to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence, may issue an order requiring such person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence and to give evidence touching on the matter in question, and any failure to obey such order of the Court may be punished by such Court as contempt thereof. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property, MCL § 117.3(j), MSA § 5.2.73(j). 
CHAPTER 7. - LEGISLATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State constitution reference- General authority relative to the adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

Section 7.1. - Prior city legislation. 
    All valid bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
    Those provisions of any effective valid bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 7.2. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    All official action of the Commission shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Action by resolution, motion or order shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be so done by this charter, by statute, by federal law or pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the Commission and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title, by a serial number, and by a code section number as soon as the codification of ordinances is completed. 
    Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Sault Ste. Marie ordains:". 
Section 7.3. - Enactment, amendment, repeal and effective date of ordinances. 
    Subject to the exceptions which follow hereafter, (a) ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the Commission, (b) no ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance adopted as foresaid, (c) no ordinance shall be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced nor until after publication of the proceedings or summary thereof of the meeting at which it was introduced, which summary shall include a brief statement of its title and purpose, and (d) the effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein but the effective date shall not be earlier than ten days after enactment nor before publication thereof. 
    It is provided, however, that an ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced and/or before publication of the proceedings of the meeting at which it is introduced, or may be given earlier effect than ten days after its enactment, or both, by five affirmative votes if six or seven members of the Commission are present at the meeting at which it is enacted or by four affirmative votes if four or five members of the Commission are present at the meeting at which it is enacted. 
    In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than ten days after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance becomes operative may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three public places in the city, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding; and the Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such publication by posting of the ordinance, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with Section 7.4 but not as a requirement for the effectiveness thereof. 
    No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.2. 
    No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the sections of the ordinance as amended, shall be enacted and published in full. However, an ordinance or section thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
Section 7.4. - Publication and recording of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance shall be published within ten days after its enactment in one of the following two methods: (a) The full text thereof may be published in a newspaper as defined in Section 17.4, or (b) in cases of ordinances over five hundred words in length a digest, summary or statement of purpose of the ordinance, approved by the Commission, may be published in a newspaper as defined in Section 17.4, either separately or as part of the published Commission proceedings or summary thereof, including with such newspaper publication a notice that printed copies of the full text of the ordinance are available for inspection by and distribution to the public at the office of the Clerk; if method (b) is used, then printed copies shall promptly be so made available as stated in such notice. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called, "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon but the failure to so record and authenticate any such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL § 117.3(K), MSA § 5.2073(K). 
Section 7.5. - Penalties for violations of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance may provide for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any ordinance shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL § 117.4i(10), MSA § 5.2082(10). 
Section 7.6. - Special requirements for certain commission actions. 
(a)  Action to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof, shall be by resolution. After the introduction of such resolution and before its final adoption, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall publish notices of such hearing at least one week prior thereto. 
(b)  The following actions shall require the affirmative vote of four or more members of the Commission for the effectiveness thereof: 
(1)  Vacating, discontinuing or abolishing any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place or part thereof; 
(2)  Purchasing, selling, leasing or letting of any real estate or interest therein; 
(3)  Authorizing the condemning of private property for public use; 
(4)  Creating or abolishing any office; 
(5)  Appropriating any money; 
(6)  Imposing any tax or assessment; 
(7)  Reconsidering or rescinding any vote of the Commission. 
(c)  The Commission shall not have the power to provide for engaging in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of the amount permitted to be so invested by statute unless approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
Section 7.7. - Approval of plats; acceptance of street dedications. 
    The Commission shall not approve any plat nor accept the dedication of any street unless all the following improvements shall have been made or a bond furnished to guarantee such improvements: 
(a)  The installation of sanitary sewers and house or building connections to beyond the curb location, 
(b)  The installation of water mains connected with existing city mains with house or building connections to beyond the curb location, 
(c)  The construction of streets to proper grade with adequate provisions for drainage and adequate surface. 
    The Commission shall provide for the establishment of specifications and standards for all improvements required to be made under the provisions of this section, and shall require that all such work be subject to city inspection and approval before acceptance thereof. 
    The city shall not be obliged to share in the costs of the installation of such improvements prior to dedication, and may share in such costs only (a) to the extent that it shares in the cost of similar improvements elsewhere in the city, and (b) to the additional extent of the incremental cost of installing improvements larger than are necessary for the immediate area when such enlargement is done at the request of the city. 
    It is provided, however, that plats may be approved or street dedications accepted without any provision for sanitary sewers and water mains if all the lots in such plat or on such street are one-half acre or larger for each dwelling unit, and if provision is made by contract of at least twenty-five years duration, or by ordinance, to insure that no further subdivision of such lots will be made before provision is made for sanitary sewers and water mains. 
    The provisions of this section may be supplemented by ordinance. 
    The provisions of this section shall not abridge the powers granted in Section 2.3(x). 
Section 7.8. - Technical codes adopted by reference. 
    Subject to the provisions of this section there may be adopted as a city ordinance or code, by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance, in whole or part, provisions of (a) any Michigan statute or (b) any detailed technical regulations promulgated or enacted by (1) any state or federal agency, or (2) by any municipal corporation, or (3) by any organization or association which has developed a recognized standard code or set of such technical regulations. Such adopting ordinance shall clearly identify, and state the purpose of, the provisions or regulations so adopted. Where any ordinance or code, or amendment thereto, adopting provisions by reference is enacted, all requirements for its publication may be met, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, by (a) publishing the ordinance referring to such provisions in the manner provided by this charter for the publication of other ordinances, and including as part of such publication a notice that printed copies of the provisions so referred to are available for inspection by and distribution to the public at the office of the Clerk and (b) so making copies available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL § 117.3(K), MSA § 5.2073(K). 
Section 7.9. - Codification of ordinances. 
    Within two years after the effective date of this charter the Commission shall direct and complete a codification of all ordinances of the city in printed loose-leaf form and shall cause such codification to be maintained thereafter in current form. Any such codification may originally include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the city. 
    The Commission shall provide for making printed copies of the original codification available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge and shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such original codification at least ten days before the effective date thereof. Such printing and making available of the codification and notice thereof shall constitute publication of any such original codification, other provisions of this charter for publication of ordinances notwithstanding. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of the codification thereof, and of provisions adopted by reference in accordance with Section 7.8, may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and other legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL § 117.5b, MSA § 5.2084(2). 
Section 7.10. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- City authority relative to initiative and referendum on all matters within the scope of its powers, MCL § 117.4i(6), MSA § 5.2082(6). 
Section 7.11. - Initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten per cent of the registered electors of the city as of the date of the last regular city election and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within thirty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Commission and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to contents and simultaneously filed by one person. 
    An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. An initiatory petition only shall contain as part of the body of said petition the names and addresses of ten registered electors of the city (who shall be among the petitioners) who shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the purposes hereinafter named in this chapter. 
    A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or part thereof, or code sections, it proposes to have repealed. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or, in the case of an initiatory petition, fails to properly name a committee of ten, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental or corrected petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Commission at its next regular meeting. 
Section 7.12. - Assistance of city attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall, upon request, assist any group proposing to circulate an initiatory or referendary petition. Such assistance shall be limited to advice with regard to the form and contents of the petition. 
Section 7.13. - Commission procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    Upon the presentation to the Commission of an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Commission shall, within thirty days, unless otherwise provided by statute; 
(a)  In the case of an initiatory petition, either (1) enact the ordinance as submitted, or (2) enact a similar substitute ordinance that at least six members of the aforesaid committee indicate in writing is an acceptable substitute; or 
(b)  In the case of a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance or part thereof it proposes to have repealed; or 
(c)  In the case of either kind of petition, determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors as provided in the following section. 
Section 7.14. - Submission of initiatory and referendary ordinance to electors. 
    Should the Commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Commission, at a special election called for that specific purpose. If no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within ninety days from the time the petition is presented to the Commission and the Commission does not enact the ordinance or an approved substitute therefor as provided in Section 7.13(a)(2), or repeal the ordinance, as the case may be, then the Commission shall call a special election to be held within eighty days from such date of presentation for the submission of the proposal contained in the petition. The result of all elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by statute or Constitution. 
    If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
Section 7.15. - Ordinance suspended. 
    The presentation to the Commission by the Clerk of a valid and sufficient referendary petition proposing to repeal an ordinance which was enacted not over one year from the date of original filing of the petition with the Clerk shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Commission or final determination by the electors. 
Section 7.16. - Limitation on amendment or repeal of ordinances; submission of ordinances by commission. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was repealed. It is provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Commission on its own motion. 
Section 7.17. - Severability of ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE 

Section 8.1 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget procedures. 
    The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Commission on the third Monday in April in 1953 and in each year thereafter a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, and shall include therein, or provide as a supplement thereto, at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates with supporting explanations of all proposed expenditures for each department, board, commission, utility and agency of the city (including the public library), showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to March 1 and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to March first, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Commission may request. 
Section 8.3. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Commission shall direct. Notice of such public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than one week prior to such hearing. 
Section 8.4. - Adoption of budget. 
    Not later than June first in each year the Commission shall by resolution adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during such year and shall in such resolution provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes subject to the limitations contained in Section 9.1. 
    Appropriations to a contingency fund or to any other similar fund which is not for a specific purpose or purposes shall not exceed an amount which is reasonably necessary to provide for unforseeable contingencies but in no case over four per cent of the total amount of the appropriations for all purposes. No allowance shall be made in the contingency fund for any estimated expenditure which can logically be included in a specific budget account. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation of money for municipal purposes, MCL § 117.3(h), MSA § 5.2073(h). 
Section 8.5. - Budget control. 
    Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Commission by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof from one account, department, fund or agency to another. 
    In the case of emergency arising from a natural calamity, civil commotion, military action, or act of God, as a result of which it is necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety, the Commission may make additional appropriations to cover unanticipated expenditures required of the city because of such emergency. Otherwise, no additional appropriations shall be made. 
    Expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation from the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
    The City Manager shall each month submit to the Commission data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Commission shall endeavor to reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
    The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund. 
Section 8.6. - Depository. 
    The Commission shall designate depositories for city funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Commission shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Section 8.7. - Independent audit; annual report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Commission. The audit shall include checks by recognized audit procedures to determine if the financial provisions of the charter have been complied with. Such audit shall be made by Certified Public Accountants experienced in municipal accounting to be selected by the Commission. Such audit shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
    The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city after completion of the annual audit. The report shall include financial statements showing the results of all city operations including operating statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of such report, after approval by the Commission, shall be made available for public inspection and distribution at the office of the Clerk. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL § 211.1 et seq., MSA § 7.1 et seq. 

Section 9.1. - Power to tax; tax limit. 
    The city shall have the power to assess taxes and lay and collect rents and tolls. The annual general ad valorem tax levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city exclusive of any levies authorized by statute to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations. 
    The city shall also have the power to lay and collect excises, but any excise imposed pursuant to the authority contained in this section must, before becoming effective, be referred to the electorate and ratified by a majority of the voters voting thereon. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL § 117.3(g), MSA § 5.2073(g). 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Mandatory Charter provisions, MCL § 117.3(f), (i); MSA § 5.2073(f), (i). 
Section 9.3. - Exemption from taxation. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by statute and this charter. The Commission is hereby authorized, if in its judgment it shall be for the best interests of the city, to exempt from municipal taxation any manufacturing institution not to exceed a period of five years; provided, however, that no exemption shall be voted or given unless notice that such vote will be taken and shall have been given in writing at a regular meeting of the Commission, and the same published in some newspaper in said city at least two weeks before the time of said vote. In the case of exemptions made to persons who, in the opinion of the Assessor and Board of Review, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the public charges, there shall be required as a condition to the grant of exemption a trust deed or assignment to the city of all or any part of the real property of the beneficiary of such exemption. Such trust deed or assignment shall be in such form as to be recordable in the office of the Register of Deeds of Chippewa County and shall be so recorded. Such deed shall state the amount at which the property would have been assessed if it had not been exempted. No such trust deed or assignment shall deprive the owner of the property to whom tax exemption is granted of his right to freely occupy and use the property, but shall give the city in the event that the ownership of such property is transferred to another in any manner whatsoever such an interest therein as will provide for the payment to the city of an amount equal to all taxes, exclusive of interest, penalties and collection fees which would have been levied by the city against the property of such owner had exemption not been granted, in the event of the death of a person who has received an exemption, the claim of the city against said person's property or estate (as evidenced by said trust deed) shall be a claim of the fourth class and preference in accordance with Section 10, Chapter VIII of Act 288, of the Public Acts of 1939 [MCL § 708.10, MSA § 27.3178(420)]. (Adopted by electors on April 1, 1957) 
State Law reference- Tax exemption for industrial facilities, MCL § 207.558, MSA § 7.800(8). 
Section 9.4. - Tax day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January, which shall be deemed the tax day. 
Section 9.5. - Preparation of the assessment roll. 
    On or before the first Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city subject to ad valorem taxation. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with statute and this charter. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. The records of the Assessor shall show separate figures for the value of the land, of the building improvements and of personal property. 
    On or before the first Monday in March the Assessor shall give by first class mail a notice of any increase over the previous year in the assessed value of any property or of the addition of any property to the roll to the owner as shown by such assessment roll. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL § 117.3(i), MSA § 5.2073(i). 
Section 9.6. - Board of review. 
    The Board of Review shall be composed of five freeholders of the city who shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 and who during their term of office shall not be city or school board officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for elective city or school board office. The filing by a member of the Board of Review of his nomination petition for an elective city or school board office or the filing of a consent thereto shall constitute a resignation from the Board of Review. The appointment of members of such Board shall be based upon their knowledge and experience in property valuation. Three members of the Board shall be appointed by the Commission in January of 1954 and of each even-numbered year thereafter, two of whom shall be designated for a term of four years and one of whom shall be designated for a term of two years, beginning in the month when so appointed. The Commission shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board. The Board of Review shall annually in February select its own chairman for the ensuing year, and the Assessor shall be clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions but shall have no vote. 
Section 9.7. - Duties and functions of board of review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are by statute conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. At the time and in the manner provided in the following section, it shall hear complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the Board in making its decision. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon, or additions or corrections to the assessment roll. The Assessor shall keep a permanent record of all proceedings and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. 
Section 9.8. - Meetings of board of review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its first meeting on the second Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Commission and shall remain in session for at least eight hours for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. During its first meeting the Board shall consider any written objections filed with it in respect to any assessment and may, on its own motion, revise said assessment roll and may increase or diminish valuations therein, add the names of persons and descriptions of property and shall correct all errors and supply all deficiencies found therein or resolve to consider such action at its second meeting. 
    In each case in which, at the first meeting of the Board, the assessed value of any property is increased over the amount shown on the assessment roll as prepared by the Assessor or any property is added to such roll by the Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second meeting such increasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to such roll, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owners as shown by such roll by first class letter mailed not later than the day following the end of the first meeting of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the second meeting of the Board. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its second meeting on the fourth Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Commission and shall continue in session until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for less than eight hours. At the second meeting, the Board may not increase any assessment except in those cases in which the Board resolved at its first meeting to consider such increase at its second meeting. The Board may, however, still add to the roll property previously omitted, but before so doing shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner thereof and permit him to be heard. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the meeting of the board of review, MCL § 117.3(i), MSA § 5.2073(i). 
Section 9.9. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the Clerk at least one week prior to each meeting of the Board. 
Section 9.10. - Endorsement of roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL § 211.30a, MSA § 7.30(1). 
Section 9.11. - Clerk to certify tax levy. 
    Within three days after the Commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Commission determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Commission requires to be assessed, reassessed or charged upon any property or against any person. 
Section 9.12. - City tax roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll", and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 9.11, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Commission to be charged, assessed or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread the amounts of the general ad valorem city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
Section 9.13. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March first of the following year from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On June fifteenth, the roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for collection. 
Section 9.14. - Tax lien on property. 
    On July first, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. 
    Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens to the extend provided by statute and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
Section 9.15. - Taxes due-Notification thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on July first of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall (a) publish, between June fifteenth and July first notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties and fees for late payment of same, and (b) mail a bill to each person named in said roll, but in cases of any type of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed. 
    Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in case of late payment or non-payment of the same. 
Section 9.16. - Collection fees. 
    All taxes paid on or before September 15 th of each year shall be collected by the Treasurer without interest charge or collection fee. 
    On the sixteenth day of September he shall add to all taxes then unpaid a collection fee of 2.5 percent thereof, and on the first day of each succeeding month he shall add to all taxes then unpaid an additional one-half of one per cent thereof as a collection fee. Such collection fee shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
    It is provided, however, that if delivery of the tax roll to the Treasurer, as provided in Section 9.13, is delayed for any reason by more then twenty days after June fifteenth, the application of the schedule of collection fees provided herein shall be postponed thirty days for the first twenty days of such delay and shall be postponed an additional thirty days for each additional thirty days, of major fraction thereof, of delay. (Amend. approved May 8, 2007) 
Section 9.17. - Failure or refusal to pay tax. 
    If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax assessed to him, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue the person to whom it is assessed in accordance with statute. 
Section 9.18. - Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer. 
    All city and school taxes remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer to the extent and in the same manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with statute, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. 
Section 9.19. - State, county and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of statute relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For the purposes of collecting state, county and school taxes, the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under statute. 
CHAPTER 10. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Power re special assessments, MCL §§ 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; MSA §§ 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

Section 10.1. - General power relative to special assessments. 
    The Commission shall have the power to determine by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
Section 10.2. - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
    The Commission shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, collection of assessments and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method. 
    Such ordinance shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be adopted until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city, but this requirement for mailing notices shall not be a jurisdictional requirement for the making of any special assessment or of any special assessment roll. 
(b)  No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed until after a meeting of the Commission has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city, but this requirement for mailing notices shall not be a jurisdictional requirement for the making of any special assessment or of any special assessment roll. 
(c)  No original special assessment roll shall be confirmed except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Commission if prior to such confirmation written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district which will be required to bear more than fifty per cent of the amount of such special assessment. 
    For the purposes of Section 10.2 (c) only: (1) in the case of tenancies by the entirety or joint tenancies, any one tenant shall be considered an owner entitled to file objections; (2) in the case of tenancies in common, objections shall be valid only if signed by all the common tenants; and (3) in the case of property being sold under land contract, the seller of such property shall be deemed to be the owner. 
(d)  No public improvement to be financed in whole or part by special assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement. 
Section 10.3. - Special assessment powers. 
    In addition to the other improvements which the city may make and finance in whole or in part by special assessments, the city may: 
(a)  Construct, establish and extend facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits as a public improvement and finance the same in whole or in part by special assessments; 
(b)  Install a boulevard lighting system on any street and finance the same in whole or in part by special assessment upon land abutting thereon; provided that property owners of a majority of the frontage on such street or part thereof to be so improved shall petition therefor; 
(c)  Install and connect sewers and waterworks on and to property within the city and finance the same in whole or in part by special assessments. 
Section 10.4. - Disposition of excessive special assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto, or larger than the amount necessary to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll, may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five per cent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five per cent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed as shown by the current assessment roll of the city and to the city to the extent it has been assessed for such improvements. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment. 
Section 10.5. - Additional assessments; correction of invalid special assessments. 
    Additional pro rata assessments may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five per cent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the Commission be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Commission, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Commission shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for an original assessment and whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment refunds shall be made. 
    No judgment or decree nor any act of the Commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Section 10.6. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment (a) unless within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice is given to the Commission of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (b) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty days after confirmation of the roll. 
Section 10.7. - Lien and collection of special assessments. 
    Lien. Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll the special assessments shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and shall until paid be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. 
    Due date. Special assessments shall become due on such date as the Commission shall prescribe. 
    Installment payments. Any assessment may be made payable in yearly installments not to exceed ten in number. The initial installment shall be due on such date as the Commission shall prescribe, and subsequent annual installments shall be due on the anniversary of the due date of the first installment. 
    It is provided, however, that the Commission may provide that subsequent yearly installments be spread on the annual city tax roll. In such cases the second installment shall be collected as part of the first city tax roll which becomes due six months or more after the due date of the initial installment. 
    All unpaid installments except the initial installment shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding six per cent per year from such date as the Commission shall prescribe. Such interest on the entire unpaid balance shall be spread as one item with each unpaid installment and shall be computed to the last day on which such installment may be paid without collection fee. The Commission may provide for advance payment of unpaid installments with interest computed to such date as the Commission prescribes. 
    Collection fees. Each special assessment, or installment thereof, shall be collected by the Treasurer without collection fee for a period ending on the last day of the month in which such assessment or installment is due, provided that if such last day is fifteen days or less from such due date, then the period for collection without collection fee shall be extended to the last day of the following month. On the first day of the month following the month for collection without collection fee, the Treasurer shall add to such assessment or initial installment a collection fee of one per cent of the amount thereof, and on the first day of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one-half of one per cent collection fee. All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee on city taxes. 
    Delinquent assessments. Special assessments or installments thereof which become due other than on July first shall, if unpaid for thirty days or more on May first of any year, be certified as delinquent to the Commission by the Treasurer and the Commission shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together as one item with accrued collection fees thereon to August first of such year. 
    Collection when part of tax roll. Special assessments or installments thereof which become due on July first of any year, and delinquent assessments or installments thereof, together with accrued interest and collection fees thereon which have been placed upon the city tax roll, shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on such date and shall be returned to the County Treasurer with such taxes if uncollected on the following March first. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to MCL § 133.9, MSA § 5.3188(12b), the city may charge a rate of interest on the unpaid balance of special assessments in excess of any charter or ordinance limitation, but not in excess of a rate of more than one per cent above the average rate of interest borne by the obligations. 
Section 10.8. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto or to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor. 
Section 10.9. - Assessments for removal of hazards, etc. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to Section 2.3(u) or Section 2.3(v) or for the cost of removing snow, ice or other obstructions from sidewalks to be made pursuant to Section 2.3(w), shall be made by resolution of the Commission. Notice of the time at which the Commission will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the city, except that no notice shall be required in the case of assessments for the removal of weeds, snow or ice. For the purposes of collection of such assessment, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the conformation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt to the city upon adoption of such resolution, be due at such time as the Commission shall prescribe, and shall be subject to the collection fees and become a lien as provided in Section 10.7. Every such assessment shall also be subject to Sections 10.4, 10.5, 10.6 and 10.10. 
Section 10.10. - Failure to mail notice. 
    The requirement for mailing any notice required to be so sent by this charter or by ordinance shall not be a jurisdictional requirement and shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
Section 10.11. - Exemptions from special assessments. 
    Whenever it shall be made to appear to the City Commission that any person by reason of poverty is unable to pay the special assessment assessed upon property owned by him, the Commission may authorize the payment of such assessment from the general fund of the City. As a consideration for the payment of such assessment by the City, the person requesting such payment shall execute a trust deed to the City in the form and which shall have the same effect and shall be enforceable as a lien upon the property and as a claim against such person's estate as in the case of the exemption from general taxation as provided in Section 9.3 of Chapter 9 of this Charter. (Adopted by electors on December 15, 1953) 
CHAPTER 11. - BORROWING POWER 

Section 11.1. - Grant of authority to borrow. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of statute and Constitution, the Commission may by ordinance or resolution borrow money and issue bonds and other evidence of indebtedness therefor for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the city. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to the following types: 
(a)  General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the city for the payment of such obligations including bonds for the city's portion of public improvements; 
(b)  Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided by Section 8.5; 
(c)  In case of fire, flood or other calamity, emergency obligations due in not more than five years for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property; 
(d)  Bonds issued in anticipation of special assessments, which bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district only, or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city; provided that bonds may be issued in anticipation of the special assessments levied in respect to two or more public improvements, but no special assessment district shall be compelled to pay the obligation of any other special assessment district; 
(e)  Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing or operating of any public utility as provided in Article 8, Sections 23 and 24, of the Constitution; provided such bonds shall not impose any liability upon the city but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. Such mortgage bonds shall be sold to yield not to exceed six per cent per annum. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for such payment. 
(f)  Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the city; 
(g)  Revenue bonds as authorized by statute which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation of the city. 
State Law reference- City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL § 117.4a(1), MSA § 5.2074(1); city authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL § 117.4a(2), MSA § 5.2074(2). 
Section 11.2. - Limits of borrowing powers. 
    The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed eight per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money borrowed under the following sections: 11.1(b) (tax anticipation notes), 11.1(d) (special assessment bonds even though they are also a general obligation of the city), 11.1(e) (mortgage bonds), 11.1(g) (revenue bonds), and any other obligations excluded by statute or Constitution from such limitation. The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted in computing the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
    The amount of emergency loans which may be made under the provisions of Section 11.1(c) may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by statute, and such a loan may be made even if it causes the indebtedness of the city to exceed the limit of net bonded indebtedness fixed in this charter. 
    The total amount of such special assessment bonds issued under Section 11.1(d) which are a general obligation of the city shall at no time by reason of future issues other than issues of refunding bonds, exceed five per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, nor shall such bonds be issued in any calendar year in excess of three per cent of such value unless authorized by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
State Law reference- Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL § 117.4a(1), MSA § 5.2074(1). 
Section 11.3. - Approval of electors. 
    General obligation bonds (except bonds for the city's portion of those public improvements which are to be paid for in part by special assessment) issued under the authority of Section 11.1(a) and mortgage bonds issued under the authority of Section 11.1(e) shall be issued only with the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. On the question of approving any such general obligation bond issue, only those persons who own property assessed for taxes in the city and their husbands and wives shall be entitled to vote. 
    The issuance of any bonds even if not otherwise requiring the approval of the electors shall be subject to applicable requirements of statute with regard to public notice in advance of the authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding of such referendum and other applicable procedural requirements. 
State constitution reference- Approval of bonds by three-fifths vote of electors, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25. 
Section 11.4. - Preparation and record of bonds. 
    Every bond issued by the city shall contain on its face a statement specifying the object for which the same is issued. It shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to sign or issue any such bond unless such statement is set forth on the face of the same, or to use such bonds or the proceeds from the sale thereof for any object other than that mentioned on the face of such bond. Any officer who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
    Bonds and all other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk under the seal of the city. The coupons evidencing the interest upon said bonds may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and the Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds shall be kept by the Clerk. 
    Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be cancelled. 
Section 11.5. - Unissued bonds. 
    Any authorization by the electors for the issuance of bonds by the city shall be void if such bonds shall not be issued within five years from the date of such authorization. 
Section 11.6. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The city may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each of such contracts shall not extend over a period greater than five years nor shall the total amounts of principal payable under all such contracts exceed an amount equal to one-eighth of one per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city. 
    All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER 12. - PURCHASING-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Section 12.1. - Purchase and sale of property. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property but may designate another officer of [or] employee of the city as Purchasing Agent. 
    Comparative prices shall be obtained for the purchase of [or] sale of all materials, services, supplies and public improvements except (a) in the employment of professional services and (b) when the City Manager, the Purchasing Agent if one be designated or the Commission as hereinafter provided shall determine that it would not be advantageous to the city. 
    In all sales or purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars, (a) the sale or purchase shall be approved by the Commission, (b) sealed bids shall be obtained unless the Commission by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting, based upon the written recommendations of the City Manager, determines that it would not be advantageous to the city to obtain sealed bids, and (c) the requirements of Section 12.2 shall be complied with. No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
    It is provided, however, that (a) by ordinance adopted by all the members of the Commission in office at the time (and amendable in the same manner) that the limit of ten thousand dollars in the preceding paragraph may be raised to as high as fifteen thousand dollars, and (b) the Commission may authorize the making of public improvements or the performance of any other city work by any city agency without competitive bidding. 
    Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. 
    All purchases and sales in excess of one thousand dollars shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. 
    The city may not sell any park, cemetery or any part thereof except in accordance with restrictions placed thereon by statute. 
    The city may not purchase, sell or lease any real estate or any interest therein except by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the Commission. 
    The purchase and sale of all city property shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.14. 
    The purchasing services of the city shall be made available without charge to the Public Library. The purchasing services of the city shall be made available to the public school system of the city, and the Commission may provide for fair charges for any such services. 
    Detailed purchasing, sale and contract procedures shall be established by ordinance. (Amend. approved April 4, 1983; Amend. approved May 8, 2007) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 261, adopted June 15, 1953, raised the sales and purchases limit from $1,000.00 to $1,500.00. 
Section 12.2. - Contracts. 
    All contracts and leases to which the city is a party when this charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the Commission and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute and of this charter, provided that purchases and sales may be made by the City Manager, or the Purchasing Agent if one be designated, subject to the provisions of Section 12.1. 
    Any contract or agreement in an amount of one thousand dollars or more made with form or terms other than the standard city purchase order form shall before execution be submitted to the Attorney and his opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk together with a copy of the opinion. 
    Before any contract, agreement or purchase order obligating the city to pay an amount of one thousand dollars or more is executed the Accountant shall first have certified that an appropriation has been made for the payment thereof, or that sufficient funds will be available if it be for a purpose to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement obligating the city for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement unless such purchase or construction is being financed by an installment contract under authority of Section 11.6. Certification by the Accountant shall be endorsed on each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or shall be filed as an attachment thereto. 
    No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
    No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the authority of the Commission, provided that the City Manager, or Purchasing Agent if one be designated, may amend contracts for those purchases and sales made by them under the authority of Section 12.1. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
    No contract shall be made with any person in default to the city. 
    An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the Attorney or certification by the Accountant. 
Section 12.3. - Restriction on powers to lease property. 
    Any agreement or contract for the renting or leasing of public property for a period longer than three years shall be subject to the same referendum procedure as is provided in the case of ordinances passed by the Commission but any petition for such referendum must be filed within thirty days after publication of the proceedings of the meeting of the Commission at which such agreement or contract is authorized. 
    The transfer or assignment of any agreement or contract for the renting or leasing of public property may be made only upon approval of the Commission but approval of such transfer shall not be subject to referendum. 
    Rentals and leases and renewals thereof shall be for a fair consideration as determined by the Commission. 
CHAPTER 13. - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 

Section 13.1. - General powers respecting utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by statute and Constitution to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits to an amount and to a territory not exceeding the limitations set by statute and Constitution. 
State constitution reference- Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 
Section 13.2. - Management of municipally owned or operated utilities. 
    Each municipally owned or operated utility shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the City Manager. 
Section 13.3. - Rates. 
    The Commission shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility services as the city may provide. The rates and charges of any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the costs of such utility. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted, but higher rates may be charged for service outside the city limits. 
Section 13.4. - Utility rates and charges-Collection. 
    The Commission shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide at least: 
(a)  That the city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(c)  That suit may be instituted by the city in any competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
    With respect to the collection of rates charged for water the city shall have all the powers granted to cities by Public Act 178 of 1939 [MCL § 123.161 et seq., MSA § 5.2531(1) et seq.]. 
Section 13.5. - Disposal of utility plants and property. 
    Unless approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility which is needed to continue the operation of such utility. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any city owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service be, replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property or easements. 
Section 13.6. - Utility finances. 
    Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Such accounts for utilities for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas shall be designed to show the financial results of city ownership or operation in the same manner as the financial results of a corresponding privately-owned utility would be shown, except that taxes need not be accounted for. To that end the accounts shall show all assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, reserves and surplus. Revenues shall include charges rendered by such utility to any other city department or fund, including, by way of illustration but not limited thereto, charges for water for municipal buildings and fire hydrant rentals. Such charges shall be computed in a reasonable manner considering cost and value of the service and the practice of privately owned utilities and, where the service is comparable to that provided to other customers, the charge shall be the same as to other customers. 
    Expenses shall include charges for services rendered to such utility by other city departments. All the inter-departmental charges provided for herein shall actually be made in the accounts of the city. 
    The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the costs of such utility. 
    Except for the inter-departmental charges provided for herein and except for temporary short-term loans in anticipation of taxes, there shall be no transfer of funds to or from any utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas from or to any other fund or account of the city, unless approved by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting thereon or unless such utility is discontinued. If money is loaned to other city funds in anticipation of tax collections, it shall be repaid to the utility at the earliest possible date at which moneys are available, but in no case more than one year after borrowing. 
    Loans may be made to utilities for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas from any other city funds, but shall be repaid at the earliest possible date at which utility moneys are available, but in no case more than one year after borrowing. 
    Nothing contained herein, however, shall prevent the city from pledging its full faith and credit for the payment of principal and interest on bonds issued for the purposes of any such utility or to use general city moneys to pay such principal and interest if sufficient moneys therefor are not available in the funds of such utility. 
CHAPTER 14. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Section 14.1. - Franchises remain in effect. 
    All franchises to which the city is a party when this charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Section 14.2. - Granting of public utility franchises. 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
    No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Commission shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Commission for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Commission nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Commission unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Commission, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the proposed grantee. 
    A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension thereof or amendment thereto which is subject to revocation at the will of the Commission may be enacted by the Commission without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been in the form in which it is finally enacted on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
State constitution references- Thirty year limitation on franchises, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 30; payment of expenses for holding special election, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25. 
State Law reference- Three-fifths vote of electors required for irrevocable franchises, MCL § 117.5(i), MSA § 5.2084. 
Section 14.3. - Conditions of public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Commission to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for mis-use, non-use or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Section 14.4. - Regulation of rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 14.5. - Use of public places by utilities. 
    Every public utility whether it has a franchise or not shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Commission shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
State Law reference- City may provide for the use of property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of reasonable compensation to the owners thereof, MCL § 117.4 h(2), MSA § 5.2081(2). 
CHAPTER 15. - SUPERVISORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this chapter have been superseded by MCL § 46.401 et seq., MSA § 5.359(1) et seq., which provides for the election of members of the board of commissioners. 

Section 15.1. - Number of supervisors. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 27 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [repealed] that the representation of any city on the Board of Supervisors shall not be decreased by revision of its charter, the city of Sault Ste. Marie shall continue to be entitled to nine representatives on the Chippewa County Board of Supervisors as provided collectively by Sections 4, 5, 28, 34, 40 and 43 of the charter of the city existing prior to the effective date of this charter. The city shall be entitled in the future to any additional representation on such board which may be provided by statute. 
Section 15.2. - Selection of supervisors. 
    The representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be selected as follows: (a) The Assessor shall be a representative; (b) the seven members of the Commission shall be representatives, however if any member of the Commission files with the Commission his written declination to serve as such a representative for a specific period of time which may not be less than the period ending on the Monday following the next regular city election after the filing of such declination, then a replacement representative shall be designated by the Commission in the manner provided in part (c) of this paragraph; (c) all additional representatives and any representatives to replace members of the Commission who have declined to serve shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the Commission then in office and shall serve for a period ending on the Monday following the next regular city election. The Commission appointees may either be employees or officers of the city or electors who have the qualifications for elective office specified in Section 5.1. 
    In case any representative of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be unable to perform the duties of his office for any reason, the Commission may appoint another qualified person to serve temporarily in his stead. 
Section 15.3. - Duties of supervisors. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall perform the statutory duties of Supervisors. In the performance of his duties each Supervisor shall represent the city, its inhabitants and its government to the best of his ability. 
Section 15.4. - Compensation of supervisors. 
    Representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be entitled to retain any compensation and expense allowances paid to them by the county in such capacity. Representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall also be paid the sum of eight dollars by the city for each day or fraction thereof actually served in attendance at meetings of the Board of Supervisors. 
CHAPTER 16. - MUNICIPAL COURT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- There is no longer a municipal court. It was abolished by MCL § 600.9921, MSA § 27A.9921. 

Section 16.1. - Establishment of court. 
    The court of the city existing prior to the effective date of this charter is hereby abolished and the powers, jurisdiction and duties of said court are consolidated into one Municipal Court to be presided over by a Municipal Judge. This Municipal Court is created under the authority of Section 28 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.28, MSA § 5.2107]. 
Section 16.2. - Pending litigation. 
    The Municipal Judge shall be empowered to receive and take from the court herein abolished, all files, records and dockets kept therein, appertaining to said court. The Municipal Judge shall be empowered to issue executions according to law, upon any judgment appearing upon said dockets with the same effect as if said judgment had been rendered by him. The Municipal Judge shall have transferred to him any and all actions or proceedings pending in the court abolished herein and he shall have full jurisdiction to proceed with such actions or proceedings in the same manner as if they had been brought before him originally. 
Section 16.3. - Qualifications of municipal judge. 
    The Municipal Judge shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 and, in addition, shall have been a resident of Sault Ste. Marie for five years immediately prior to the last day for filing petitions for such office, and he shall be an attorney in good standing admitted to practice law in the Supreme Court of this state immediately preceding the date of his appointment or election and throughout his tenure of office. He shall not practice law in any of the courts of this state or in federal courts, nor in any way engage in private practice during his tenure of office. Neither his business partners, nor his or their employees, shall have any part in any case before this Court. 
Section 16.4. - Compensation of judge. 
    The Municipal Judge shall receive such annual compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance, but not less than six thousand dollars nor more than seventy-five hundred dollars per year, such salary to be paid in the same manner as other city officers are paid. No ordinance fixing his salary may be enacted or amended less than sixty days before the next primary election at which a Municipal Judge is to be nominated, nor may his compensation be changed during the term of office for which he was elected or appointed. The salary of the first judge elected hereunder shall be six thousand dollars. 
    The salary for the office provided by charter or ordinance shall be in lieu of all fees, both in civil and criminal cases, to which the Judge might be entitled but for the provisions of this section, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits and proceedings in this Court. 
    The Municipal Judge shall be entitled to the same vacation and sick leave as are the administrative officers of the city. Should his absence exceed such allowance, then the compensation paid to the Judge or Justice who serves during such absences in excess of such leave shall be deducted from the compensation of the Municipal Judge. It is provided, however, that such deduction shall not be made because of disqualification because of interest in the case or because of absence from the city on official business of the Court. 
Section 16.5. - Bond. 
    The Municipal Judge shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give bonds to the Treasurer of the County of Chippewa in such sum as provided by statute and to the City of Sault Ste. Marie in like amount. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.12. 
Section 16.6. - Jurisdiction of court. 
(a)  General jurisdiction. The Court shall have and exercise within the City of Sault Ste. Marie and County of Chippewa the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are or may be conferred upon or required of Justices of the Peace in cities and townships by statute and shall be subject to such statutes with respect to such Justices except as otherwise provided in this charter. The Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other Justices in Chippewa County as to all crimes, offenses and misdemeanors alleged to have been committed within Chippewa County, whether within or without the city. The proceedings in all suits and actions before the Court shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, be according to and governed by the statutes applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
(b)  Charter and ordinance cases. The Court shall have authority to hear, try and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for the violation of such charter and ordinances as in the charter or ordinances prescribed and directed. 
    The Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction, except as herein provided, to hear, try, and determine all actions and prosecutions for the recovery or enforcement of fines, penalties, and forfeitures for violations of this charter and for encroachments upon and any injuries to any of the streets, alleys, and public grounds, within the city, except in cases where jurisdiction is given to some other court. The jurisdiction contained in this paragraph is provided herein in accordance with the provisions of Section 18 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.18, MSA § 5.2097], which permits the inclusion in any revised charter of any power or provision contained in the charter to be revised. 
(c)  Extended jurisdiction. The Court shall also have jurisdiction in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto to the maximum amount which cities are in their charters permitted to provide for, with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. Initially such limit shall be five hundred dollars. If the statutes at some future date permit charters to provide for higher dollar value limitations in such civil matters, then such court shall have automatically the maximum permitted to be so provided. 
(d)  County-wide jurisdiction. The Court shall have jurisdiction in civil causes in all townships and cities throughout the County of Chippewa up to the full amount of the jurisdiction of said court. This jurisdiction is in accordance with the provisions of Section 28-A of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.28a., MSA § 5.2108] and of Subsection 6 of Section 10 of Chapter LXVI of Public Act 314 of 1915 [repealed]. 
(e)  Causes where all parties are residents of city. The Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction of courts of record excepted, in causes or proceedings where all the parties of the same reside in said city at the time of the commencement of the proceeding or cause, and in case where the original cause of action existed in favor of a plaintiff and against a defendant, both residents of the city, and has been assigned to a nonresident of said city. This jurisdiction is in accordance with the provisions of Section 10 of Chapter LXVI of Public Act 314 of 1915 [repealed]. 
(f)  Setting aside verdicts. The Court shall have such power and authority as can under Section 28 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.28, MSA § 5.2107] be conferred by this charter to set aside the verdict or judgment in any civil cause and grant a new trial therein, to be exercised in such manner and on such conditions as provided in said act. The filing of a motion for new trial or to set aside a verdict or judgment shall have such effect on the time for taking an appeal from any judgment and upon the issuance and levy of execution or other similar process and sale thereunder and on other proceedings in said cause as provided in said act. 
(g)  Additional authority. The Court shall have such additional jurisdiction, powers and duties as may now or hereafter be conferred upon such courts by statute. 
Section 16.7. - Place and conduct of court; annual report. 
    The Commission shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for conducting Court. It may regulate the hours of court and it may require monthly reports of the activities and finances of the court in such form as it prescribes. 
    The Municipal Judge may from time to time make and adopt rules of practice for the conduct of the business of said court not inconsistent with statute or the charter and ordinances of the city, which rules shall be entered upon the civil docket of said judge and signed by him. 
    The Municipal Judge shall file with the Commission an annual report of the Court for the fiscal year in such manner as the Commission shall prescribe. 
Section 16.8. - Docket. 
    There shall be kept at the place of holding Court a docket or dockets in the manner required by statute. Failure of the Municipal Judge to make provision for the maintenance of such docket shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 16.9. - Jury trials. 
(a)  In all jury trials it shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to instruct the jury as to the law applicable to the case, which instructions shall be received by the jury as the law of the case. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance adopted in accordance with the following subsections, the procedure contained herein shall be used in the selection of juries: 
    If a jury shall be demanded by either party to any such suit, such party shall file a written demand therefor with said judge and at the same time pay the lawful fees of the jurors; provided that in case both parties demand a jury, jury fees shall be received from the party first making the demand only, unless such demand be waived or withdrawn; provided further, that prosecutions for violations of any of the ordinances of the city which are not criminal offenses, either at the common law or under any of the general laws of this state shall be tried summarily before said judge without a jury. Jurors for the trial of all civil and criminal cases tried before said judge shall be selected in the following manner: On the first Monday in May of each year, or as soon after as may be, the Mayor, Clerk and Treasurer of the city shall meet at the office of the Clerk and select the names of not less than fifteen nor more than thirty qualified voters from each voting precinct in the city whose names appear on the poll lists as electors in such voting precincts, and otherwise having the qualifications of jurors under the general laws to act as jurors therein during the ensuing year. The names of such persons shall be written on slips of paper and placed in a box to be provided by the Clerk and kept by said Judge. At the request of the officer or person directed by said judge to have charge of the drawing of a jury for the trial of any cause, the judge shall, in the presence of the parties or their attorneys or other person representing them, in case they desire to be present, draw from the box, without favor or selection, eighteen slips containing the names of eighteen persons and hand the same when drawn to the officer or persons having charge of the drawing thereto, who shall enter the names so drawn on a list, from which either party may strike off six names and in case of the absence or refusal of either party to strike off such names, the judge shall strike off for him six names from said list, and the Judge shall thereupon issue a venire directed to any constable of the county or other officer authorized to serve the same, requiring him to summon the six persons whose names shall remain on the list as jurors for the trial of such cause, and the proceedings thereafter and the selection of talesman shall be in accordance with the general laws relating thereto. The slips containing the names of persons stricken from said list of eighteen shall be returned to said box and mixed among the other slips remaining therein. The slips containing the names of the six persons remaining after each party shall have stricken six from the list shall be placed in a separate box and not again used until the whole number of originally selected slips shall have been drawn, when and in such case they shall be returned to the box used in drawing and be used for the further drawing of jurors in the same manner as before, and at the time of each annual selection of the names of persons for jurors the slips used the previous year shall be destroyed. The boxes in which such slips are placed shall be safely and securely kept at all times and no persons shall have access thereto, except at the time and for the purpose herein provided. 
(c)  The Commission may by ordinance provide that, instead of the foregoing procedure, jury cases be set for trial upon one or more certain days of each month, or as soon thereafter as such trial can be reached, and may therein establish terms for the trial of jury cases, and may provide therein that a panel of jurors shall be drawn and certified to the Court Clerk in the manner provided by law for the drawing and certified to the Court Clerk in the manner provided by law for the drawing of Circuit Court jurors, all in accordance with the provisions therefor contained in Section 28 of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL § 117.28, MSA § 5.2107]. 
(d)  The Commission or Municipal Judge may also, instead of either of the foregoing procedures, provide for any other jury system which by statute they are competent to so provide. 
(e)  In all other matters, the trial of cases by jury shall be otherwise conducted as provided by law for trials by jury before Justices of the Peace in townships and cities. 
Section 16.10. - Fees and costs. 
    The Commission shall within ninety days after the effective date of this charter enact an ordinance establishing and fixing the fees and costs which may be taxed by the Court in all civil matters and in all cases for violations of the charter or city ordinances, and fixing fees and costs not inconsistent with statute in criminal matters. 
Section 16.11. - Disposition of fees, costs and fines. 
    Fees in civil cases shall be collected by the Court and turned over to the City Treasurer on the first and fifteenth of each month. Fees in criminal cases shall be charged and presented to and audited by the Board of Supervisors of Chippewa County, in the same manner and amounts as provided by law in the case of justices of the peace in townships, and upon allowance by said Board, shall be paid monthly by said county to the City Treasurer for the use and benefit of the city. The Court shall turn over to the Chippewa County Treasurer all costs and fines in state criminal cases. The court shall turn over to the City Treasurer all costs and fines in city ordinance or charter cases. 
    The expenses of prosecution before the Court for violations of criminal statutes and in punishing the offenders thereof shall be paid by the County of Chippewa. 
Section 16.12. - Substitute judge or justice. 
    Any cause pending before the Court may, whenever the Municipal Judge is unable to act in such cause at the time the matter comes before the Court, be transferred upon his order or, in case of his absence, by the Court Clerk to one of the Justices of the Peace in Chippewa County, or to a Circuit Court Commissioner of said county, without any notice to the parties in such cause, but a note of such transfer shall be entered upon the docket of the case, and when two or more Justices shall have acted in any one cause or proceeding, the docket shall be signed in the manner and within the time provided by law by the Judge, Justice or Circuit Court Commissioner who shall have given the final judgment in such cause. 
    The Commission shall by ordinance fix the compensation to be paid Justices or Circuit Court Commissioners for such services and, unless so provided by ordinance, no such Justice or Circuit Court Commissioner shall so act or be entitled to compensation therefor. The provisions of such ordinance relative to such compensation may not be amended less than sixty days before the next primary election at which a Municipal Judge is to be nominated nor may such compensation be changed during the term of office for which any Municipal Judge was elected. The first such ordinance shall provide that such compensation shall be twelve and one-half dollars for each one-half day or fraction thereof for regular sessions of the Court and other matters pertaining to the office. 
Section 16.13. - Court clerk. 
    The Municipal Judge shall appoint a Court Clerk and, with the confirmation of the City Manager, one or more deputy clerks, whose compensation and duties shall be determined in accordance with Sections 4.6 and 5.11 and in accordance with statute. The deputy clerks may hold other city office or employment. The Court Clerk and deputy clerks shall serve at the pleasure of the Municipal Judge. 
    Such Clerk and deputy clerks shall, by virtue of their office, be empowered to administer oaths to persons making affidavits for writs in civil causes and to issue all processes and test the same in the name of the Municipal Judge, and shall be required to collect all fees in civil causes and all costs and fines in criminal causes and all moneys paid into court for security for costs, bail or otherwise. The Clerk shall enter a record of the same in books kept by him for that purpose and pay over the same to the authorities of the city or county or other persons entitled to same, as directed by the proper authorities or by law, and the Commission shall cause the books of such clerks to be audited at least once each year to ascertain that such books are correctly kept and all moneys received have been properly accounted for. 
Section 16.14. - Court officer. 
    The City Manager upon request of the Municipal Judge may assign a police officer of the city to the Court who shall have all the duties and powers of court officers of the Circuit Courts of the state and shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Manager. Such officer shall receive no compensation except such as he may be entitled to as a police officer. All fees and mileage allowances received by such officer in the performance of the duties imposed upon him shall be paid into the city treasury in accordance with Section 5.11. 
Section 16.15. - Constables. 
    The City Manager shall appoint one or more police officers of the city as Constables. Such Constables shall have like power and authority in matters of civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on Constables in townships. They shall have power also to serve all process issued for breaches of ordinances of the city. The bond of Constables shall be that required of Constables in townships and shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of Section 5.12. The statutory fees received by such Constables shall be paid into the city treasury in accordance with Section 5.11. 
Editor's note- The city does not have any constables. 
Section 16.16. - Violations bureau. 
    The Commission shall have power and authority to establish by ordinance a Violations Bureau within the Court for the handling of such violations of ordinances and regulations of the city, or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such Bureau. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a charge of violating any of such ordinances may within the time specified in the notice of such charge answer at the Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a fine prescribed by ordinance which cannot be waived by the Bureau, and in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to make such a plea and pay such fine in Court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a Bureau shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in Court should such person so choose. 
CHAPTER 17. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 17.1. - Vested rights and liabilities continued. 
    After the effective date of this charter, the city shall be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files, books and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous charter. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time this charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall in any manner be affected by any change resulting from the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the city shall continue to be its debts and liabilities and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected by the city. 
Section 17.2. - Records to be public. 
    All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in city offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL § 117.3(l), MSA § 5.2073(l). 
Section 17.3. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this charter: 
(a)  All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(b)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(c)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
(d)  The word "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
(e)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
(f)  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and other members of the Commission, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers (other than deputy court clerks), members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this charter and the Municipal Judge. 
(g)  The word "statute" shall denote the Public Acts of the State of Michigan as they are in effect at the time the provision containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
(h)  The word "Constitution" shall denote the Constitution of the State of Michigan as it is in effect at the time the provision containing the word "Constitution" is to be applied. 
(i)  All references to specific Local or Public Acts shall be to such Local or Public Acts of the State of Michigan as they are in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied. 
(j)  The words "law" or "general laws of the State" shall denote the Constitution and statutes of Michigan as herein defined and applicable common law. 
(k)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this charter. 
Section 17.4. - Definition of publication; mailing of notices. 
    The requirement contained in this charter for the publishing or publication of notices, ordinances or proceedings shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character, which newspaper shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the city immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance of [or] proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Section 17.5. - City liability. 
    The city shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective condition of or obstruction in any public place unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk within ninety days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    The city shall not be liable for any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. No person shall bring any action against the city for any such damages until such claim shall have been filed with the Clerk and until the Commission shall have been given reasonable opportunity to act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city under this section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
State Law reference- City liability for damages to property and personal injuries sustained on public ways, MCL § 242.1 et seq., MSA § 9.591 et seq. 
Section 17.6. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The Commission may in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall apply. 
Section 17.6a. - [Augusta Hursley Seal Trust.] 
    Notwithstanding any charter provisions to the contrary: 
(a)  There is hereby created the Augusta Hursley Seal Trust into which shall be placed all the assets bequeathed to the city by Augusta Hursley Seal in her Last Will and Testament; 
(b)  There is hereby created the Augusta Hursley Seal Trust Board of Trustees consisting of the Mayor and four other persons nominated by the Mayor in accordance with the terms of the trust fund, who are residents of the city and approved by a majority of the Commission for two year terms; provided, however, of the first four persons appointed as trustees, two shall serve for one year and two shall serve for two years, provided further, the Mayor's terms as a trustee shall be coterminus with the Mayor's term of office; provided further, that no trustee's term shall terminate until the successor assumes the duties of trustee; 
(c)  Said board of trustees shall, according to the terms of a Declaration of Trust of the City Commission, solely control the trust principal which it shall not allow to be diminished; control the distribution of the trust income; to determine how the trust funds will be invested; and direct the City Treasurer in the deposit, withdrawal, investment and disbursement of the trust monies and to exercise all other duties of a fiduciary of the trust in compliance with a Declaration of Trust and applicable laws; and 
(d)  The trust fund shall not be part of any other city funds except to the extent the Board of Trustees disburse trust income to the city for purposes consistent with the terms of the Declaration of Trust and the City Commission shall not have control of the trust. (Approved by electors on June 10, 1985) 
Section 17.6b. - Governor Chase S. Osborn Trust. 
    Notwithstanding any charter provisions to the contrary: 
(a)  There is hereby created THE GOVERNOR CHASE S. OSBORN TRUST FUND into which shall be placed the net principal proceeds received from the sale of the original paintings known as "GRAND CANYON COLORADO RIVER, by THOMAS MORAN and HIGHLANDERS AT REST by J.T. HUGHES". 
(b)  The Trust proceeds shall be managed by the August Hursley Seal Trust Board of Trustees as created under Section 17.6a of the City Charter. 
(c)  Sault Board of Trustees shall, according to the terms of The Governor Chase S. Osborn Declaration of Trust adopted by the City Commission, solely control the Trust principal which it shall not allow to be diminished; control the distribution of the trust income; determine how the Trust funds will be invested; and direct the City Treasurer in the deposit, withdrawal, investment and disbursement of the Trust monies; and to exercise all other duties of a fiduciary of the Trust in compliance with the above mentioned Declaration of Trust and applicable laws. 
(d)  The Trust Funds shall not be a part of any other City funds except to the extent the Board of Trustees disburses Trust income to the City for purposes consistent with the terms of the Declaration of Trust and the City Commission shall not have control of the Trust. (Amend. approved November 5, 2002) 
Section 17.7. - Quorum. 
    A quorum of any board or commission created by or pursuant to this charter shall be a majority of the members of such board or commission in office at the time, but not less than two members. 
Section 17.8. - Sundays and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this charter or by ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 17.9. - Penalties for misconduct in office. 
    Any officer of the city found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. The punishment provided in this section shall be in addition to that of having the office declared vacant as provided in Sections 5.2 and 5.3. 
Section 17.10. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the charter. 
Section 17.11. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 17.12. - Severability of charter provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this charter is declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER 18. - SCHEDULE 

Section 18.1. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the city under this charter and to accomplish the transition from the old to the new charter, and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
Section 18.2. - Election to adopt this charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the City of Sault Ste. Marie at a special election to be held on Wednesday, February 27, 1952. This election shall be conducted by the officers under the existing charter, charged with the conduct and supervision of elections, and shall follow the election procedure and be canvassed on Thursday, February 28, 1952, in the manner provided in the existing city charter. The certificates of the board of canvassers as to the result shall be filed on Friday, February 29, 1952. 
Section 18.3. - Form of ballot. 
    The form of the ballot for the submission of this charter shall be as follows: 
    Instructions: A cross (x) in the square ? before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed charter, and a cross (x) in the square ? before the word "No" is against the proposed charter. 
    Before leaving the booth, fold the ballot so that the initials of the inspector may be seen on the outside. 
    Shall the proposed charter for the City of Sault Ste. Marie drafted by the Charter Commission elected on May 28, 1951, be adopted? 
    ? Yes 
    ? No 
Section 18.4. - Effective date of charter. 
(a)  Only for the purpose of holding the election on the adoption of this charter, this charter shall take effect on January 2, 1952, so that the City Clerk may prepare for, and publish registration and election notices for, such election. 
(b)  For the purposes of nominating and electing the first officers provided for in this charter, and for the purpose of altering the schedule of city elections in March and April of 1952 this charter shall take effect on March 1, 1952. 
(c)  For all other purposes not provided for herein, this charter shall take effect at 8:00 P.M. Eastern Standard Time on May 1, 1952. 
Section 18.5. - Alteration of 1952 election schedule. 
    If this charter is adopted by the electors, the primary election which would have been held on Monday, March 3, 1952, and the regular municipal election which would have been held on Monday, April 7, 1952, under the provisions of the previous charter of the city shall both be cancelled. These elections shall be replaced by the regular elections in 1952 provided for in this charter. 
Section 18.6. - First election of officers under this charter. 
    The first regular election of officers under this charter shall be held on Monday, April 28, 1952, and the primary therefor shall be held on Monday, April 14, 1952. 
    In the year 1952, the first primary and regular election under this charter shall be conducted by the officers of the city then in office in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of Chapter 3 of this charter. The City Clerk shall, not later than Monday, March 3, 1952, publish the first notice of the last day of registration of electors for the April 14, 1952, election and shall thereafter publish all notices and do all things necessary to prepare for, and hold, the elections provided for herein. 
    At the first regular election of officers under this charter on April 28, 1952, the electors shall be entitled to vote for not more than six candidates for Commissioner, one candidate for Mayor and one candidate for Municipal Judge. 
    At the first regular election of officers on April 28, 1952, there shall be elected one Mayor, six Commissioners and one Municipal Judge. All such officers shall be elected for terms beginning May 1, 1952. 
    The Mayor shall serve for a term ending at 8:00 P.M. on the Monday following the regular city election in 1955. 
    The three candidates for Commissioner with the first, second and third highest number of votes respectively shall be elected for a term ending at 8:00 P.M. on the Monday following the regular city election in 1955 and the three candidates with the fourth, fifth and sixth highest number of votes respectively shall be elected for a term ending at 8:00 P.M. on the Monday following the regular city election in 1953. 
    The Municipal Judge shall be elected for a term ending at noon on January 1, 1958. 
    After 1952, the provisions in Chapter 3 of this charter on the various terms of office shall apply. 
    The nomination of candidates for the April 14, 1952, primary election shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of this charter, subject to the following exceptions: (a) no declaration of intention shall be required; (b) the affidavit of qualifications required in Section 3.10 shall be filed with the nomination petition; (c) the Clerk shall publish notice of the last time for filing nomination petitions on or before Tuesday, March 4, 1952, and twice again before Tuesday, March 18, 1952, and (d) any person who under the previous charter of the city qualified as a candidate for nomination for Mayor or Commissioner in the primary election which would have been held on March 3, 1952, shall be automatically nominated for the April 14, 1952, primary election unless he shall voluntarily withdraw as a candidate; the signatures on any petitions for such persons shall not be considered in determining how many petitions a person may sign after March 1, 1952. 
Section 18.7. - Taking of office. 
    The Commission first elected under this charter shall assemble in the existing City Commission chambers at 8:00 P.M. Eastern Standard Time on May 1, 1952. 
    The Clerk shall administer the oath of office to its members and it shall be called to order by the newly elected Mayor, and the offices of the previously existing Mayor and City Commission shall then cease to exist and the term and office of each and every member thereof shall terminate. 
    The terms of all other elective officers of the city by virtue of election under the previous charter shall terminate and their offices shall cease to exist at the same time that the previously existing City Commission ceases to exist. 
Section 18.8. - Continuation of appointed officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter all appointive officers and all employees of the city shall continue in that city office or employment which corresponds to the city office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter; except that the terms of office of all members of the Board of Review shall terminate as provided in Section 18.9, and except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this charter provides be held for an indefinite term and/or at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Section 18.9. - First board of review. 
    The terms of all members of the Board of Review existing under the previous charter of the city shall expire on May 1, 1952. By January, 1953, the Commission shall appoint a Board of Review of five freeholders who meet the qualifications for such office provided in this charter, and shall fix their compensation. Three such members shall be designated to serve for a term expiring in January, 1954, and two shall be designated for a term expiring in January, 1956. 
Section 18.10. - Interim finance and taxation provisions. 
    The fiscal period of the city which began July 1, 1951, shall continue until June 30, 1952, without change. 
    Any budget, appropriation, ordinance or tax levy for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1952, which may have been adopted prior to May 1, 1952, shall be abrogated by the taking of effect of this charter. Instead, the following provisions of this section shall apply: 
    The budget and taxation procedures provided in Chapters 8 and 9 of this charter shall apply as nearly as possible for the adoption of the budget for the 1952 fiscal year and the levy of taxes therefor in July, 1952, subject to the following exceptions: 
(a)  The budget shall be adopted not later than June 9, 1952, and appropriate changes shall be made by the Commission in the schedule of events leading to its adoption. 
(b)  The assessment roll as fixed prior to May 1, 1952, the effective date of this charter, shall become the assessment roll of the city for the purposes of the 1952 tax roll. 
    Resolution of adoption. 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie held on the 8th day of December, 1951, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Thomas A. Wallace: 
    RESOLVED: that the Charter Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed revised charter for the City of Sault Ste. Marie and the Clerk of this Commission is directed (1) to transmit a copy of this charter to the Governor of the State for his approval in accordance with statute (2) to this day file with the City Clerk a copy of this charter, and (3) to cause this proposed charter to be published in the Sault Ste. Marie Evening News on February 1, 1952. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner David Ripley, and adopted by the following vote: 
    YEAS: Commissioners Adams, Brown, Caffey, Cummings, MacInnis, Ripley, Wallace, Weber and Veum. 
    NAYS: None. 
    ABSENT: None. 
    The chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor and filed with the City Clerk by attesting their names thereto in the following manner: 
Paul L. Adams William J. Cummings __________Thomas A. Wallace John J. MacInnis __________David W. Ripley Burney C. Veum __________A. J. Terry Brown W. F. G. Weber __________T. S. Caffey _____ 
    All of the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution and also having attested the copies to be signed by the Governor and filed with the City Clerk, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the chairman. 
STATE OF MICHIGAN       ) SS. COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA       )  
    R. R. Reinhart, Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie being duly sworn says that an election duly called and held in the City of Sault Ste. Marie on the 28th day of May, 1951, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a revised charter for the city, namely: Paul L. Adams, A. J. Terry Brown, T. S. Caffey, William J. Cummings, John J. MacInnis, Dave Ripley, Thomas A. Wallace, W. F. G. Weber and Burney C. Veum, and that the annexed and foregoing charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission by the foregoing resolution which is a true and correct copy thereof, and that the said Charter Commission directed that said charter be presented to the electors of the City of Sault Ste. Marie in accordance with the requirements of this charter and the laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Further deponent sayeth not. 
(signed)        R. R. Reinhart       
R. R. REINHART, City Clerk 
Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie 
Dated: December 18, 1951. 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this 18th day of December, 1951. 
(signed)        S. M. Stephenson       
Notary Public, Chippewa County, Michigan 
My commission expires September 25, 1953. 
_____
    I do hereby approve the above and foregoing charter of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(signed)        G. Mennen Williams       
G. MENNEN WILLIAMS, Governor of Michigan 
Dated: December 26, 1951. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original charter, §§ 1.1-18.10, is set out as adopted on February 27, 1952. The following table shows the disposition of amendments adopted at subsequent elections. 
Date Section Section 
this Charter 12-15-53 10.11  4- 1-57 9.3  4- 4-83 12.1  6-10-85 17.6a 11- 5-02       Added 17.6b.  5- 8-07 9.16 12.1  6- 7-10 3.10 3.11  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Sault Ste. Marie City Code." 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.01) 
Charter reference- Authority to codify ordinances, § 7.9. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL § 117.5b, MSA § 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    It is the legislative intent of the city commission, in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. In the construction of this Code and any amendment thereto, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, adopted February 27, 1952, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
    City commission. The term "city commission" or "commission" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
    Code. The term "this Code" or "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Chippewa in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. A word importing gender shall extend and be applied to both genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
    Health officer. The words "health officer" shall mean the director of the department of public health of the City of Sault Ste. Marie or authorized representative. In the absence of a city health officer the county health officer shall perform the functions and duties of the city health officer. 
    Holidays. The word "holidays" shall mean, where used in this Code or on official signs erected by authorized official agencies in addition to Sundays, those entire days declared by law of the State of Michigan to be legal holidays, to wit: New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, General Election Day, Armistice Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
    Officer. Whenever any officer is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or deputy or authorized subordinate. Whenever any act is required to be done pursuant to the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city, by any designated officer or official of the city, and such officer or official has not been appointed, such act shall be performed by the city manager. 
    Official time standard. The words "official time standard" shall mean whenever certain hours are named herein standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the city shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title, chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied. The term "public place" shall include any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street, between the curblines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The word "street" or "highway" shall mean the entire width, subject to an easement for public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, or every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
    Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year," alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." (Code 1957, § 1-1.05) 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.03) 
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city commission not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(12)  Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones; specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield intersections; 
(13)  Affecting any urban renewal project; 
(14)  Pertaining to zoning, including the zoning ordinance printed in Appendix A of this Code and any amendments thereto; or 
(15)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-5. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.09) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty for violation of Code or rules and regulations adopted under Code; continuing violations. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rules or regulations adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation, and every day upon which such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.08) 
Charter reference- Limitation on penalties, § 7.5. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL § 117.4i(10), MSA § 5.2082. 
Sec. 1-7. - Aiding and abetting of Code violations. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by any amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted hereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do such act. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.02) 
Sec. 1-8. - Service of notice in Code; interference with posting of notice. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, razing of dangerous structures, abating nuisances, or any other act, performed by the city, the expense of which may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering a notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at the residence, office, or place of business of the owner with some person of suitable age and discretion, or 
(2)  By mailing such notice by registered or certified mail to such owner at the last-known address of the owner, or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five (5) days. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by such officer to remove such notice. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.06) 
Sec. 1-9. - Publication of rules and regulations. 
    All rules and regulations made by any administrative officer under the provisions of this Code shall be submitted to the city commission as required. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of the clerk for public inspection and distribution. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.07) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan (or Sault Ste. Marie City Code), is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan (or Sault Ste. Marie City Code), is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.04) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code-Generally. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Same-Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-13. - Responsibility of officers with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city officer assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the officer having custody thereof, upon expiration of the term of office, to the successor thereof or to the city clerk, in case there shall be no successor. 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability. 
    Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the city commission that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1.10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Organization of government, Ch. 4; general provisions regarding officers and personnel, Ch. 5. 
Cross reference- Board of electrical examiners, Ch. 8, Art. III, Div. 3; elections, Ch. 11; fire department, Ch. 12, Art. II; false personation of officers, § 16-8; police department, ch. 19, Art. II; parking commission, Ch. 24, Art. III, Div. 2; parking violations bureau, Ch. 24, Art. III, Div. 3; administration of zoning regulations, App. A, § 10-1.19; zoning board of appeals, App. A, § 10-1.20. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed art. I, § 2-1, which pertained to residence requirements of employees, and derived from Ord. No. 95, §§ 2-7.01-2-7.04, adopted February 28, 1972. 

Secs. 2-1-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-16. - Superintendent. 
    The department of public works shall be headed by the superintendent of public works, who shall be responsible for all matters relating to construction, management, maintenance, and operation of the physical properties of the city, except as provided elsewhere in this Code. The superintendent shall also be responsible for all planning in connection with such changes or improvements to the physical properties as are essential to the future growth and development of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-3.01) 
Sec. 2-17. - Divisions. 
    The department of public works may be divided into divisions which shall include, but not be restricted to the following: 
(1)  Division of engineering. The division of engineering shall be supervised by a competent civil engineer experienced in the design and construction of municipal engineering works. This division shall perform all engineering services for the department and for such other departments of the city as may from time to time require such services. The supervision of all constructed work undertaken by the city shall also be furnished by this division except as otherwise ordered by the city manager. 
    Bureau of permits and inspections. The bureau of permits and inspections shall be under the division of engineering, and shall be supervised by a city inspector who shall: 
(a)  Issue all permits for, and inspect the work involved in, the construction of sewer and water services, sidewalks, curb cuts, street cuts; 
(b)  Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all work done under the provisions of the electrical, plumbing, and building codes of the city; and 
(c)  Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all premises, including structures and appurtenances thereon, for safety features. 
(2)  Division of pumping and filtration. The division of pumping and filtration shall be supervised by a qualified person who shall have charge of the pumping, purifying, softening and filtering of water supplied to the water distribution system. 
(3)  Division of water and sewer maintenance. The division of water and sewer maintenance shall be supervised by a qualified person who shall have charge of the construction, operation and maintenance of the city water distribution and sewage systems. 
(4)  Division of parks and cemeteries. The division of parks and cemeteries shall be supervised by a qualified person who shall have charge of the control and regulation of the planting of trees and of the planning, development, maintenance, management and operation of parks, boulevards, cemeteries, municipal parking lots, markets, airports and recreation facilities, except that the recreational use of city recreation areas and facilities shall be under the supervision of the director of recreation. 
(5)  Division of street and bridge maintenance. The division of street and bridge maintenance shall be supervised by a qualified person who shall have charge of the maintenance of all improved and unimproved street surfaces, the cleaning of improved streets, the removal of snow, the maintenance and operation of bridges, the operation of the city sanitary landfill, and such other problems of maintenance and service as may be required of the division by the director of public works. 
(6)  Division of signal service. The division of signal service shall be supervised by a signal service supervisor who shall be responsible for the construction, installation, repair and maintenance of all facilities of the fire and police signal systems, traffic-control signals, and other electrically operated signals but excluding the fire and police radio systems. Such supervisor shall supervise the work of cable splicers and those other employees who assist in the construction, installation, repair and maintenance of such facilities. This division may be called upon to provide services for other departments. Such services shall be provided when ordered by the city manager and, in the performance of such service, the signal service supervisor shall be subject to call by the department head concerned. 
(Code 1957, § 2-3.02) 
Secs. 2-18-2-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-29. - Members serving at time Code is adopted. 
    All members serving on boards and commissions at the time this Code is adopted shall, provided the board or commission on which they are serving is continued by this Code, remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.01) 
Sec. 2-30. - Membership. 
    Unless hereinafter otherwise specifically provided, all boards and commissions of the city shall be composed of seven (7) members. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.05) 
Sec. 2-31. - Members' terms of office. 
    Unless otherwise provided, the terms of members of boards and commissions shall be staggered. No persons shall serve on the same board or commission for a period of more than two (2) consecutive terms exclusive of a partial term to fill a vacancy. A member may however be reappointed after a lapse of at least one year. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.06) 
Sec. 2-32. - Compensation of members. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.04) 
Sec. 2-33. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the city commission. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.02) 
Sec. 2-34. - Removal of members. 
    The appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.03) 
Sec. 2-35. - Officers. 
    Unless otherwise provided, the officers of all boards and commissions shall consist of a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. Such officers shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting of such board or commission following after June thirtieth. In the event a treasurer is required for any board or commission, the city treasurer shall serve ex officio in that capacity. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.07) 
Sec. 2-36. - Bylaws, rules and regulations. 
    Each board or commission shall have the power to make and adopt such bylaws, rules or regulations as may be deemed expedient for the exercise of its powers. Such bylaws, rules or regulations shall become effective upon the filing of a copy with the city clerk and presentation of the same to the city commission at the next regular city commission meeting. Any bylaw, rule or regulation shall become void upon the veto of either the city manager or the city commission. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.08) 
Sec. 2-37. - Expenditures. 
    No board or commission shall incur any expense or obligate the city in any respect without first securing specific authorization from the city commission. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.09) 
Sec. 2-38. - Purchases. 
    All purchases by any board or commission shall be handled through the city purchasing agent in accordance with customary city procedures and in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.10) 
Sec. 2-39. - Deposit of funds with city treasury, bonds, bills. 
(a)  All moneys received for any board or commission shall be deposited in the treasury of the city, to the credit of such board or commission in a special account fund and shall be drawn upon by the officers of such board or commission as the members of such board or commission and the city manager shall designate. 
(b)  All bills shall be allowed at a meeting of the board or commission, and, when certified, shall be paid so long as funds are available. 
(c)  All moneys collected by any board or commission shall be deposited monthly or more often with the city treasurer. Forms for the collection and remittances of all funds shall be prescribed by the city auditor. Such funds shall be remitted intact to the city treasurer. All persons regularly handling funds or any persons handling funds in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be bonded in like manner as other city employees. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.11) 
Sec. 2-40. - City auditor to prepare books, annual budget. 
    The city auditor shall set up such books and forms for the audit and report of all funds received by any board or commission as deemed proper and advisable by the auditor, or as may be required by the charter. There shall be an annual audit of the accounts of all boards and commissions, certified by the city auditor to the city commission as to sources of all funds, the amount of money expended, and for what purposes. In addition thereto, the board of directors of any board or commission shall submit a proposed budget on or before March first of each year showing the anticipated funds and proposed expenditures for the coming year. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.12) 
Sec. 2-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed § 2-41, which pertained to annual reports, and derived from the Code of 1957, § 3-1.13. 
Sec. 2-42. - No member or relative to be employed. 
    No member of any board or commission shall be employed by such board or commission or be directly or indirectly interested in any contract with such board or commission. No relative of any member of a board or commission shall be employed by such board or commission. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1.14) 
Secs. 2-43-2-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed div. 2, §§ 2-50 and 2-51, which pertained to the safety council, and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 3-3.01 and 3-3.02. 

Secs. 2-50-2-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 528-11, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, amended Div. 3 in its entirety and enacted the provisions set out herein. The former Div. 3, titled Planning and Development Commission, derived from Ord. No. 222-82, § 2, adopted Feb. 1, 1982; and Ord. No. 466-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2002. 

Sec. 2-59. - Creation and powers. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission for the City of Sault Ste. Marie, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. The commission is established pursuant to Act 33 of Public Acts of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 
    The commission shall have such powers and duties as set forth in PA 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. and PA 110 of 2006, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-60. - Composition. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be appointed by the mayor, such appointments to be subject to the approval of the majority of the city commission. The individuals shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Shall be a qualified elector of the city, except one (1) nonqualified elector may be a member of the commission; 
(2)  Shall be representative of the important segments of the community, such as the economic, government, educational, and social development of the municipality in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, commerce, and tourism. The members shall also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent practicable. 
(b)  All members shall hold a term of three (3) years, except that three (3) members of the first commission to be so appointed shall serve for a term of one (1) year; three (3) for a term of two (2) years; and three (3) for a term of three (3) years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(1)  The city commission shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission for the unexpired terms in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(c)  No member shall hold any office or position with the city except that a member may also be a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(d)  The city commission may designate one (1) of its members to sit as a nonvoting liaison on the planning commission. The terms of office of city commission liaisons shall coincide with their elected terms of office with the city. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-61. - Officers, meetings, records, organization. 
(a)  The commission shall elect its chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary from the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. An ex-officio member of the commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of its officers shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection as specified in the bylaws. 
(b)  The commission shall hold not less than four (4) regular meetings each year, and by resolution shall determine the time and place of the meetings. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct the transaction of business. The affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total number of seats for members of the commission, regardless if vacancies or absences exist or not shall be necessary for the adoption, or recommendation for adoption, of any plan or amendments to a plan. 
(1)  A special meeting may be called by the chairperson or by two (2) other commission members, upon request to the secretary. Notice of a special meeting shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the special meeting. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be made a public record. 
(d)  In pursuance of its duties and functions, the planning commission may establish one (1) or more advisory committees to review and analyze various matters under its jurisdiction, provided, however, that no such advisory committee may act for the commission. Such advisory committees may include as members persons who are not on the commission, provided that at least two (2) commissioners are appointed to serve on any such advisory committee. The chairperson of the commission shall make all such committee appointments. 
(e)  Regular or special commission meetings shall be conducted at a public meeting open to the public and held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, MCL 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place shall be given in the manner required by the Act. 
(f)  Any written and/or prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained materials/documents by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act of 1976, PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
(g)  The planning commission shall make an annual written report to the city commission concerning its operations and the status or planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the city commission related to planning and development. 
(h)  The city commission may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this section shall be constitutes malfeasance in office. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. The member shall be disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining planning commission members. The secretary of the planning commission shall report any member who has missed three (3) regular meetings in a row to the city commission. Failure to repeatedly attend planning commission meetings shall be considered nonfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-62. - Duties and functions. 
    The commission shall have the following duties and functions: 
(a)  Master plan. To make and approve a master plan for the physical development of the municipality. Such master plan, or portion thereof, shall be developed and approved in accordance with provisions of Act 33 of Public Acts of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., and as summarized in section 2-64. 
(b)  Other plans. To make or coordinate the development of subsidiary or complementary development plans. 
(c)  Capital improvements. To prepare a coordinated and comprehensive program of public structure and improvements, such program to be prepared annually for the ensuing six (6) years in accordance with section 2-65. 
(d)  Zoning. To recommend zoning regulations, changes and amendments to the city commission, in accordance with Act 110 of Public Acts of 2006, as amended being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and to administer provisions of the city's zoning ordinance to the extent specified in such ordinance, including but not limited to, site plan reviews and conditional use approvals. 
(1)  The planning commission may by first-class mail or personal delivery submit to the county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners if requested a copy of the zoning ordinance and any amendments. The commission shall submit the requested documents to the county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners within sixty-three (63) days after the request is received and shall submit any future amendments to the zoning ordinance within sixty-three (63) days after the amendments are adopted. The commission may also submit a zoning ordinance electronically. 
(e)  Subdivision, lot splits, and land divisions. To review and make recommendations on subdivision, lot splits, and land divisions in accordance with PA 288 of 1967, as amended, and to administer the city's subdivision regulations to the extent specified in such regulations. 
(f)  Coordination. To coordinate implementation of the city's master plan with other city agencies and boards in accordance with section 2-66. Consult with representatives of adjacent local units of governments in respect to their planning so that conflicts in master plans and zoning may be avoided. Cooperate with all departments of the state and federal government and other public agencies concerned with programs for economic, social, and physical development within the municipality and seek the maximum coordination of the city with these agencies. 
(g)  Other duties. To provide recommendations to the city commission on other matters relevant to the future development of the city and as may be requested by the city commission or city manager. 
(h)  Generally. In general, the commission shall have such powers as provided in Act 33 of Public Acts of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this division. Upon request, all public officials shall furnish to the commission such available information as it may require for its work. The commission, its members, officers, and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon and land and make examinations and surveys and place maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-64. - Master plans. 
    The commission shall make, adopt, amend, and implement a master plan for the physical development of the municipality, including areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the municipality. The plan may be adopted as a whole or by successive parts corresponding with major geographic areas of the municipality or with functional subject matter areas of the plan. 
(a)  Content. The plan shall address land use issues and infrastructure projects twenty (20) years or more into the future. The plan shall include maps, plats, charts, and descriptive, explanatory, and other related matter and shall show the commission's recommendations for the physical development of the municipality. The plan shall also include those of the following subjects, which reasonably can be considered as pertinent to the future development of the municipality: 
(1)  A land use plan and program, in part consisting of a classification and allocation of land for agriculture, residences, commerce, industry, recreation, ways and grounds, public buildings, schools, soil conservation, forests, woodlots, open space, wildlife refuges, and other uses and purposes. 
(2)  The general location, character, and extent of streets, railroads, airports, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, bridges, waterways, and waterfront development; flood prevention works, drainage, sanitary sewers and water supply systems, works for preventing pollution, and works for maintaining water levels; and public utilities and structures. 
(3)  Recommendations as to the general character, extent, and layout for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas; and the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, or change of use or extension of streets, ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, utilities, or other facilities. 
(4)  A zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises. 
(5)  Recommendations for implementing any of its proposals. 
(6)  The planning commission may, by a majority vote, adopt a subplan for a geographic area less than the entire planning jurisdiction, if the unique physical characteristics require more intensive planning efforts. 
(7)  If the plan is or includes a master street plan, the means for implementing the master street plan in cooperation with the county road commission and the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) shall be specified in the master street plan in a manner consistent with the respective powers and duties of and any written agreements between these entities and the municipality. 
(b)  Surveys. In the preparation of such plan the commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the municipality and with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements, and the use of resources in accordance with their character and adaptability. 
(c)  Notice of intent to prepare a plan. A plan may be adopted as a whole or by successive parts corresponding with major geographic areas of the municipality. Before preparing a plan, the commission shall send by first-class mail or personal delivery, a notice explaining that the commission intends to prepare a plan and requesting the recipient's cooperation and comment, to all of the following: 
(1)  The planning commission, or if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each township, city, or village located within or contiguous to the municipality. 
(2)  The regional planning commission for the region in which the municipality is located. 
(3)  The county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for the county in which the municipality is located. 
(4)  Each public utility company and railroad within the municipality, and any governmental entity that registers its name and mailing address for this purpose with the commission. 
(5)  If the plan will include a master street plan, the county road commission and the MDOT. 
(6)  A submittal under subsection (d) to an entity described in subsection (c) may be made by personal or first-class mail delivery of a hard copy or by electronic mail. However, the commission preparing the plan shall not make such submittals by electronic mail unless, in the notice described in subsection (c), the commission states that it intends to make such submittals by electronic mail and the entity receiving that notice does not respond by objecting to the use of electronic mail. Electronic mail may contain a link to a website on which the submittal is posted it the website is accessible to the public free of charge. 
(d)  City commission approval of plan distribution. After preparing a proposed plan, the planning commission shall submit the proposed plan to the city commission for review and comment. The process of adopting the plan shall not proceed further unless the city commission approves the distribution of the proposed plan. If the city commission approves the distribution of the proposed plan, it shall notify the secretary of the planning commission. 
(e)  Distribution of plan for review and comment. If the city commission approves the distribution of the proposed plan, the secretary of the planning commission shall submit a copy of the proposed plan, for review and comment, to all of the following: 
(1)  The planning commission, or if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each city, village, or township located within or contiguous to the municipality. 
(2)  The regional planning commission for the region in which the municipality is located. 
(3)  The county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for the county in which the municipality is located. The secretary of the commission shall concurrently submit to the county planning commission or, if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, a statement, signed by the secretary, that the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) have been met. The statement shall include the name and address of each planning commission or legislative body to which a copy of the proposed plan was submitted under subsections (a) and (b) and the date of submittal. 
(4)  Each public utility company and railroad company owning or operating a public utility or railroad within the municipality, and any government entity, that registers its name and address for this purpose with the secretary of the commission. An entity that, pursuant to this subdivision, receives a copy of a proposed plan shall reimburse the municipality for any copying and postage costs thereby incurred by the municipality. 
(5)  If the proposed plan is or includes a proposed master street plan, the county road commission and MDOT. 
(f)  Comments on plan. An entity described in subsection (e) may submit comments on the proposed plan to the planning commission within sixty-three (63) days after the proposed plan was submitted to that entity under subsection (e). 
(g)  County board comments. If the county planning commission or the county board of commissioners that receives a copy of the proposed master plan submits comments, the comments shall include, but need not be limited to, both of the following, as applicable. The comments are advisory only. 
(1)  A statement whether the county board of commissioners, after considering any comments received under subsection (f), considers the proposed plan to be inconsistent with the plan of any city, village, township, or region described in subsection (e)(1) or (2). 
(2)  If the county has a county plan, a statement whether the county planning commission considers the proposed plan to be inconsistent with the county plan. 
(h)  Public hearing, notice. Before approving the proposed plan, the commission shall hold not less than one (1) public hearing on the proposed plan. The hearing shall be held after the expiration of the deadline for comment. The commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than fifteen (15) days' before the hearing by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The commission shall also submit notice to each entity described in subsection (c). 
(i)  Plan approval. The approval of the plan shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan and the action taken shall be recorded by the chairperson or the secretary of the commission. Following approval of the proposed plan by the commission, the secretary of the commission shall submit a copy of the proposed plan to the city commission. 
(j)  City commission action. Approval of the plan by the planning commission is the final step for adoption of the plan, unless the city commission by resolution has asserted the right to approve or reject the plan. In that case, after approval of the plan by the planning commission, the city commission shall approve or reject the plan. If the proposed plan is rejected, the city commission shall submit to the planning commission a statement of its objections to the proposed plan. The planning commission shall consider the city commission's objections and revise the proposed plan so as to address those objections. The procedures provided in subsections (h) and (i) and this subsection shall be repeated until a proposed plan is approved by the city commission. 
(k)  Plan distribution. Upon final adoption of the plan, copies of the adopted plan shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for submitting copies of the proposed plan under subsection (e). 
(l)  Plan amendments or adoption of new plan. An extension, addition, revision, or other amendment to a plan shall be adopted under the same procedure as a plan or a successive part of a plan as set forth herein, subject however to the following: 
(1)  The review period provided for in subsection (f) shall be forty-two (42) days instead of sixty-three (63) days. 
(2)  Amendments to a master plan involving grammatical, typographical, or similar editorial changes, title changes, or a change to conform to an adopted plat may be made without following the procedure set forth in subsections 2-64(c), (d) and (h). 
(m)  Five-year review . At least every five (5) years after adoption of the plan, the commission shall review the plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the plan or adopt a new plan. The review and its findings shall be recorded in the minutes of the relevant meeting or meetings of the commission. 
(n)  Authority of the plan . A street; square, park, playground, public way, ground, or other open space; or public building or other structure shall not be constructed or authorized for construction in an area covered by a municipal master plan unless the location, character, and extent of the street, public way, open space, structure, or utility have been submitted to the planning commission by the legislative body or other body having jurisdiction over the authorization or financing of the project and has been approved by the planning commission. The planning commission shall submit its reasons for approval or disapproval to the body having jurisdiction. If the planning commission disapproves, the body having jurisdiction may overrule the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its entire membership for a township that on the enactment date of this act had a planning commission created under former 1931 PA 285, or for a city or village, or by a vote of not less than a majority of its membership for any other township. If the planning commission fails to act within 35 days after submission of the proposal to the planning commission, the project shall be considered to be approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-65. - Capital improvements. 
    For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the municipality under the master plan, the planning commission, after adoption of a master plan, shall annually prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six (6) years, which programs shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six (6) year period. The programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and to that end, each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall, upon request, furnish the commission with lists, plans, and estimates of time and cost of those public structures and improvements. The commission may recommend to the city commission programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-66. - Coordination. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan [and] to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. The commission shall coordinate the implementation of the city's development policy and master plan with other city agencies and boards. To this end, other agencies and boards may submit to the planning commission their projects, plans, and grant requests for a "finding of consistency" with the approved development policy and master plan. The commission's determinations in the "consistency" matters shall be submitted to the city commission. 
(b)  The commission shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-67. - Staff support. 
    The city manager shall appoint the city planner or such other officer as he may determine to act as staff support to the commission. Such staff support shall provide the commission the data, options and analysis needed by the commission to make determinations and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 2-68. - Approval, ratification, and reconfirmation. 
    All official actions taken by city commission and/or planning commission during and preceding this division are hereby approved, ratified, and reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective date of this division shall continue with the planning commission as amended by this division, subject to the requirements of this division, and shall be deemed a continuation of any previous City of Sault Ste. Marie planning commission. This division shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 528-11, 9-6-11) 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 222-82, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1982, deleted Div. 4 which pertained to planning commission, and derived from the 1957 Code, §§ 3-2.01, 8-2.02. 

Secs. 2-69-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMUNITY SERVICES BOARD 

Sec. 2-76. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted under the provisions of Act 156 of the Public Acts of 1917 of the State of Michigan [MCL § 123.51 et seq.], in which it is provided that any city may operate a public recreation and playground system, there is hereby created a community services board for the city. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 3-6.01, 11-19-73) 
Sec. 2-77. - Appointment; terms of members. 
    The city commission shall appoint the members of the community services board. The board shall consist of nine (9) members with a term of office for each of three (3) years. Members of the first board shall be appointed, effective December 3, 1973 as follows: Three (3) members shall each be appointed for three (3) year terms; three (3) members shall each be appointed for two (2) year terms; three (3) members shall each be appointed for one (1) year terms; and annually thereafter on July 1st, three (3) members shall each be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 3-6.02, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 280-87, § 1, 8-17-87) 
Sec. 2-78. - Compensation, removal and filling of vacancies. 
    The members of the community services board shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the city commission. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city commission for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 3-6.02, 11-19-73) 
Sec. 2-79. - Meetings. 
    The community services board shall hold meetings at least once a month. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 3-6.06, 11-19-73) 
Secs. 2-80, 2-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed §§ 2-80 and 2-81, which pertained to separate fund and leasing of Pullar Community Building, and derived from Ord. No. 132, §§ 3-6.04 and 3-6.05, adopted November 19, 1973. 
Sec. 2-82. - Duties. 
(a)  The community services board shall act as an advisory board to the city manager and advise the city manager concerning all phases of a parks and recreation program for the city, including the control of the Pullar Community Building; and including all activities, receipts, expenditures, supervision and control of the parks and recreation system and the Pullar Community Building of the city. 
(Ord. No. 132, §§ 3-6.01, 3-6.03, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 584-18, § IA., 11-19-18) 
Secs. 2-83-2-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed div. 6, §§ 2-89-2-95, which pertained to the industrial and economic development commission, and derived from Ord. No. 136, §§ 3-4.01-3-4.05, adopted January 21, 1974. 

Secs. 2-89-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-103. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to Act 213 of the Public Acts of 1957 [MCL § 399.171, MSA § 5.3395], as amended by Act 33 of the Public Acts of 1968 [MCL § 399.172, MSA § 5.3396], and all amendments thereto, a commission is hereby created in and for the city, to be known as the Sault Ste. Marie Historical Development Commission. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.01), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.02), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
Sec. 2-104. - Composition, appointment, members, and terms. 
    The city commission shall appoint all the members of the historical development commission. the commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whose terms shall consist of seven (7) years. Members of the historical development commission appointed before January 1, 2002 are hereby removed from office. Members of the commission appointed after January 1, 2002 to the historical development commission shall be appointed for the terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6), and seven (7) years respectively, and annually thereafter one (1) member shall be appointed for seven (7) years. Four (4) of the appointed seven (7) historical development commission members shall be appointed from a list of nominations provided by the Chippewa County Historical Society, Inc. The Chippewa County Historical Society, Inc. shall provide a list of nominations under the terms and conditions of a request of the city commission from time to time. Upon the failure of the Chippewa County Historical Society, Inc. to provide a list of nominations to the city commission, the city commission may appoint members to the historical development commission nominated from any other source. 
    If the members of the historical development commission are increased or decreased then the number of Chippewa County Historical Society, Inc. nominees shall increase or decrease in such a manner that the Chippewa County Historical Society, Inc. nominees shall always constitute a simple majority of the members. 
    Three (3) of the appointed seven (7) members shall be nominated and appointed solely by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, (3-11.02), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77; Ord. No. 465-02, 12-2-02) 
Sec. 2-105. - Compensation. 
    Members of the historical development commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.02), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
Sec. 2-106. - Removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Members of the historical development commission may be removed from office by the city commission. 
(b)  Any vacancy on the historical development commission shall be filled by the city commission for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.02), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
Sec. 2-107. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The historical development commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in municipal historical commissions by Public Act 213 of 1957 [MCL § 399.171, MSA § 5.3395] and Act 33 of 1968 [MCL § 399.172, MSA § 5.3396] as heretofore or hereafter amended, and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are related or supplemental thereto, it being the intention of this division to vest in the historical commission all powers and duties permitted by law, including advising the city commission and city manager on all phases of historical development and financing for said city, including the acquisition and disposal of historical buildings and sites and financing of such buildings and sites, and leasing of said sites, subject to the approval of the city commission and city manager. 
(b)  It shall be the function and duty of the historical development commission to study, investigate and survey the needs of the city in the development of historical sites, materials, and other related matters. It shall report its findings and recommendations to the city commission and the city manager. The historical development commission shall consider and devise plans for the use and development of lands and facilities now owned or to be acquired by the city for historical purposes, including plans for the financing thereof. In general, it shall be the duty of the historical development commission to make such studies and to submit such recommendations to the city commission and city manager from time to time as it shall deem necessary and desirable to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.03, 3-11.04), 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
Sec. 2-108. - Establishment of regulations; contracting and hiring. 
    The city commission shall, from time to time, establish regulations for the guidance of the historical development commission, and the historical development commission shall not bind the city to any contract, or hire any employees, without the approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1 (3-11.05, 3-3-69; Ord. No. 176, 1-3-77) 
Sec. 2-109. - Governor Chase S. Osborn Trust Fund spending recommendations. 
    The historical development commission shall annually as part of the city budget development process: (i) recommend to the city commission a list of projects to be funded from the annual proceeds distributed to the city from the Governor Chase S. Osborn Trust Fund. The historical development commission shall prior to such recommendation review and evaluate the projects recommended for funding, and (ii) prepare and submit the report required by subsection 2-107(b). 
(Ord. No. 465-02, 12-2-02) 
Secs. 2-110-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-116. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to Act 8 of 1972 [MCL § 117.5c, MSA § 5.2084(3)], a local officers compensation commission is created, which shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.01, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-117. - Composition; appointment. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall consist of five (5) members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. The terms of office shall be five (5) years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years. All first members shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.01, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-118. - Certain persons ineligible. 
    No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the local officers compensation commission. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.01, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-119. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the local officers compensation commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.01, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-120. - Determination of salaries. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salaries of such local elected officials, which determination shall be the salaries unless the city commission by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the city commission shall reject them. The determinations of the local officers compensation commission shall be effective thirty (30) days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city commission. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.02, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-121. - Meetings; organization; compensation. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in 1972 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of such commission constitute a quorum for conducting its business. The local officers compensation commission shall take no action or make determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. Such commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. "Session days" means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of such commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.03, 9-18-72) 
Sec. 2-122. - Changing of procedure to establish compensation of elected officials. 
    The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by Charter amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3-13.04, 9-18-72) 
Secs. 2-123-2-128. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-129. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to Public Act Number 18 of the Extra Session of 1933 [MCL § 125.651 et seq.], as amended, a commission is hereby created in and for the city to be known as the Sault Ste. Marie Housing Commission. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.01), 7-5-61) 
Sec. 2-130. - Appointment; terms. 
    The city manager is hereby directed to appoint the members of the housing commission, with the consent and approval of the members of the city commission. Such housing commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whose term of office shall be five (5) years. Members of the first housing commission shall be appointed for the terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years, and five (5) years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.02), 7-5-61; Ord. No. 39, § 10-6.02, 5-2-66) 
Sec. 2-131. - Compensation. 
    Members of the housing commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.02), 7-5-61; Ord. No. 39, § 10-6.02, 5-2-66) 
Sec. 2-132. - Removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
    Members of the housing commission may be removed from office by the city manager. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city manager for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.02), 7-5-61; Ord. No. 39, § 10-6.02, 5-2-66) 
Sec. 2-133. - Powers and duties. 
    The housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933 [MCL § 125.651 et seq.], as heretofore or hereafter amended, and only laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the intention of this division to vest in the housing commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.03), 7-5-61; Ord. No. 65, § 1 (10-6.03), 1-20-69) 
Sec. 2-134. - Hiring of employees. 
    The housing commission shall select and appoint such employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and duties and shall pay them such compensation as it shall fix and determine. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1 (10-6.03), 7-5-61; Ord. No. 484-05, 9-6-05) 
Secs. 2-135-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 222-82, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1982, provided that Div. 10, Community Development Commission, be deleted; substantive sections thereof being §§ 2-141-2-149, as derived from Ord. No. 170, adopted June 21, 1976. 

Secs. 2-141-2-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-154-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1A., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed div. 12, §§ 2-161-2-166, which pertained to the commission for administration of gift funds, and derived from Ord. No. 239-83, §§ 1-6, adopted October 17, 1983. 

Secs. 2-161-2-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASES 

Sec. 2-169. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan." 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.01, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-170. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City purchasing agent or agent is the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Contractual services shall mean and include all telephone, gas, water, electric light and power service, towel and cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term shall not include professional and other contractual services which by their nature are unique and not subject to competition. 
    Supplies, materials and equipment as used throughout this article shall mean any and all articles or things which shall be furnished to or used by any agency including all printing, binding or publication of stationery, forms, journals and reports. 
    Using agency means any department, agency, commission or other unit in the city government or a unit other than the city government making use of the city purchasing department using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.02, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-171. - Establishment of office of purchases. 
    There is hereby established, as prescribed by section 4.6 of the Charter, the department of purchases and supplies, to be administered by a director of purchases and supplies, or purchasing agent, under the direction and control of the city manager as provided by the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.03, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-172. - City purchasing agent. 
(a)  Generally. The city purchasing agent shall be the head, and have general supervision of the office of the department of purchases and supplies. The agent shall perform all duties required of a department head by law and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Scope of purchasing authority. The agent shall have the powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  Purchase or contract. To purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this article and such rules and regulations as adopted by the purchasing procedural committee for the internal management and operation of the department of purchases and supplies. 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or officers to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article other than through the department of purchases and supplies, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(c)  Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred above and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this article, the agent shall: 
(1)  Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at the least expense to the city. 
(2)  Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(3)  Rules and regulations. The agent shall be responsible for the establishment and amendment when necessary, of all rules and regulations authorized by this article, the Charter, and any other ordinances pertaining to purchasing which have been or may be enacted. Such rules and regulations shall be established and amended by a purchasing procedural committee which shall be composed of the city manager, purchasing agent and finance officer and shall be in the form of a purchasing manual which shall be revised and updated to conform to changing conditions. 
(4)  Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by private businesses and organizations. 
(5)  Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as shall be reasonably necessary to the efficient and effective operation of a department of purchases and supplies. 
(6)  Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors' catalog file or library. Such catalogs shall be filed, as nearly as may be, according to materials and shall contain if possible description of materials, vendors' commodities, prices and discounts. 
(7)  Bulk purchases. Explore and make use of the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take full advantage of quantity discounts. The cooperative purchasing or purchasing for other governmental agencies or political subdivisions is to be encouraged and explored by the agent. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.04, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-173. - Capacity of agent. 
(a)  Generally. The agent shall enforce the written specifications adopted. 
(b)  Agent's duties. It shall be the duty of the agent: 
(1)  Classification. To classify all supplies used by the using agencies. 
(2)  Standardization. To adopt as standards the minimum number of qualities, sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the city government. 
(3)  Specification. To prepare and adopt written specifications of all such standard supplies. 
(c)  Consultation with using agencies. The agent shall consult with the heads and other officials of the using agencies to determine their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards which meet the needs of the majority of such agencies. 
(d)  Nature of specifications. All specifications shall be definite and certain as nearly as may be, and shall permit of competition; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to noncompetitive types or kinds of supplies. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.05, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-174. - Requisitions and estimates. 
    All using agencies shall file with the purchasing agent, detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the agent shall prescribe. This shall not prevent any using agency from filing with the purchasing agent at any time duly approved requisitions for supplies, equipment or commodities as required. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.06, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-175. - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency, the agent shall not issue any purchase order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the finance officer has certified that there are unencumbered funds to the credit of the using agency to defray the amount of such order. When the total cost requisitioned exceeds the amount the finance officer has been authorized to approve by the city manager, such requisition shall bear the approval of the city manager prior to the issuance of a purchase order. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.07, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-176. - Competitive bidding required. 
    All purchases of, and contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become excess or obsolete and unusable shall, except as specifically provided in this article, be based wherever possible and feasible on competitive bids. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.08, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-177. - Formal contract procedure. 
(a)  Generally. All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided in this article and by the Charter, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(b)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in an official publication of general circulation in the city and surrounding area at least five (5) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. At the discretion of the agent, notices may be published in publications of greater area circulation than the local paper. 
(1)  Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required in this subsection shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(2)  Bidders list. The agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a "bidders list" which the agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of the notice which will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. 
(c)  Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the agent, bid deposits or surety in the form of check, cash or bond shall be made a part of the specifications. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety upon awarding or rejection of bids. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within a reasonable length of time after the award. 
(d)  Bid opening procedure. 
(1)  Submittal. Sealed bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
(2)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. 
(3)  Tabulation. The tabulation of all bids received shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  Bid handling. The tabulation of the bids received along with the recommendation of the purchasing agent shall be submitted to the city manager, who shall submit such information with a recommendation to the city commission for commission action. 
(f)  Award of contract. The agent shall have the authority to award contracts under the section 2-177 limit and recommended to the city manager the awarding of contracts involving expenditures in excess of the section 2-177 limit with the purview of this article. 
(g)  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  The time element; whether or not the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(4)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(5)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(6)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(h)  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(i)  Tie bids. 
(1)  Local vendor. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder. 
(2)  Outside vendors. When subsection (i)(1) is not in effect, the agent shall award the contract to one of the bidders by publicly drawing lots. 
(j)  Performance bonds. The agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(k)  Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.09, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 493-07, § 1, 7-2-07) 
Sec. 2-178. - Open market procedure. 
(a)  Generally. All purchases of supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, of less than the estimated value of the section 2-177 limit may be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure described by section 2-177 for the award of formal contracts. 
(b)  Minimum number of bids. All open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three (3) competitive bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in section 2-177(g). 
(c)  Bid invitations. The agent shall solicit bids from interviews with representatives, by telephone, direct mail or personal delivery to prospective vendors. 
(d)  Recording. The agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted thereon for a period of six (6) months, which records shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  Rejection of bids. The agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the best interest of the public will be served thereby. 
(f)  Source establishment by bid. The purchasing agent may establish sources of supply for various commodities, supplies or material by means of the procedures as set forth in this section even though the aggregate amount which may be purchased over a period of time may exceed the section 2-177 limit limitation for a single purchase. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.10, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 493-07, § 1, 7-2-07) 
Sec. 2-179. - Emergency purchases. 
    In case of actual emergency, and with the approval of the agent, a department head or duly authorized agent thereof may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency which may vitally affect the life and health or convenience of citizens. Such purchases shall be made in compliance with prescribed rules and regulations as set forth in the purchasing manual. Provided further that the amount does not exceed the section 2-177 for a single-limit purchase. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.11, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 493-07, § 1, 7-2-07) 
Sec. 2-180. - Inspection; tests. 
(a)  The agent shall have the authority to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of purchases to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(b)  The agent shall have the authority to require chemical or physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformity with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.12, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-181. - Surplus and obsolete stock. 
(a)  Generally. All using agencies shall submit to the agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports of stocks, supplies or equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  Sale. The agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. 
(1)  Competitive bidding. Sales of personal property, the value of which exceeds the section 2-177 limit, and all sales of real estate property shall be made to the highest responsible bidder in conformance with section 2-177. 
(2)  Open market procedure. Sales of personal property, the value of which does not exceed the section 2-177 limit may be made to the highest responsible bidder in conformance with section 2-178. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.13, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 493-07, § 1, 7-2-07) 
Sec. 2-182. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the city would be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.14, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-183. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
    Competitive bidding shall not be required for the following activities: 
(1)  Where the product or material contracted for is not competitive in nature and no advantage to the city would result from requiring competitive bidding or the city commission authorizes execution of a contract without competitive bidding as provided by section 12.1 of the Charter; 
(2)  The employment of professional services; 
(3)  When the department of purchases and supplies shall determine that the public interest will be best served by purchase from or joint purchase with another government unit; 
(4)  When the city elects to undertake the work itself, as provided by the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2-7.15, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 2-184. - Contract change orders. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to approve and sign change orders for all construction projects previously approved by the city commission if all of the following terms and conditions are met: 
(1)  The dollar amount of said change order shall not exceed ten (10) per cent of the original bid award on the entire construction project; provided, however, that in no event shall the change order amount exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); and 
(2)  Such change orders authorized by the city manager shall not exceed the funds budgeted for the particular construction project in question; and 
(3)  No contract or change order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the ten (10) per cent bid award limitation contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 211-81, § 1, 1-19-81) 
Sec. 2-185. - Local bid adjustment and award. 
(a)  This section applies to purchases only. 
(b)  A city or county local bidder is defined as either a bidder who owns land in the city or the county; and upon such land its business is located; and who owned the land continuously for the twelve (12) months prior to the bid; and who is current on all obligations and property taxes owed to the city or the county as the case may be; and has paid in full any real property taxes which were due to the city or county in the twelve (12) months prior to making the bid. 
(c)  A city or county local bidder is defined as either a bidder who is a tenant under a fully signed written lease on land located in the city or the county; and upon such land its business is located; and which lease was in existence continuously for the twelve (12) months prior to the bid; and who is current on all obligations owed to the city or the county as the case may be. 
(d)  Any bid made by a local bidder as defined above shall be provided a competitive adjustment to their bid at the time of tabulation: 
If a city local bidder then equal to five (5) percent of the low bid amount not to exceed $10,000.00. 
If a county local bidder then equal to three (3) percent of the low bid not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(e)  The competitive adjustment for purposes of determining the award of the bid shall reduce the local bidder's bid artificially as means of determining if the award to the local bidder is in the best interest of the city. 
(f)  Lowest responsible bidder defined under subsection 2-177(g), and award to other than low bidder under subsection 2-177(h) shall include the competitive adjustment of this section in their application to the bid award decision. 
(g)  To receive the benefit of this section the local bidder shall agree to lower its bid at the time of bid award to match the actual bid submitted by the non-local bidder. 
(Ord. No. 502-08, § 1, 5-14-08; Ord. No. 511-09, § 1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 517-10, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 563-15, § 1, 10-19-15) 
Secs. 2-186-2-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT 

Sec. 2-300. - Preamble. 
    In keeping with the policies declared by the state legislature in enacting codes of ethics for state officials, it is recognized that high moral and ethical standards among city officials are equally essential to the conduct of local and state government; that a code of ethics for the guidance of city officials is necessary in order to prevent conflicts of interest in public office, improve standards of public service, and promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the people of the city in their governing body. The ethics and conduct board will initially receive and process complaints or allegations of violations of the city code of ethics and conduct. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 1, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-301-2-309. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-310. - Code of ethics and conduct. 
    Definitions. No city officer shall violate the standards of conduct or procedural parameters as used in this article: 
(a)  City officer means an elected commissioner, mayor, employee of the city, or the members of the several boards and commissions created by or under the authority of the Sault Ste. Marie City Charter, Code, or applicable state law. 
(b)  Unethical conduct means a violation of the standards of conduct contained in this article. 
(c)  Incompatible offices means the standards of conduct prescribed by 1978 PA 566. 
(d)  Conflict of interest-Kinship means the contracting with an entity that is either wholly owned or that is controlled by and through a controlling interest by a person who is a member of the city officer's family as defined in City Charter subsection 5.14(a). 
(e)  Person means any business, individual, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
(f)  Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or construction, including description of requirement, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
(g)  Gratuity means an item of value in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) such as: a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, alcoholic beverages, or anything else of more than a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
(h)  Confidential information means any information which is available to a city officer only because of the city officer's status with the City of Sault Ste. Marie and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
(i)  Contract means all types of agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the sale of city real or personal property, procurement of supplies, services, or construction. 
(j)  Contractor means any person having a contract with the city or an agency thereof. 
(k)  Services means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective-bargaining agreements. 
(l)  Direct participation means substantial involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, or preparation of any part of a purchase request, for the purposes of influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard. 
(m)  Non-employee means any person, not an officer or employee of the city, who is involved directly or indirectly, including through a third party, in the procurement process with the city. 
(n)  Conflict of interest-Employment/financial means a personal interest of such substance as to induce action on his or her part to promote the governmental decision or contract for his or her own personal benefit. 
(o)  Governmental decision means a determination, action, vote or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, ordinance, or measure on which a vote by a defined city officer of the public body is required, and by which the public body formulates or effectuates public policy. 
(p)  Minor violation means a violation of this article where the acts or omissions of the violator only: 
(1)  Meet the prohibitions of conduct contained in this article in a limited fashion; and 
(2)  Where there is only indirect benefit to the violator. 
(q)  Major violation means a violation of this article where the acts or omissions of the violator: 
(1)  Meet the expressed prohibitions of conduct contained in this article in a direct fashion; and 
(2)  Where there is direct benefit to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-311-2-314. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-315. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Disclosure of confidential information and city officer status activities within one year. It shall be unethical for a city officer to use or divulge to any person confidential information acquired in the course of city service in advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release to the public. No city officer shall, except as required in the performance of his duties, or in the course of any conduct reasonably believed to be in the performance of his duties, disclose confidential information gained by reason of his or her official position, nor shall he otherwise use the information for his personal interest. Confidential information shall include: 
(1)  Personnel information, applications, or any files maintained for city officers; 
(2)  Information required of any taxpayer or city license holder in connection with the assessment or collection of any tax or license fee if the disclosure of the information to other persons would violate the taxpayer or licensee's right to privacy; 
(3)  Specific intelligence information and specific investigative files compiled by investigative law enforcement and penology agencies and those state agencies vested with the responsibility to discipline members of any profession, the nondisclosure of which is essential to effective law enforcement or for the protection of any person's right to privacy. 
(4)  Information revealing the identity of persons who file complaints with investigative law enforcement or other government agencies except as the public disclosure laws may authorize; 
(5)  Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used to administer license, employment or examination [license or employment examinations]; 
(6)  Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations and intra-agency memorandums in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended, except that a specific record shall not be exempt when publicly cited by an agency in connection with any agency action; 
(7)  Records which are relevant to a controversy to which the city or any of its officers, employees or agents is a party and would not be available to another party under the rules of pretrial discovery for causes pending in the courts; 
(8)  Any other information as is declared confidential by other specific statutes; 
(9)  The confidential areas herein above listed shall be inapplicable to the extent that information, the disclosure of which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interest, can be deleted from the specific records sought. 
To further the goal of maintaining confidences and preventing confidences from being used for personal gain, a person who was a city officer shall not, within one (1) year of his or her leaving the city office, be an employee of any entity who seeks a contract with the city without obtaining approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Use of city property. It shall be unethical for a city officer to use personnel resources, equipment, property, and funds under the officer's official care and control for personal gain or benefit unless used judiciously and solely in accordance with prescribed constitutional, statutory, and regulatory procedures. 
(c)  Gifts or loans. It shall be unethical for a city officer to solicit or accept a gift or loan of money, goods, services, or other thing of value for the benefit of a person or organization other than the city which tends to influence the manner in which the city officer or another city officer performs official duties. 
(d)  Personal profit. It shall be unethical for a city officer to engage in a business transaction in which the city officer may profit from his or her official position or authority or benefit financially from confidential information which the city officer has obtained or may obtain by reason of that position or authority. 
(e)  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for a city officer to accept a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with a decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefore. 
(f)  Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for a city officer to be directly or indirectly involved in any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(g)  Incompatible employment. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in 1978 PA 566. 
(h)  Incompatible offices. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in 1978 PA 566. 
(i)  Incompatible kinship. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in subsection 2-310(d) described herein. 
(j)  Contract fixing. It shall be unethical for a city officer to participate in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision relating to a business entity in which the city officer has a financial or unethical interest. 
(k)  Unethical hiring. It shall be unethical for a city officer to be hired, or to hire a person, to solicit or secure a city contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, per centage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
(l)  Financial conflict of interest. It shall be unethical for a city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in subsection 2-310(n) described herein. 
(m)  [Participation in decision making.] Before debate or a motion, proposal, recommendation, or resolution is made, a city officer shall not directly participate in a vote or debate regarding a governmental decision or a contract between the city and any of the following: 
(1)  Himself or herself or any family member as defined in City Charter section 5.14. 
(2)  A partnership, or limited liability company in which he or she (or any family member as defined in City Charter section 5.14.) is a partner, or member. 
(3)  Any corporation in which he or she (or any family member as defined in City Charter section 5.14.) is a stockholder owning more than ten (10) per cent of the total outstanding stock of any class if the stock is not listed on a stock exchange, or of which he or she is a director or officer. 
(4)  Any trust of which he or she (or any family member as defined in City Charter section 5.14.) is a beneficiary or trustee. 
(5)  An entity where the city officer has a financial interest as defined in City Charter section 5.14. 
(n)  Conduct of conduct of board, commission, and committee members (collectively called commission members). Commission members will hereafter conduct themselves according to the following rules of conduct as they pertain to work for and on behalf of the city: 
(1)  A commission member shall maintain decorum and set an example for conduct when the commission member represents the city, constituents, principals, or themselves personally. Commission members shall conduct themselves so as not to bring disgrace or embarrassment upon the city. Conduct such as name calling, yelling, screaming, use of fighting words, threatening retribution, or similar activity shall be prohibited. 
(2)  A commission member shall always represent that opinions stated are the member's own and do not necessarily represent those of the commission unless the commission has voted and passed an ordinance, resolution or motion that so states the expressed policy. 
(3)  If a commission member writes to a citizen, the member may use city stationery. However, the form and language must clearly state that opinions are those of the writer unless the commission has taken some official action. The commission member shall sign his/her name as "mayor," "mayor pro tem" or "commission member" as applicable. 
(4)  A commission member must obtain approval of the commission by motion to represent the city to any organization. 
(5)  A commission member must obtain approval of the commission by motion to attend any activity for which the city will pay for travel and other expenses. 
(6)  A commission member shall not divulge the discussions held in closed session until or unless the commission itself has made the discussions public. 
(7)  A commission member shall not make false statements on which the commission, city staff or other agencies rely to establish policy or make important decisions. A commission member violates this rule if he or she knows it is untrue, or if he or she has knowledge that would lead a reasonable person of ordinary prudence to conclude that the statement is untrue. 
(8)  A commission member shall not interfere with the city managers control of and relationship to city employees as protected by City Charter section 4.9. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 2-316. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-317. - Employee standards of citizen responses. 
(a)  Employees shall promptly respond to citizen request for assistance or inquiry. 
(b)  Employees are expected to respond as required by law to all requests of citizens for information under the State Freedom of Information Act. 
Secs. 2-318, 2-319. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-320. - Waiver by necessity. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b), a city officer shall be permitted to vote on, make, or participate in making a governmental decision if all of the following occur: 
(1)  The requisite quorum necessary for official action on the governmental decision by the entity of the city to which the city officer has been appointed is not available because the participation of the public officer in the official action violates this article. 
(2)  Without breaching legal requirements for nondisclosure, the city officer promptly discloses any personal, contractual, financial, business or employment interest he or she may have in the governmental decision and disclosure is made part of the public record of the official action on the governmental decision. 
(b)  If a governmental decision involves the awarding of a contract, a city officer shall be permitted to vote on, make, or participate in making the governmental decision on issues defined in this article herein if all of the following occur: 
(1)  All of the conditions of subsection (a) are fulfilled. 
(2)  The city officer will directly receive from the contract an amount less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-321-2-324. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-325. - Intent, public contracts. 
    This article is intended as a code of ethics and conduct for city officers and not as a rule of law for public contracts. 
    In the event of a conflict between this article and the city's purchasing ordinance, the provisions of the purchasing ordinance shall prevail. 
    This article does not prevent the issuance of a contract awarded to the lowest qualified bidder, upon receipt of bids pursuant to a notice for bids, and shall not preclude any person, firm, corporation, or trust from bidding. 
    A contract in respect to which a city officer acts in violation of this article shall not be considered to be void or voidable. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-326-2-324. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-335. - Notices of employee protections and obligations. 
    The city shall post notices and use other appropriate means to keep its employees informed of their obligation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-336-2-339. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-340. - Violation and penalties. 
    The following procedure will be implemented by an appointed ethics and conduct board consisting of three (3) people who are not city officers and who are appointed by the city commission under this section. The city clerk shall act as secretary for the board. Each member's term shall be for three (3) years. Members of the board shall be initially appointed for the terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3) years respectively. Annually thereafter one (1) member shall be appointed for a full three-year term. The rules of procedure for violations and penalties are as follows: 
(a)  Any officer who believes that another officer has violated this article shall submit a written statement of the purported violation to the secretary of the ethics and conduct board. 
(b)  The board shall review the violation to determine whether adequate reasons exist to bring formal charges. 
(c)  The board shall come to one of the following conclusions: 
1.  There is insufficient evidence to conclude that any particular violation has occurred. In this case, the board shall keep any records confidential. 
2.  The board concludes it is more likely than not that there has been a violation, in which case the board may call for full review by the city commission or the city manager if the complaint involves a city employee under the managers control under the charter. 
(d)  If the board concludes there may have been a violation, the city commission (or manager) shall classify the possible violation as major or minor. If the city commission (or manager) determines that a minor violation has occurred, it shall administer a censure. The violator may demand a public hearing for minor violations. A major violation shall result in a public hearing by the city commission (or manager). If before the city commission it shall select one of its members to present its findings at the hearing. The accused violator shall neither conduct the meeting during the hearing nor shall the member present the findings of the city commission. The city commission (or manager) shall give the accused violator adequate time to prepare a case and to present the case at the public hearing. Both the city commission (or manager) and accused member shall present their own cases but they may be accompanied by counsel during the proceedings. The city commission presenter (or manager) and the accused may present witnesses who shall present their evidence under oath. After hearing the evidence, the city commission (or manager) shall determine whether the purported violation was major, minor or whether there is insufficient evidence to determine that a violation occurred. if the city commission (or manager) determines that a violation occurred, they shall also establish a penalty commensurate with the violation as follows: 
1.  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
2.  Suspension of duties for specified periods of time; or 
3.  Termination of duties. 
The city commission may remove the violator from the positions of commissioner, mayor or mayor pro tem, if applicable, as part of the penalty if they deem it appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-341-2-344. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-345. - Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards. 
(a)  General provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical standards of this article by persons affected by this article may be recovered by and on behalf of the city for the sole benefit of the city. 
(b)  Recovery of kickbacks by the city. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a person affected by this article, to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-346-2-349. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-350. - Severability, savings, repealer, sanctions. 
(a)  If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this article, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the time this article takes effect are saved and may be consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced. 
(c)  To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this article constitute violations of the Michigan Criminal Code or the City Charter they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this article. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  No provision contained herein shall be intended to restrict, preclude, hinder or otherwise impair the city officer from exercising any and all rights, duties, obligations or discretion bestowed upon them in the exercise and fulfillment of their official functions. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 2-351-2-354. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-355. - False charge-Violation. 
    Any person who files a false charge of misconduct on the part of any city officer when the person knows it is false shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 496-07, § 2, 9-4-07) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful business advertising in connection with electrical work, § 8-45; businesses and business regulations, Ch. 9; signs, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Posting of signs, advertisements and other matter. 
(a)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, paste or otherwise affix any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, public utility pole, tree, fire hydrant or boxing covering it, or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, public building or any property or thing belonging to the city or located in the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided that this shall not be construed to prevent any duly authorized public official from so doing for a public purpose. 
(b)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, paste or otherwise affix any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any private house, wall, fence, gate, post or tree without first having obtained the written permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  No person shall erect any sign in violation of this Code or any ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.06) 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL § 252.301 et seq., MSA § 9.391(101) et seq. 
Secs. 3-2-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Litter, Ch. 13, Art. III; nuisances, Ch. 18. 

Sec. 3-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Commercial handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place at any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purpose, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Newspaper shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, or sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Private premises shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designated or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place shall mean any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds or building. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Sec. 3-17. - Throwing or distributing in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. 
Sec. 3-18. - Throwing on vacant private premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
Secs. 3-19, 3-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1B., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed §§ 3-19 and 3-20, which pertained to distributing at inhabited private premises and political, and derived from the 1978 codification of ordinances. 
Chapter 4 - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1C., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-10, which pertained to air pollution prevention and control, and derived from the Code of 1957, § 8-7.01-8-7.10. 

Secs. 4-1-4-10. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - AIRPORT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate airports, § 2.3(s). 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; operation of snowmobiles at airports restricted, § 24-155. 

Sec. 5-1. - Obedience to laws, rules and regulations required. 
    No person shall violate any law of the United States or of the State of Michigan nor any applicable rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the United States or the State of Michigan, pertaining to airport landing fields, airport managers and air traffic. 
(Code 1957, § 7-6.01) 
Sec. 5-2. - Trespassing prohibited. 
    No persons shall, without special permission in writing from the city manager or authorized representative, enter upon or drive or travel upon or cross any part of the Sault Ste. Marie Airport, or shall permit their horses, cattle or other animals to enter upon such airport, or shall occupy or use any portion of such airport. 
(Code 1957, § 7-6.02) 
Sec. 5-3. - Rules and regulations promulgated by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby empowered to make and promulgate rules and regulations governing the administration and management of the municipal airport. Any rule or regulation so made shall be in writing. 
(b)  A copy of each such rule or regulation shall be filed with the city clerk before the same is put into effect. The clerk shall present such rule or regulation to the city commission for its consideration not later than the next regular meeting of the commission after the filing of the same. No such rule or regulation shall remain in effect if disapproved by the city commission. 
(c)  No person shall violate any such rule or regulation promulgated in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1957, § 7-6.03) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate amusements, § 2.3(o). 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, Ch.9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed §§ 6-16-6-19, 6-26-6-28 which comprised art. II, divs. 1, 2. Former art. II pertained to bowling, pool and billiards, and derived from the 1957 Code. 

Secs. 6-16-6-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 400-95, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 1995, deleted §§ 6-35-6-37, 6-44-6-49, being the substantive sections of art. III, Public dance halls and dances, derived from the 1957 Code, §§ 9-6.08 and 9-6.09. 

Secs. 6-35-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed §§ 6-61, 6-62, 6-70-6-76 which comprised art. IV, divs. 1, 2. Former art. IV pertained to carnivals, circuses, and other similar exhibitions, and derived from the 1957 Code; and Ord. No. 16, adopted Aug. 21, 1961. 

Secs. 6-61-6-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed §§ 6-88-6-93, 6-101-6-109 which comprised art. V, divs. 1, 2. Former art. V pertained to transitory shows and exhibitions, and derived from Ord. No. 83, adopted Oct. 5, 1970. 

Secs. 6-88-6-109. - Reserved. 
Chapter 7 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animal noise constituting a nuisance, § 18-7(5); keeping of animal carcasses on public sidewalks prohibited, § 22-44. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Keeping when annoyance to neighborhood prohibited. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any animals, birds or insects which cause annoyance in the neighborhood, either by: 
(1)  Barking, howling, braying, crowing or making other sounds common to its species; or 
(2)  Failure of the owner, caretaker or custodian to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors, all structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein any animals, fowl or insects are kept; or 
(3)  Failure of the owner, caretaker or custodian to keep such animals confined on such owner's, caretaker's or custodian's premises; or 
(4)  In the case of insects, stinging or molesting any person. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.11) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 7-2. - Slaughter; licensing. 
(a)  No person shall kill or slaughter any animal to be used as food for human consumption except as otherwise permitted herein. 
(b)  No person shall maintain or operate any slaughterhouse, premises, place, room or shop where animals are killed or slaughtered except as otherwise permitted herein. 
(c)  Killing of fowls and rabbits for human consumption may be conducted after obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk in the manner provided in chapter 14. 
(d)  No such license will be issued except upon certification of the health officer to the effect that the premises are kept in a clean and sanitary manner consistent with health regulations and pure food laws in force in the city and in the state. 
(e)  No person shall burn any feathers, hides or other animal matter within the corporate limits of this city. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.12) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; nuisances, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 7-3. - Disposition when sick or dead. 
(a)  No person shall place dead animals in rubbish or garbage containers. The owner of any dead horse, cow, dog, cat or other such large animal shall, within six (6) hours of the death of such animal, notify the department of public works of such death and secure the removal of the carcass. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, place or throw any dead or fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, or into any reservoir or into, or on the banks of any stream, lake, pond, sewer, well or other body of water. 
(c)  No person shall carry or convey any dead animal through or upon any street, alley or public place unless the same is so covered that no part of it is exposed to view and no odors can emanate therefrom. 
(Code 1957, §§ 6-1.13, 7-4.05) 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish, Ch. 13, Art. II; nuisances, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 7-4. - Livestock prohibited in certain areas; permit required for other areas. 
(a)  No person shall keep or confine horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs or chickens in any stable, barn, building or on any lot or premises, or otherwise, within that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
    Beginning at a point in the south shoreline of St. Mary's River which would be intersected by the west line of the SE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Sec. 17, T. 47 N., R. 1 W., thence south along said west line of SE1/4 of NE1/4 of Sec. 17, T. 47 N., R. 1 W., to the intersection of the center line of Bermuda Ave., thence easterly along the center line of Bermuda Ave. to the intersection of the center line of 20th Ave. W., thence easterly along the center line of 20th Ave. W. to the intersection of the center line of Sec. 16, T. 47 N., R. 1 W., thence northerly along said center line of Sec. 16 to the intersection of the center line of 16th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along the center line of 16th Ave. W. extended and the established avenue to the intersection of the center line of 24th St. W., thence northerly along the center line of 24th St. W., to the intersection of the center line of 8th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along said line to the intersection of a line parallel to and 150 feet east of 24th St. W., thence northerly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 5th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 22nd St. W., thence southerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 6th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 20th St. W., thence southerly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 8th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 18th St. W., thence southerly along said line to the intersection of the center line of 10th Ave. W., thence easterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 16th St. W., thence northerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 8th Ave. W. extended, thence easterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 8th St. W. extended, thence southerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 24th Ave. as platted, thence easterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of Young St., thence northerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 12th Ave. E., thence easterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 12th St. E., thence northerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of Spruce St. E., thence easterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of Mission Rd., thence northerly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of Riverside Dr., thence southeasterly along said center line to the intersection of the center line of 32nd Ave. E., thence easterly along said center line extended to the intersection of the St. Mary's Steamboat Channel, thence northwesterly along said channel to the intersection with the international boundary line, thence westerly along said boundary line to a point which would be the point of intersection of a line drawn from the point of beginning perpendicular to the international boundary line, thence southerly along said line perpendicular to the international boundary line to the point of beginning. 
(b)  No person shall keep or confine horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs or chickens in any stable, barn, building or on any lot within the portion of the city lying outside of the area described in subsection (a) without first obtaining a permit therefor from the health department. Such permit shall extend for a period of time not exceeding one year as the health department shall determine and may be renewed annually or for such shorter periods as the health department shall determine. Upon application for such permit or renewal thereof being made, the health department shall cause an investigation to be made of the premises to be used for such purposes and the health department may issue such permit if it shall be determined by the health department that the premises are kept in a clean and sanitary manner consistent with health regulations and pure food laws in force in the city and state and that the keeping and confining of such animals shall not create a nuisance in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 8-30-54) 
Secs. 7-5-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL WELFARE AND CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 1995, repealed §§ 7-16-7-21, 7-28-7-33, being the substantive sections of Art. II, Dogs, derived from the 1957 Code, § 6-1.14, and added §§ 7-26-7-31, 7-33-7-38, 7-51, 7-52, 7-76, 7-77, 7-80-7-82, to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-26. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Animal Welfare and Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-27. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To require the licensing of dogs. 
(2)  To provide regulations for the protection, control and maintenance of dogs and animals on public and private property within the city. 
(3)  To define and control dangerous animals. 
(4)  To establish a procedure for the removal or destruction of certain dangerous animals. 
Cross reference- Dangerous and exotic animals, § 7-76 et seq. 
(5)  To establish powers and duties of enforcement and implementation in certain city officers and employees. 
(6)  To provide for penalties and sanctions for violations hereof. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-28. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate shelter means a structure which, other than an opening for egress and ingress, is completely enclosed, creating a space within which is equal to the length of the animal in inches, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail, plus six (6) inches expressed in square feet, and creating ample height space. 
    Animal means any one (1) or more of a kingdom of living beings (except humans) differing from plants in capacity for spontaneous movement and rapid motor response to stimulation. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the city, county, or state to enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Dangerous animal means any animal determined dangerous by a court of competent jurisdiction under M.C.L.A. 287.321 et seq., or an animal defined in section 7-81 of this chapter. 
    Dog means a highly variable domestic mammal (Canis familiaris) closely related to the common wolf (Canis lupus). 
    Domestic animal means any of the various animals (as the horse or sheep) domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition. 
    Exotic animals means, generally, the species of animals which are not native to the state or the United States and/or are introduced from another country. 
    Hybrid(s) means any animal which is the offspring of two (2) different varieties or species. 
    Owner or possessor means any person who has right of property in any animal, who has an animal in his care or custody, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Poisonous means a substance which, through its chemical action, usually kills, injures or substantially impairs an organism. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-29. - Dogs or cats running at large in a public place. 
    No dog or cat shall be permitted at any time to be on any road or street, in a public park, public building or any other public place, except that when held securely by a leash of suitable strength and length, by the owner thereof or any other responsible person. It is unlawful to allow any dog or cat to be removed from such a leash in such public places. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-30. - Owners permitting dogs or cats to run at large; collar and license token or tag required. 
(a)  No person owning, possessing or harboring a dog or cat shall permit same to run at large in the city. 
(b)  Dogs and cats at all times shall wear a substantial collar of leather, or other durable material, to which shall be securely attached a license issued by the County of Chippewa if the animal is a dog, or a tag identifying the owner of the animal if a cat. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-31. - Enforcement generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to promptly seize, take up and place in the pound all dogs and other animals, when necessary, that may be found running at large, or unlicensed, or if a cat not tagged as required under sections 7-30 and 7-51 of this chapter, or being kept or harbored any place within the city contrary to the provisions of this Code, city ordinances, state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-33. - Procedures for animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer is authorized, in his/her discretion, to issue a notice of violation to any person violating the terms of this article, or to file a sworn complaint at the district court. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-34. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Yards and exercise runs shall be kept free of dog and cat feces, uneaten food, and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition so as not to be a nuisance because of odor or attraction for flies or vermin. 
(b)  No owner or possessor of a dog or cat shall cause, suffer, or allow it to defecate upon any public or private property without the permission of the owner of such property unless the person owner or possessor shall immediately remove all feces by a sanitary method. The owner or possessor shall possess a container of sufficient size to collect and remove such feces, and shall exhibit such container if requested by any animal control officer. The collected feces shall be disposed of only upon the property of the owner or possessor of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-35. - Keeping when disturbing others. 
    No person owning or possessing a dog or cat shall permit it to bark, meow, yelp, or howl often enough or loud enough to constitute a disturbance to any occupiers of any land or building. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-36. - Location of pens, cages. 
    No person owning, possessing, or harboring a dog or other domesticated animal shall permit such dog or other domesticated animal to be harbored, housed, penned, caged or kept within fifteen (15) feet of any occupied building or structure located upon premises not owned or under control of such owner, possessor or harborer of any dog or domesticated animal, nor within five (5) feet of any lot line (as defined in the city zoning ordinances, as amended) of property owned or under the control of such owner, possessor or harborer of any dog or domesticated animal. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-37. - Quarantine of biting animals. 
    Whenever any animal bites a person, the owner or possessor of such animal shall immediately notify the animal control officer within the first twenty-four (24) hours of the bite and make themselves readily available to the animal control officer. The officer shall order the animal held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded, at the discretion of the animal control officer, for a period of ten (10) days. The animal shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of such ten-day period. If a veterinarian is convinced that the animal is free of rabies, the animal shall be released from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog dies in the meanwhile, its head shall be sent to the state department of health for examination and determination of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-38. - Kennel prohibited. 
    No person shall keep, maintain or possess more than: (i) a total of four (4) dogs, or (ii) a total of four (4) cats, or (iii) a combination of four (4) dogs and cats, four (4) months or more in age in any area of the city that is classified or zoned as R-1, R-1A, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, or RM-3. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-39. - Waterfowl. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Waterfowl as used in this section shall include all species of ducks and geese. 
    Feed as used in this section shall include every method whereby any person shall place food, garbage, food scraps, fruits, nuts, honey, vegetables, any food or animal byproducts, wheat, corn, meal, grain, sorghum, alfalfa, lard, grease or any animal rendering, or any other substance of any type out of doors, or inside any structure, whether in a container or otherwise, where such substance is accessible to or used by any animal as a source of food or nourishment. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any waterfowl in any area in the City of Sault Ste. Marie. This prohibition shall not apply to the feeding of songbirds or squirrels, so long as the food placed for these creatures is not accessible to or consumed by any waterfowl. 
(Ord. No. 443-00, 4-17-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 443-00, adopted Apr. 17, 2000, enacted provisions which pertained to waterfowl. Such provisions, designated as §§ 7-39 and 7-40 were redesignated by the editor as § 7-39 (a) and (b) for purposes of classification. 
Secs. 7-40-7-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOG LICENSE AND CAT IDENTIFICATION TAG 

Sec. 7-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor a dog or cat four (4) months of age or over in the city without first having obtained, if a dog a license therefor, or if a cat a tag identifying the owner of the cat as herein provided. In either case the license or tag shall be affixed to a collar which collar shall be placed around the animals neck at all times when the animal is outside the dwelling of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 444-00, § 1, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 7-52. - Application. 
    Licenses to own or harbor a dog shall be issued by the County of Chippewa upon application made therefor, together with payment of the license fee provided. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Secs. 7-53-7-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 7-76. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To identify and enumerate certain animals, which, by their nature, are sufficiently dangerous, undesirable or unsuitable for incorporation into the residential, agricultural or commercial life of this community. 
(2)  To impose prohibitory measures to discourage and ban the possession and maintenance of animals considered as exotic and not easily domesticated. 
(3)  To establish guidelines and procedures to be utilized by animal control personnel in implementing this article. 
(4)  To provide for penalties and sanctions for violations hereof. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-77. - Legislative classification and findings. 
(a)  With the increasing urbanization and population density of the city, the residents of the city must be protected from the attack and threat of injury or disease from certain exotic animals possessed or maintained as domestic animals. 
(b)  This article is enacted following the passage of Act 381 of the Public Acts of 1988 (MCL 750.49, MSA 28.244) by the state legislature which provides for substantial penalties to be imposed against persons who promote the possession or use of dogs bred for fighting or baiting. 
(c)  This article is enacted following the passage of Act 426 of the Public Acts of 1988 (MCL 287.321 et seq., MSA 12.545(21) et seq.) by the Michigan Legislature which provides for additional penalties and procedures for the protection against dangerous animals. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Secs. 7-78, 7-79. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-80. - Minimum requirements for keeping dangerous animal. 
(a)  At all time when such animal is outside of any enclosed structure, fenced yard or fenced running area, the animal shall: 
(1)  Be under the control of a person over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(2)  Be held securely by a leash of adequate strength to restrain the animal. 
(3)  Have a muzzle over its jaws sufficient to prevent the animal from inflicting any bite upon another person or animal. 
(c)  All properties where the animal is kept, harbored or possessed shall at all times be insured with public liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage by such animal in an amount no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) coverage. Proof of such insurance shall be submitted to the city clerk upon demand. 
(d)  Pens or structures utilized for harboring or keeping such animal, if a dog, outside of a habitable structure shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide, ten (10) feet long, five (5) feet in height above grade. The pen must not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence of the property. The pen must have secure sides, and a secure top attached to all sides. All to be constructed with at least 12-gauge (heavier if necessary to contain animal) chain link fencing with necessary steel supporting posts. The sides must be either buried two (2) feet into the ground, wired or otherwise securely attached to a continuous floor of chain link fencing material, or adequately secured to a concrete pad. The pen must be securely locked with a key or combination lock when the dog is within the pen. All pens erected to satisfy this section must also comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All pens must be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-81. - Prohibited exotic, rare or dangerous animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to possess or maintain within the city the following animals: 
(1)  All animals, including snakes, whose bite or venom is poisonous or deadly to humans. 
(2)  Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus). 
(3)  Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus). 
(4)  Bears (Ursidae). 
(5)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). 
(6)  Crocodilians (Crocodilus), and alligators. 
(7)  Constrictor snakes if longer than eight (8) feet or if weighing more than forty (40) pounds, or other poisonous reptiles. 
(8)  Coyotes (Canis latrans). 
(9)  Elephants (Elephas and Loxondonta). 
(10)  Gamecocks and other fighting birds. 
(11)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae). 
(12)  Jaguars (Panthera onca). 
(13)  Leopards (Panthera pardus). 
(14)  Lions (Panthera leo). 
(15)  Lynex (Lynx). 
(16)  Ostriches (Sruthio). 
(17)  Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers. 
(18)  Wolves (Canis lupus). 
(19)  Wolf hybrids. 
(20)  Raccoons (Procyon lotor). 
(21)  Skunks (Genus Mephitis). 
(22)  Tigers (Felis tigris). 
(b)  The prohibitions above shall not apply to pet shops licensed by the state department of agriculture, zoological gardens licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and accredited by the American Association for the Accreditation of Zoological Parks and Gardens, and circuses licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture or schools keeping such animal for educational purposes if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape, and so as to humanely provide for their biological and social needs. 
(4)  No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(c)  The prohibitions above shall not apply to any person who is in possession of an injured animal listed in this section under a valid care giver's permit issued by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Sec. 7-82. - Destruction or removal of prohibited animals. 
(a)  Upon a sworn complaint that an animal is a dangerous animal or one of the species of exotic or other animal prohibited by this article, and is currently being illegally possessed or maintained, a district court or district court magistrate shall issue a summons to the owner ordering him to appear to show cause why the animal should not be destroyed or removed from the city. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided herein, the court or magistrate may order the owner or possessor to immediately turn the animal over to the animal control officer, an incorporated humane society, a licensed veterinarian, or a boarding kennel, at the owner's option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held and a decision is made for the disposition of the animal. The expense of the boarding and retention of the prohibited animal is to be borne by the owner. After a hearing, the magistrate or court shall issue its findings and opinion as to whether the animal is subject to destruction or removal under this article. If so, the court shall order the destruction of the animal at the expense of the owner, or, in the alternative, at the court's discretion, order the animal removed from the city under terms and conditions which ensure such removal. 
(c)  Illegally possessed and/or maintained animals who reasonably appear to have become a dangerous animal, are subject to immediate seizure or pickup under this article. The impounded animal shall be held at a facility designated by the animal control officer, at the owner's expense. The complaining witness shall promptly comply with the complaint requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 397-95, § 1, 10-2-95) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Air pollution prevention and control, Ch. 4; fire prevention and control, Ch. 12; licenses and permits, Ch. 14, mobile homes, Ch. 17; construction noises constituting nuisances, § 18-7(8); signs, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; moving of buildings, § 22-37; construction or repair of structures lying in right-of-way, § 22-38; obstruction of streets and alleys by construction materials and facilities, § 22-41; subdivision regulations, Ch. 23; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL § 125.1501 et seq., MSA § 5.2949(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Application of building code to signs, § 20-1. 

Sec. 8-16. - State construction code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the power granted to cities by Section 8(1) of Act 230 of The Public Acts of 1972 as amended [MCL § 125.1508, MSA § 5.2949(8)], the State Construction Code with all amendments thereto, is hereby adopted, by reference as the building code of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 10-2.01; Ord. No. 151, § 10-2.01, 3-3-75) 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, § 7.8. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL § 117.3, MSA § 5.2073. 
Sec. 8-17. - Compliance with state construction code required; enforcement by building inspector. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the construction, repair or alteration of any building in the city contrary to the provisions of the state construction code or any amendments thereto, and no person shall violate any of the provisions of the state construction code or any amendments thereto. 
(b)  The chief inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § (10-2.02), (10-2.03); Ord. No. 151, § 10-2.02, 3-3-75) 
Sec. 8-18. - Copies of state construction code on file in city clerk's office. 
    Printed copies of the state construction code with amendments thereto shall be kept in the office of the city clerk available for inspection by, and distribution to, the public at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 10-2.03, 3-3-75) 
Sec. 8-19. - Building permit-Required. 
    No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1(10-2.04), 7-20-59) 
Sec. 8-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 375-93, adopted June 21, 1993, deleted former § 8-20 providing fee schedules for building department and sign and mechanical permits and derived from the following: Ord. No. 9, § 1(10-2.05), (10-2.06) adopted July 20, 1959; Ord. No. 128, § 10-2.05, adopted June 18, 1973; Ord. No. 134, § 10-2.05, adopted Jan. 7, 1974; Ord. No. 246-85, adopted July 1, 1985; Ord. No. 304-89, § 1, adopted July 6, 1989; and Ord. No. 339-90, § 1, adopted July 23, 1990. For new provisions re such permit fees the user's attention is directed to § 8-121 herein. 
Sec. 8-21. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  A fee shall be charged for building plan review and permits. 
(b)  A fee shall also be charged for sign permits, mechanical permits, plan review and inspection services. 
(c)  Where work for which a permit is required by this section is started or proceeded prior to obtaining such permit, the fees charged for such permit shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve such persons from the responsibility of fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(d)  All fees and charges for the above stated services shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 8-22-8-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 324-90, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 1990, repealed §§ 8-34-8-47, 8-54, 8-71-8-73, being the substantive sections of Art. III, Electricity. Prior to repeal, such sections were derived from the 1957 Code, §§ 10-3.01-10-3.03, 10-3.05-10-3.10, and the following: 
Ord. No. Date Sec. Ord. No. Date Sec. 67  4-21-69 1 227-82 10-18-82 1 98  2-28-72 10-3.01 228-82 10-18-82 1 135  1- 7-74 1 231-82  2- 7-83 1 186 11- 7-77 1 247-85  7- 1-85 1  

Secs. 8-34-8-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAIN LAYING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Drainage improvements in subdivisions, § 23-52; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-85-8-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-93. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in or work at the business of drain laying in the city unless such person shall have a license as provided in this division. (Code 1957, § 10-4.13) 
Sec. 8-94. - Application; issuance. 
    Every person desiring to engage in the business of drain laying in the city shall make application to the city clerk on forms provided by the chief inspector. The chief inspector shall conduct an examination to test the fitness and qualifications of the person to carry on the business of drain laying. If found by the chief inspector to be qualified and entitled to a license, and if such person shall pay the license fee and furnish bond and evidence of insurance as herein provided, the clerk shall issue the license. (Code 1957, § 10-4.14) 
Sec. 8-95. - Bond or insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
    No license shall be issued under this division until the applicant shall have filed with the city clerk proper and sufficient evidence from a financially responsible insurance or bonding company showing that the applicant has obtained a policy of insurance or indemnity bond indemnifying applicant and the city for liability for damages for injury to persons or property caused in the conduct of such business of drain laying in an amount of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for bodily injuries or death and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for damage to or destruction of property. (Code 1957, § 10-4.15) 
Secs. 8-96-8-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly, Art. V, §§ 8-107-8-111, pertained to the heating code, adopting the BOCA Basic Mechanical Code as such and providing for distribution of copies, compliance, fees and a board of examiners. Such article had been derived from Ord. No. 191, §§ 2-6, adopted Feb. 6, 1978. Pursuant to consultation with the city, said Article V was deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 200, enacted Feb. 4, 1980, which designated provisions adopting a mechanical code as Art. VII, § 8-131. 

Secs. 8-107-8-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
  
Editor's note- The Property Maintenance Code may be viewed as a PDF via the following link: https://www.municode.com/webcontent/11527/propertymaintenancecode.pdf 
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 200, enacted Feb. 4, 1980, amended the Code by enacting provisions designated Art. VII, § 8-131, as herein set out. 

Sec. 8-131. - Code adopted. 
    The mechanical code for cities, townships and villages (promulgated by authority conferred on the Construction Code Commission of the State of Michigan by Section 6 of Act No. 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, being Section 125, 1506 of the Michigan Compiled Laws) filed with the Secretary of the State of Michigan October 5, 1979, to be effective April 5, 1980, is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference in this article. 
(Ord. No. 200, 2-4-80) 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, § 7.8. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL § 117.3, MSA § 5.2073. 
Sec. 8-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 375-93, adopted June 21, 1993, deleted former § 8-132 providing a fee schedule for mechanical permits and inspections and derived from Ord. No. 328-90, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1990. For new provisions re mechanical permit and inspection fees the user's attention is directed to § 8-133 herein. 
Sec. 8-133. - Permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  A fee for each mechanical permit and inspection shall be charged. 
(b)  Where work for which a permit is required by this section is started or proceeded prior to obtaining such permit, the fees charged for such permit shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve such persons from the responsibility of fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(c)  All fees and charges for the above stated services shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 8-134-8-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REGISTRY OF OWNERS AND PREMISES 

Sec. 8-190. - Definitions. 
    Certain words in this article are defined for the purposes thereof as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(1)  Dwelling. A "dwelling" is any house, building, structure, shelter, or portion thereof, (except railroad cars, on tracks or rights-of-way) which is occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place of one (1) or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. A house trailer or other vehicle, when occupied or used as a dwelling, shall be subject to all the provisions of this act, except that house trailers or other vehicles, duly licensed as vehicles, may be occupied or used as a dwelling, without being otherwise subject to the provisions of this act for dwellings, when located in a park or place designated or licensed for the purpose by the city; provided, that such parking sites are equipped with adequate sanitary facilities. 
(2)  Classes of multiple dwellings. All "multiple dwellings" are dwellings and for the purpose of this act are divided into 3 classes, being: class a, class b, and class c. 
Class a. Multiple dwellings of "class a" are dwellings which are occupied more or less permanently for residence purposes and in which the rooms are occupied singularly, in apartments, suites, or groups; in which each room or combination of rooms is so arranged and designed as to provide for cooking accommodations, toilet, and kitchen sink accommodations within the separate units. This class includes tenement houses, flats, apartment houses, bachelor apartments, studio apartments, duplex apartments, kitchenette apartments, and all other dwellings similarly occupied whether specifically enumerated herein or not. 
Class b. Multiple dwellings of "class b" are dwellings which are occupied, as a rule transiently, as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which as a rule the rooms are occupied singularly and without any attempt to provide therein or therewith cooking or kitchen accommodations for the individual occupants. This class includes hotels, motels, clubhouses, hospitals, jails and all other dwellings similarly occupied, whether specifically enumerated herein or not. 
Class c. Multiple dwellings of "class c" are dwellings which are occupied more or less permanently for residence purposes and in which the rooms are occupied singularly, in apartments, suites, or groups, and where the dwelling is designed to provide for cooking accommodations, toilet, and kitchen sink accommodations outside of the separate rooms or units. This class includes fraternities, sororities, apartment hotels, nursing facilities, and other communal residence houses, and all other dwellings similarly occupied whether specifically enumerated herein or not. 
(3)  Rooming house. A "rooming house" is any owner-occupied single-family dwelling occupied as the owner's home, and occupied in such a manner that certain rooms, in excess of those used by the members of the owner's immediate family, are leased or rented to persons outside of the family, with or without any attempt to provide therein or therewith, cooking or kitchen accommodations for individuals leasing or renting rooms. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast houses. A "bed and breakfast" is a single-family residential structure that meets all of the following criteria: 
a.  Has ten (10) or fewer sleeping rooms, including sleeping rooms occupied by the innkeeper, one (1) or more of which are available for rent to transient tenants. 
b.  Serves meals at no extra cost to its transient tenants. 
(5)  Agent. "Agent" means a person who has charge, care, control, or management of a dwelling. 
(6)  Owner. "Owner" means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in a dwelling, regardless of whether the person has possession of the dwelling. Owner includes an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of an owner of a dwelling. 
(7)  Residential rental property. "Residential rental property" means any dwelling, or multiple dwelling of class a or class c, the right to possession of which has been transferred for residence, living, or sleeping purposes by one (1) of the following methods: (i) leased, let, or rented, (ii) sold under the terms of a land contract which has not been recorded with the Chippewa County Register of Deeds. 
Residential rental property does not include: 
a.  Rooming houses; 
b.  Multiple dwellings of class b; 
c.  Bed and breakfast houses; 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  A multiple dwelling of class a or class c used for students attending a state licensed or state chartered college or university when the property is owned by the college or university. 
f.  A dwelling operated or licensed by the state or the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 591-19, § 1, 4-15-19) 
Sec. 8-191. - Required. 
    Owners shall separately register each residential rental property. 
    A registry of owners, agents and residential rental property shall be maintained by the building inspection department. Such registry will be kept as a public record and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-192. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person failing to register on or before February 15 of each year, as required by this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as defined in section 1-6 of the Code. Each day that a person fails to register shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-193. - Data generally, change of status. 
    The owner of each residential rental property shall register the owner's name, business addresses, the location of the dwelling and the number of dwelling units or rooming units located in such dwelling to be offered to let. Such additional information as the city manager shall request shall be provided at the time of registration. The manager shall publish the form of such request. 
    Persons becoming owners of residential rental property after February 15 each year shall register within forty-five (45) days of such event. 
    Property which becomes residential rental property after February 15 each year shall be registered within forty-five (45) days of such event. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-194. - Agent authority and information. 
    For all residential rental property registered, an agent shall be named. The agent shall be a natural person. The agent's name and address shall be placed with the name of the owner in the registry. The agent shall be a resident of Chippewa County. The agent shall endorse the registration for the purposes of accepting the responsibility imposed upon the agent by this article. The agent shall be authorized to act for the owner in all matters relating to the City Code and the residential rental property. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-195. - Agent for service of process. 
    The agent shall be eligible and authorized to receive all notices and services of process under the laws of the State of Michigan, City Code and Charter and shall be competent to receive the same on behalf of the owner. Service upon the agent may be made by first class mail sent to the agent's address as listed upon the registration. Service upon the agent shall constitute service upon the owner. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-196. - Corporate and other legal entity ownership. 
    If the owner is any form of limited partnership, corporation, association, partnership, limited liability company or other legal entity then the names and addresses of its officers or members shall be listed upon the registry. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 8-197. - Change of address. 
    Any change of address of owner or agent shall be noted in the registry. Agents and owners shall notify the city in writing within ten (10) days of any such change in address. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Secs. 8-198, 8-199. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-200. - Fees and deadlines for registration. 
    The registration shall be made annually before February 15th of each year. The fee charged for timely registration shall be set by resolution of the city commission. A fee as set by resolution shall be assessed for registrations received up to forty-five (45) days late. A fee as set by resolution shall be assessed for registrations received more than forty-five (45) days late. 
(Ord. No. 438-98, § 1, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 534-12, § 1, 12-3-12) 
Sec. 8-201. - Educational checklist to be certified by owner annually. 
(a)  The city shall send annually to each registered owner a checklist of minimum property maintenance code requirements. The checklist must be signed by the owner or agent and returned to the city within the time prescribed by the inspection department for its return. The owner's execution of the checklist and its return to the city shall be a certification by the owner to the city that all the individual rental units covered by the rental registration meet the requirements of the minimum property maintenance code requirements at the time of the certification. If an inspection by the city subsequent to the owner's certification of compliance with the checklist reveals the property is not in compliance with the checklist then the property shall be subject to an inspection fee as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Timely return of the checklist certification does not preclude city inspection nor citing of violations under the entire Chapter 8 Property Maintenance Code or other provisions of the City Code. 
(c)  The city commission by resolution shall set the fee for an owner's failure to return the checklist certified by the owner within the time prescribed for its return to the city. 
(d)  If the owner fails to return the checklist certified within the time prescribed for its return to the city then the city may request an inspection of the individual rental units and common areas. If the owner refuses the city's request for an inspection then the city may apply for a search warrant and such refusal shall be a presumption that the individual units do not comply with the City Code requirements. The city commission shall set a fee for the application for the search warrant. 
(e)  All fees set by this section are enforceable as a lien against the property under section 10.9 of the City Charter and section 21.76 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 534-12, § 1, 12-3-12) 
Chapter 9 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 2.3(o). 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; amusements, Ch. 6; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; signs, Ch. 20; telecommunications, Ch. 23.5; vehicles for hire, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed § 9-1, which pertained to fire sales, bankrupt sales and the like, and derived from the 1957 Code. 
Secs. 9-2-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Junk, Ch. 13, Art. IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Automobile graveyard means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
    Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts of automobiles, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, including garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
    Public street or alley means a street or alley as designated or platted, or used as such, or as may hereafter be so designated, platted or used. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.01; Ord. No. 44, § 9-11.09, 9-12-66) 
Secs. 9-17-9-22. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNK DEALERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of junk dealers, MCL §§ 445.401 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 

Sec. 9-23. - Adoption of state law. 
    All statutes of the state and specifically Sections I to VII of Act No. 350 of the Public Acts of 1917 [MCL § 445.401 et seq.] and Sections I and II of Act No. 231 of the Public Acts of 1945 [MCL § 445.471 et seq.], relating to secondhand dealers and junk dealers are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this division, and no person shall violate any such law, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.03) 
Sec. 9-24. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer without having first obtained a license from the city clerk in the manner provided in chapter 14 and in the statutes of the state pertaining to secondhand dealers and junk dealers, and paying the fee therefor as provided in section 14-6. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.02) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 9-25. - Pawning and security transactions prohibited. 
    No licensee under this division shall receive in the course of such business any article by way of pledge or pawn nor shall such licensee loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any article or thing. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.04) 
Sec. 9-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed § 9-26, which pertained to loitering by minors, and derived from the 1957 Code. 
Sec. 9-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed § 9-27, which pertained to hours of operation, and derived from the 1957 Code. 
Sec. 9-28. - Records. 
    A licensee under this division shall keep in a separate book, open for inspection to any public officer, a written record showing the time of purchase of each article purchased by such licensee, a brief description of such article, and the name, description and residence of the person from whom such article was purchased or received. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.07) 
Sec. 9-29. - Retention of articles. 
    Articles purchased by a junk dealer shall, except in time of war, be retained by the junk dealer purchasing the same in an accessible place for at least fifteen (15) days where such articles can be examined and inspected before such articles are disposed of. 
(Code 1957, § 9-11.08) 
Secs. 9-30-9-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JUNKYARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards near highways, MCL § 252.201 et seq. 

Sec. 9-36. - Public policy. 
    In order to promote the public safety, health, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of public travel, to protect the public investment in public streets and alleys, to preserve and enhance the scenic beauty of lands bordering public streets and alleys, to attract tourists and promote prosperity, economic well-being and general welfare of the city, and to provide an ordinance for controlling junkyards consistent with the public policy declared by Congress in Title 23 of the United States Code (and Michigan Public Act 219 of 1966 [MCL § 252.201 et seq.]), it is declared to be in the public interest to regulate and restrict the establishment, operation and maintenance of junkyards in areas adjacent to public streets or alleys within this city. All junkyards which do not conform to the requirements of this division are public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 9-11.10, 9-2-66) 
Sec. 9-37. - Prohibited near public rights-of-way; exception. 
    Except as provided by section 9-38, no person shall establish, expand or maintain a junkyard, any portion of which is within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any public street or alley, except the following: 
(1)  Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main-traveled way of the streets or alleys, or otherwise removed from sight, in accordance with rules and regulations of the city; 
(2)  Those located within areas which are zoned for industrial use under authority of law, provided proper screening is maintained; 
(3)  Those which are not visible from the main-traveled way of public streets or alleys. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 9-11.11, 9-12-66) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 9-38. - Removal by city; cost to property owner. 
    Any junkyard which does not conform to the requirements for exception in section 9-37 shall be screened or removed by the city as a cost to the property of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 9-11.12, 9-12-66) 
Cross reference- Single lot procedure for special assessments, Ch. 21, Art. V. 
Sec. 9-39. - Violation; penalty. 
    If a junkyard is established, expanded or maintained not in conformity with the provisions of section 9-37, the city may apply to a court of proper jurisdiction to compel conformity with this division. In addition, any person who establishes, expands or maintains a junkyard in violation of this division shall be punished according to section 1-6. Each day that a violation of this division occurs shall be considered to be a separate violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 9-11.15, 9-12-66) 
Secs. 9-40-9-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- noise in hawking goods constituting a nuisance, § 18-7(4). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-46. - Definitions. 
    The word "peddler" as used in this article shall include any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance; or who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall include the word "hawker" or "huckster." 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.01) 
Sec. 9-47. - Duty of police to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce a peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this section against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.10) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 9-48. - Use of streets. 
    Peddlers shall not have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall they be permitted a stationary location, nor shall they be permitted to operate in any congested area where their operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.08) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 9-49. - Records of violations. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for a violation of this article. The city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.11) 
Secs. 9-50-9-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 9-56. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.02) 
Sec. 9-57. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this division must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Address, legal and local; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of same, together with license number or other means of identification; 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the county, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(10)  Applicant shall file with the application a statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable disease; 
(11)  At the time of filing the application, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.03) 
Sec. 9-58. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as the chief deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application such disapproval and the reasons for the same, and return such application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application such approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return such permit, along with the application, to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant the permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of such licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.04) 
Sec. 9-59. - Fees. 
(a)  Licensees under this division shall pay the fees as prescribed in section 14-6. No fee shall be required of one selling meat, poultry, fish, domestic fruits, dairy, farm or garden produce raised or produced by the seller. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section any period of seven (7) calendar days or less shall be considered one week; any period of more than seven (7) calendar days and not more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be considered one month; any period of more than thirty (30) calendar days and not more than one calendar year shall be treated as a year. The annual fees herein provided for shall be assessed on a calendar year basis and on and after November first the amount of the fee for such annual licenses shall be one-half the amount stipulated for the remainder of the year. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.05) 
Sec. 9-60. - Plates and badges. 
    The city clerk shall issue to each licensee under this division at the time of delivery of the license two (2) license plates for each vehicle to be used, plus a metal badge for each individual licensed under this division. The license plates or badges shall bear the words "Licensed Peddler," the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license in letters and figures plainly discernable. License plates shall be attached to the vehicle used by the licensee, either on both sides or on the front and rear of the vehicle so used. Such badge shall be worn constantly by the licensee on the front of such licensee's hat or outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous during such time as such licensee is engaged in peddling. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.06) 
Sec. 9-61. - Transfer. 
    No license or badge issued under the provisions of this division shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.07) 
Sec. 9-62. - Exhibition. 
    Peddlers shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1957, § 9-3.09) 
Secs. 9-63-9-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-74. - Defined. 
    A canvasser or solicitor is defined for the purposes of this article as any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.01) 
Sec. 9-75. - Duty of police to enforce article. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce a solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.09) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 9-76. - Records of article violations. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this article. The city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.10) 
Secs. 9-77-9-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 9-83. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.02) 
Sec. 9-84. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this division must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the county, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(10)  A statement by a reputable physician of the city dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable disease; 
(11)  At the time of filing the application, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.03) 
Sec. 9-85. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as the chief deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application such disapproval and the reasons for the same, and return such application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that such application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application such approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return such permit, along with the application, to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant such permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address, and photograph of such licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.04) 
Sec. 9-86. - Fees. 
(a)  The license fee which shall be charged by the city clerk for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 14-6. 
(b)  The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar year basis and on or after November first the amount of such fee for annual license shall be one-half the amount stipulated above for the remainder of the year. 
(c)  None of the license fees provided for by this section shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, such applicant may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show such applicant's method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which the city manager shall determine whether the fee fixed by this section is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to the applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by subsection (a). Should the city manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, the applicant may be required to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three (3) month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license as prescribed in subsection (a). 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.05) 
Sec. 9-87. - Bond; service of process after breach. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this division, not a resident of the city, or who being a resident of the city, represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state, shall file with the city clerk a surety bond, running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable to and approved by the city attorney, conditioned that such applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this Code and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of solicitor and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the solicitor and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such solicitor, that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such solicitor. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued for engaging in business as a solicitor or canvasser in the city, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of such applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under such license and the bond given as required by subsection (a), or for the performance of the conditions of such bond or for any breach thereof, which such instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that such applicant for such license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon such agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person or persons applying for such license under this division, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at such licensee's last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.06) 
Sec. 9-88. - Badges. 
    The city clerk shall issue to each licensee under this division at the time of delivery of the license a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor," the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of ten (10) feet. Such badge shall, during the time such licensee is engaged in soliciting, be worn constantly by the licensee on the front of such licensee's outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.07) 
Sec. 9-89. - Exhibition. 
    Solicitors and canvassers shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1957, § 9-4.08) 
Secs. 9-90-9-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of transient merchants, MCL § 445.371 et seq., MSA § 19.691 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-101. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this article a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor is defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, that such definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.01) 
Sec. 9-102. - Duty of police to enforce article. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this article, to determine if this article has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.09) 
Sec. 9-103. - Records kept by city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall deposit the record of fingerprints of licensees under this article, together with a license number, with the chief of police; the chief of police shall report to the city clerk any complaints against any person licensed under the provisions of this article and any conviction for violation of this article; the city clerk shall keep a record of all such licenses and of such complaints and violations. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.10) 
Secs. 9-104-9-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 9-111. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.02) 
Sec. 9-112. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this division, whether an individual, firm, or corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city clerk, showing: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(2)  The fingerprints of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three (3) letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the city manager the good character and business responsibility of such person; 
(3)  The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business shall be conducted; 
(4)  The places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant where applicant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of such application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post-office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(5)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city, the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in possession and by sample at auction, by direct sale or by direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery; where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed; 
(6)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all such advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to such application as exhibits thereto; 
(7)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor; 
(8)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; and 
(9)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.03) 
Sec. 9-113. - Investigation and issuance. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of such person's business responsibility or moral character to be made as such chief deems necessary to the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall so certify in writing, and a license shall be issued by the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a full record in the clerk's office of all licenses issued. Such license shall contain the number of the license, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of such license, the place where such business may be carried on under such license, and the name of the person authorized to carry on the same. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.04) 
Sec. 9-114. - Fees. 
(a)  The license fee which shall be charged by the city clerk for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 14-6. 
(b)  The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar year basis and on or after November first the amount of such fee for annual license shall be one-half the amount stipulated above for the remainder of the year. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.07) 
Sec. 9-115. - Bond; service of process. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued under this division for engaging in a transient or itinerant business in the city, such applicant shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed by the applicant, as principal, with surety acceptable to and approved by the city attorney, conditioned that such applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of this Code of the city and the statutes of the state, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against such applicant for any violation of this Code or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against such applicant by any person for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether such misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed, or circulated with reference to the goods, wares, and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the city attorney, both as to form and as to the surety thereon. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued under this division for engaging in business as an itinerant merchant in the city, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, such applicant's true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of such applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under such license and the bond given as required by subsection (a), or for the performance of the conditions of such bond or for any breach thereof, which such instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that such applicant for such license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon such agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for such license, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at the last-known address thereof, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.05) 
Sec. 9-116. - Exhibition. 
    The license issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person applying for such license shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.06) 
Sec. 9-117. - Transfer. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferred without written consent from the city manager as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the license by the city clerk showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the transfer. 
(Code 1957, § 9-5.08) 
Secs. 9-118-9-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MARIHUANA BUSINESSES PROHIBITED 

Sec. 9-129. - Marihuana businesses prohibited. 
    Pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Section 6.1, the city elects to prohibit marihuana establishments within its boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 588-18, § 1, 11-19-18) 
Secs. 9-130-9-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed art. VII, which pertained to auctioneers, consisted of divs. 1, 2, §§ 9-143-9-150, 9-157-9-159, and derived from the 1957 Code. 

Secs. 9-143-9-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of pawnbrokers, MCL §§ 446.201 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 

Sec. 9-171. - Obedience to state law required. 
    No person licensed as a pawnbroker under this article shall violate any provision of Act 273 of the Public Acts of Michigan for 1917 [MCL § 446.201 et seq.] or any other law of the state pertaining to pawnbrokers. 
(Code 1957, § 9-14.01) 
Sec. 9-172. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker without first having obtained from the city clerk a license in the manner provided in Act 273 of the Public Acts of Michigan for 1917 [MCL § 446.201 et seq.], and in chapter 14 of this Code, and by paying the fee therefor as provided in section 14-6. 
(Code 1957, § 9-14.02) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 9-173. - Bond required. 
    Before any license shall be issued under this article, the applicant therefor shall file with the city clerk a bond to the city in its corporate name in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with at least two (2) sureties, approved by the commission, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to such business and for the payment of all costs and damages incurred by any violation of Act 273 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1917 [MCL § 446.201 et seq.]. 
(Code 1957, § 9-14.03) 
Secs. 9-174-9-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed art. IX, which pertained to massage parlors, consisted of divs. 1, 2, §§ 9-185-9-187, 9-194-9-197, and derived from the original codification of the Code. 

Secs. 9-185-9-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578-18, adopted Apr. 2, 2018, repealed art. X, which pertained to filming of movies, television programming, commercials, music videos and video games, consisted of §§ 9-300-9-315, and derived from Ord. No. 518-10, adopted June 7, 2010. 

Secs. 9-300-9-315. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; operation of snowmobiles in cemeteries restricted, § 24-156; operation of off-road vehicles in cemeteries prohibited, § 24-160. 

Sec. 10-1. - Promulgation of rules and regulations by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby empowered to make and promulgate such rules, regulations and price schedules pertaining to the conduct and use of cemeteries as are necessary to administer the same or to protect public property or the safety, health, morals, or welfare of the public. No person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(b)  Any rule, regulation or price schedule, so made, shall be in writing. A copy of each such rule, regulation or price schedule shall be filed with the city clerk before the same is put into effect. The clerk shall present such rule, regulation or price schedule to the city commission for its consideration not later than the next regular meeting of the commission after the filing of the same. No such rule, regulation or price schedule shall remain in effect if disapproved by the city commission. 
(Code 1957, § 7-7.04) 
Sec. 10-2. - Perpetual care of lots. 
(a)  The city manager and the city clerk are hereby authorized and empowered to enter into a contract with the owner of any lot, or part of a lot, in Riverside Cemetery for the perpetual care of such lot on the terms and conditions, as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a cemetery lot, upon payment of the required fee, shall receive from the city manager and the city clerk a written contract by which the city will agree to care perpetually for such lot, or parts of a lot. Such care is defined as keeping the grass cut and the graves level on such lot at all future times. 
(c)  All moneys received for such perpetual care shall be placed in a special fund to be designated "The Riverside Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund." 
(d)  Such fund shall be deposited in banks at interest, or invested by the city in safe and conservative bonds or other securities. Earnings from "The Riverside Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund" shall be used in the discretion of the city manager at Riverside Cemetery solely for the care of lots or improvements to the cemetery. Earnings from "The Riverside Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund" not so used shall be retained in such fund. The principal of such fund shall be kept intact. 
(e)  The city shall furnish perpetual care, as defined herein, of all lots contracted for under the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 7-7.02) 
Sec. 10-3. - Price schedules. 
(a)  The prices to be charged for lots and graves and the fees and charges to be made for the perpetual care of lots, for the opening and closing of graves, removals, fees to be charged for the use of the receiving vault, and all other charges and fees incident to the operation of Riverside Cemetery shall be established by order of the city manager. No amendments to the price schedules shall be made except by statement of the entire schedule in the amending order. 
(b)  Prices established for the care of lots on an annual basis shall be due on or before May thirty-first in each year. No lots will be given care after May thirty-first if the established price has not been fully paid. 
(Code 1957, § 7-7.03) 
Sec. 10-4. - Use of cemeteries. 
(a)  No person shall bury, remove or disinter the body of any deceased person within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. 
(b)  No curb, decoration, design, embellishment or improvement of any sort shall be placed upon any burial lot, nor shall any alteration of the surface of the ground be made, nor shall any labor be done unless the same shall be approved by the cemetery sexton. If any person feels himself aggrieved by the decision of the cemetery sexton, such person may appeal to the city manager. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to enter upon the premises and remove any tree or shrub in or upon any lot which shall, in the judgment of the cemetery sexton, because of their roots, branches or otherwise become detrimental, unsightly or inconvenient to the public or to the adjacent grounds. 
(d)  No person shall deface, mark, write upon or otherwise injure any property in any cemetery, or deface, mar, write upon or otherwise injure any monument, design, decoration or other thing within such grounds. No person shall pick any flowers, or break any trees, shrubs or plants. This section shall not be construed to prohibit an owner from trimming shrubs, trees or removing or replacing plants on his own lot in those sections of a cemetery where the landscaping features are the responsibility of the owner. 
(e)  No person shall carry any alcoholic liquor into any cemetery or consume any such liquor therein. No person shall carry any firearms in any cemetery. No person shall allow any animal to run at large in any cemetery. 
(f)  No person shall trespass upon any cemetery lot. 
(g)  No person shall drive or operate within any cemetery a motor vehicle used solely for commercial purposes unless upon cemetery business. 
(h)  No person shall use any cemetery for the purpose of demonstrating any vehicle, or of instructing another, or of learning to drive any vehicle. 
(i)  No person shall tow another vehicle within any cemetery except in the case of a breakdown therein. 
(j)  All burial vaults or boxes over four (4) feet in length used in the cemetery shall be of nonperishable material except if used for burial in the county burial or single burial sections. 
(k)  Orders for opening graves shall not be honored unless signed by the owner, his agent or a legal heir. 
(l)  No burial shall be permitted in the city cemetery on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Armistice Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; provided, however, that the health officer, or the person performing the functions of such office during the health officer's absence, may grant special permission for burial on any day if it is the determination of such officer that burial on such day is necessary to protect the public health and safety. The health officer shall so certify in writing, stating the cause for which such burial was made necessary. When a Sunday and a legal holiday fall upon consecutive days the prohibition of burial on a legal holiday may, in the discretion of the health officer, be suspended. 
(Code 1957, § 7-7.01) 
Chapter 11 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, Ch. 3. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Laws, MCL § 168.1 et seq., MSA § 6.1001 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Precincts. 
    The city shall be divided into three (3) election precincts as follows: 
(1)  Precinct One. Commencing on the west at the International Boundary Line to the center line of the Edison Sault Election Company Power Canal and running to the east to Meridian St., then South on Meridian St. to Sheridan Dr., east on Sheridan Dr. to Ryan Avenue, south on Ryan Ave. to Emmett St., east on Emmett St to Park St., south on Park St. to 5th Avenue, east on 5th Avenue to Ashmun St., North on Ashmun St. to Newton St. East along Newton St. to Seymour St., North on Seymour St. to Easterday Avenue, east on Easterday Avenue to Spruce St., east on Spruce St. to Greenough St. and then north on Greenough St. to the International Boundary Line along the International Boundary Line to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct Two. Beginning at the International Boundary Line on the east at the City Limits on Three Mile Road and going west on Three Mile Road to the intersection of M-129, north along M-129 to the intersection of I-75 Business Spur and Ashmun St., North on Ashmun to the intersection of Newton St., east along Newton St. to Seymour St., north on Seymour St. to Easterday Avenue, east on Easterday Ave. to Spruce St., east on Spruce St. to Greenough St., north on Greenough St. to the International Boundary Line to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct Three. Commencing on the west at the International Boundary Line east to the center line of the Edison Sault Electric Power Canal and running to the east to Meridian St., south on Meridian St. to Sheridan Dr., east on Sheridan Dr. to Ryan Ave., south on Ryan Ave. to Emmett St., east on Emmett St to Park St., south on Park St. to 5th Avenue, east on 5th Avenue to Ashmun St., south on Ashmun St. to the intersection of I-75 Business Spur and M-129 (Ashmun) to Three Mile Road, west on Three Mile Road to the International Boundary Line north along the International Boundary Line to point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 1, 1-20-75; Ord. No. 224-82, § 1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 402-95, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 454-02, § 1, 4-1-02) 
Charter reference- Authority to establish precincts, § 3.3. 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Presence of firemen at public dance halls and dances, § 6-36; payment for extraordinary fire protection at carnivals, circuses and other similar exhibitions, § 6-62; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; fire limits established, § 8-21; burning of garbage, § 13-23; performance standards concerning fire and explosive hazards, App. A, § 10-1.17(1708)(4). 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL § 29.1 et seq., MSA § 4.559(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Mission statement. 
    The city fire department has been established to protect the citizens and property of the city and the county from fire and other threatening circumstances. Our commitment is to provide a professional service of the highest quality to all in need. 
    To meet this commitment, the city fire department will provide its citizens with a timely response to any emergency situation with highest trained personnel available. 
    Our goal is not only to help those in need, but to remove the threat to the community all together through aggressive fire prevention programs, progressive training and years of experience. Our primary responsibility is to provide a safe and peaceful community where our citizens can work and raise a family. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Secs. 12-2-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire chief's approval required for transitory shows and exhibitions, § 6-106. 

Sec. 12-16. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The fire department shall be headed by the fire chief, who shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against fire, and the removal of fire hazards. 
(b)  The fire chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by the fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 2-1.01) 
Sec. 12-17. - Divisions. 
    The fire department may be divided into one or more divisions which may include, but shall not be restricted to the following: 
(1)  Extinguishment division, which shall be responsible for the extinguishment of fires, the saving of life, and miscellaneous public services of an emergency nature; 
(2)  Fire prevention division, supervised by a fire hazard inspector who shall be responsible for the inspecting of potential fire hazards, the abatement of existing fire hazards, and the conducting of an educational fire prevention program. 
(Code 1957, § 2-2.02) 
Sec. 12-18. - Auxiliary fire corps. 
(a)  An auxiliary fire corps, hereinafter called corps, is hereby established as a voluntary organization composed of persons appointed by the fire chief, hereinafter called the chief. 
(b)  The chief shall have complete authority and control over the corps. The chief may appoint as members thereof any person whom such chief deems to be qualified, and may reject any application for membership. The chief may provide for the training of candidates for membership and for further training of members. Membership in this organization shall be limited to men over the age of eighteen (18). 
(c)  No person shall become a member of the corps until such person has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the chief. When so qualified and selected, such person shall then be sworn in by the chief or the chief's representative as a member of the corps. 
(d)  The duties of the corps, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief, shall be to assist the regular members of the fire department of this city in the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against fire, and the removal of fire hazards, whenever and whenever its services are required. The chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the corps, including the fixing of specific duties of its members and providing for the maintenance of discipline. The chief may change such orders from time to time. 
(e)  Identification card, badge and cap, and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the chief may prescribe, shall be issued to each member, who shall carry the card at all times. Each member shall surrender all city property issued to such member upon the termination of membership. 
(f)  The membership of any person in the corps may be terminated for cause by the chief at any time, and such member may resign from the corps at any time upon notifying the chief in writing of such person's resignation; provided, however, that the personnel regulations of the city manager applicable to full-time, regular city employees shall not be applicable to the corps and the civil service laws of the state applicable to firemen shall not be applicable to any member of the corps. 
(g)  The chief may, by order, diminish or expand the membership of the corps as existing conditions may require, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(h)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person not a member of the corps: 
(1)  To wear, carry or display a corps identification card, badge, cap or insignia; or 
(2)  In any manner to represent themselves to be connected with the corps. 
(i)  Each member of the corps, while acting under the direction of the chief, shall be deemed an employee of the city and shall be entitled to receive workmen's compensation from the city in accordance with the provisions of the workmen's compensation law of the state. If any member sustains an illness or injury covered by the workmen's compensation law, not caused by intoxication or willful misconduct and not intentionally self-inflicted, which, with or without negligence, is approximately caused by and arises out of and in the course of the performance of such member's duties while acting under the direction of the chief, then irrespective of such member's remuneration from other employment, such member's average weekly earnings shall be conclusively presumed to be the amount necessary to receive the maximum disability and death benefits provided at that time by the workmen's compensation law of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 2-1.03) 
Secs. 12-19-12-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-30. - Adoption of National Fire Codes. 
    The International Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City Sault Ste. Marie, Chippewa County, Michigan, for the control of building, structures and premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the International Fire Code including appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, including the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, set forth in section 12-35 as amended. Appendix A of the International Fire Code will not be adopted, and instead replaced with the language set forth in sections 12-34.1 and 10-1.20. Copies of the International Fire Code are on file in the office of the city fire department and city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 32, § 5-2.18, 6-21-65; Ord. No. 97, § 5-2.18, 2-28-72; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, § 7.8. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL § 117.3, MSA § 5.2073. 
Sec. 12-31. - Copies on file. 
    Printed copies of the National Fire Codes, adopted by section 12-30, with amendments thereto, shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 32, § 5-2.19, 6-21-65) 
Sec. 12-32. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall violate any of the provisions of the National Fire Codes or of the amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 32, § 5-2.20, 6-21-65) 
Sec. 12-33. - Enforcement. 
    The fire code official of the fire department shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of the International Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 32, § 5-2.21, 6-21-65; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-34. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. There shall be established and appointed by the city commission, as amended, a fire code board of appeals. The board shall consist of three (3) members and two (2) alternate members. The appointments shall be as follows: one (1) member appointed for a period of one (1) year; one (1) member appointed for a period of two (2) years; and one (1) members appointed for a period of three (3) years. One (1) of the regular members of the fire code board of appeals may be a member of the planning commission. After the initial appointments, except for a member serving because of his or her membership on the planning commission, whose term shall be limited to the time he or she is a member of that body each member shall be appointed to hold office for the full three (3) year term. The appointments of the two (2) alternate members shall be as follows: one (1) alternate member appointed for a one (1) year term; one (1) alternate member appointed for a two (2) year term; thereafter, each alternate member shall be appointed to hold office for a full three (3) year term. Term of the preceding member has expired for the remainder of the unexpired term the board shall annually elect its own chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. The alternate members shall attend each board of appeals meeting. The alternate members shall sit as a regular member in the absence of a regular member or when a regular member has abstained from acting on a matter coming before the board of appeals. The alternate members shall be called to sit on a rotating basis as needed. All members shall serve until their successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Appeal. Meetings of the board shall be heard at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine by rule. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Notwithstanding, whenever the fire code official of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International Fire Code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire code official of the fire department, in writing to the city fire code board of appeals within ten (10) days from the date of infraction. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt his [its] own rules or procedures and shall maintain a record of its proceedings, which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record provided. The fees to be charged for appeals shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  Appeals, how taken. The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of this state or the city, and review any order, requirements, decisions, or determinations, made by an administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of an ordinance adopted under Act 207, Public Acts of 1921 (MCL § 125.581 et seq.). 
    Appeals shall be taken within ten (10) days after the occurrence of the event which forms the basis for the appeal, by filing in writing a request for an appeal with the official from whom an appeal is taken who shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken. 
    An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal was taken [certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate] a stay would in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board, circuit court or other court of jurisdiction of notice on the application to the official from whom the appeal was taken and on due cause shown. All requests for board of appeals actions shall be made in writing upon forms adopted for such purposes. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall not have the power to alter to make any change in the terms of this section, but does have power to act on those matters where this section provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. Said powers include: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this section. 
(2)  Interpretation. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this section, requests for interpretation on which the section specifically authorizes the board to act. 
(e)  Hearings. 
(1)  Following receipt of a written request concerning a request for an appeal, the fire code board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the request and give notice as provided. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a written request seeking an interpretation of the International Fire Code or an appeal of an administrative decision, a notice stating the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be sent to the person requesting the interpretation not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. 
(f)  Standards. Each case before the fire code board of appeals shall be considered as individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the fire code standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such case. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. No order of the fire code board of appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that the use of such permit is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in full force and effect if a building permit for such use, erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alterations are commenced and proceed to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. No person shall fail to comply with any special condition for a use as established and required by the board of appeals. 
(h)  Decisions, appeals to circuit court. All decisions of the fire code board of appeals shall be recited in the official minutes of the board of appeals. A copy of the minutes shall be mailed by first class mail to the party who caused the matter to come before the board of appeals. The mailing date shall be stamped upon the minutes. The board of appeals shall keep a record of and proof of such mailing. The decision of the board of appeals shall be final, unless within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing stamped upon the minutes, a person having an interest affected by the decision files an appeal in the county circuit court in accordance with the court rules for taking such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 32, § 5-2.22, 6-21-65; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-35.3. - Permit fee. 
    A minimum fee established by resolution from the city commission may be applied to each type of permit required by this Code. Permits may be issued to a single vendor, an individual, or an entire event. A permit shall not be required for one- and two-family dwelling residential properties; unless a fire protection system is being installed. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12.35.4. - Required operational permits. 
    The city fire department shall be authorized to issue operational permits for hazardous conditions or processes. A list of required operational permits and their associated fee shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-36. - Injunctions. 
    If any person maintains violations of this article, or repeatedly violates this article in a manner which becomes a public nuisance, that person may be, upon application by the city commission to a court of competent jurisdiction, enjoined from such dangerous or noxious activity and shall be compelled to pay the costs of the city fire department in procuring such injunction along with the actual attorney fees incurred in such proceedings, with costs and damages, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Secs. 12-37-12-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE 

Sec. 12-41. - Obedience to state law, rules and regulations required. 
    No person shall violate any law of the state, nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state punishable as a misdemeanor, pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, fire waste, explosives, flammable liquids, pyrotechnics or hazardous chemicals. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.01) 
Sec. 12-42. - Inspection. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department is hereby empowered to enter at any and all reasonable times upon and into any premises, building or structure for the purpose of examining and inspecting the same to ascertain fire hazards, and the condition, size, arrangements and efficiency of any and all appliances for fire fighting. 
(b)  If such inspection shall disclose any fire hazard or any deficiency in fire-fighting appliances, the chief of the fire department shall order the conditions remedied within a stated time, not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor longer than thirty (30) days; provided, however, that the chief of the fire department may, at the chief's discretion, grant further time for compliance with such order if such extension of time is deemed necessary. 
(c)  The service of such order may be made upon the owner or occupant of the premises, either by delivering the order to the owner or occupant personally or by delivering and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door or entrance to the premises. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by such order may, within twenty-four (24) hours after its receipt, appeal to the city manager or city commission, who shall have the power to veto such order. 
(e)  No person shall fail to comply with any such order of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.02) 
Sec. 12-43. - Storage of combustible materials in waste receptacles required. 
(a)  No person owning or being responsible for any premises shall permit any waste paper, ashes, oil, rags, waste rags, excelsior or any inflammable or combustible material to accumulate thereon, unless contained in fireproof receptacles. 
(b)  No person owning or being responsible for any private garage shall permit any waste paper, oil, rags, excelsior or any inflammable or combustible material to accumulate therein. 
(c)  No person shall place any waste paper, oil, rags, waste rags, excelsior or any inflammable or combustible material in any street, alley or public place, unless the same be contained in a covered receptacle. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.03) 
Sec. 12-44. - Kindling fires in public places. 
    No person shall kindle a fire in or upon any street, alley, or any public place unless they have first been issued a permit for such fire from the Fire Chief. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.04; Ord. No. 414-96, § 1, 10-21-96) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 12-45. - Kindling fires on private property. 
    No person shall kindle a fire, nor suffer or permit a fire, on any private property except: 
(1)  The person has first been issued a permit for such fire by the fire chief, or 
(2)  The fire is contained in a container not in excess of three (3) feet by three (3) feet square, and the container is constructed of metal or masonry material, and the fire is being used for the purposes of cooking food. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.05; Ord. No. 414-96, § 1, 10-21-96) 
Cross reference- Burning, § 13-23. 
Sec. 12-46. - False alarms; interference with equipment. 
    No person shall turn in, sound, or cause to be communicated to the fire department a false alarm of fire; or molest any fire-fighting apparatus or equipment, or anything pertaining to the fire alarm system; or make, or have in such person's possession an impression or duplicate of any key belonging to the fire department, without the express permission of the fire chief. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.06) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL § 750.240, MSA § 28.437. 
Sec. 12-47. - Obstruction of fire plugs prohibited. 
    No person shall place or permit to remain any obstruction whatsoever within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant or fireplug. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.07) 
Sec. 12-48. - Obstruction of fire exits prohibited. 
(a)  No obstruction shall be placed in the way of, or upon, any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a means of escape from fire. 
(b)  No inflammable material shall be placed under or at the bottom of any stairway, elevator or other exit of any building; nor shall any such material be placed where burning would obstruct or render egress from a building hazardous. 
(c)  No obstruction shall be placed in hallways of tenements or apartment houses. 
(d)  No person shall obstruct with furniture, crates, cartons or in any manner any door, aisle or passageway of any theatre, church or other place of public assemblage. 
(e)  No person shall sit or stand in the aisle of any place of public assemblage or in any exit or passage required for the exit from such place of assemblage. 
(f)  Clear passage from all exits and on all sidewalks shall be maintained outside of all places of public assemblage. 
(g)  No aisle, passageway or stairway in any store shall be obstructed with tables, showcases or other obstructions during the hours such store is open to the public. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.08) 
Sec. 12-49. - Garages and repair shops regulated. 
(a)  All gasoline, exclusive of that in tanks of vehicles, shall be stored in tanks approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and the reservoirs of motor vehicles shall be filled directly through hose from pumps attached to such tanks. No transfer of gasoline in any garage shall be made in any open or breakable container. 
(b)  Smoking shall be prohibited in any public garage, except in office areas separated from the repair or storage areas by sufficient protective walls. "No Smoking" signs shall be maintained in conspicuous places in the repair and storage areas of such garages. 
(c)  No gasoline, oil, grease or inflammable liquid shall be allowed to run on the floor or flow into or be placed in the drainage system of public garages and repair shops. 
(d)  All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase drainage, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until removed from the premises of public garages and repair shops. 
(e)  Public garages shall be equipped with approved type fire extinguishers and pails of sand as required by the chief of the fire department. 
(f)  All public garages and repair shops shall be kept clean and orderly. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.09) 
Sec. 12-50. - Obstruction of view into certain places prohibited. 
    No person operating any store, shop, warehouse, hall or mercantile establishment shall construct or maintain any curtain, shade, obstruction or device in the front window of any such store, shop, warehouse, hall or mercantile establishment which has for its purpose the closing of such place from public view. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.10) 
Sec. 12-51. - Light to be burning in certain places after dark. 
    Every person operating or conducting any store, shop, warehouse, hall or mercantile establishment shall maintain and cause to be kept burning, during the hours of darkness, one light of at least sixteen (16) candlepower in such shop, store, warehouse, hall or mercantile establishment. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.11) 
Sec. 12-52. - Causing fires in hotels, rooming houses and other places of public abode. 
    No person shall carelessly, recklessly or negligently set fire to any hotel, rooming house, lodging house or any place of public abode, or to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes or other furnishings therein. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.12) 
Sec. 12-53. - Smoking in bed prohibited in places of public abode. 
    No person shall smoke or have lighted any cigarette, pipe or cigar, while such person is in or upon any bed in any motel, hotel or rooming house. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.13) 
Sec. 12-54. - Notice required in places of public abode. 
    In each sleeping room of all hotels, motels, rooming houses, lodging houses and other places of public abode, a plainly written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place as notice of the provisions of sections 12-52 and 12-53. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.14) 
Sec. 12-55. - Smoking in theaters and similar places prohibited. 
    No person shall smoke in any opera house, theater, auditorium or motion picture theater or upon the stage or in the dressing rooms of any opera house, theater, auditorium or motion picture theater except in specially constructed fireproof rooms approved by the fire chief. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.15) 
Sec. 12-56. - Incinerators required in new commercial or public buildings. 
    No person shall construct any new building for commercial or public purposes except the same be equipped with an incinerator of such size as the city inspector shall deem adequate. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.16) 
Sec. 12-57. - Installation of incinerator in existing buildings; when required; appeal. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department may order the installation of an incinerator of a size the chief finds to be adequate in any building which is used for commercial, industrial or public purposes in the event that the burning of combustible refuse upon the premises whereon such building is located or in any alley adjacent thereto constitutes a hazard to the safety of persons and property. Within sixty (60) days, the owner or person responsible for a building used for commercial, industrial or public purposes shall equip such building with an incinerator of the size determined by the chief of the fire department upon order to do so by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  In the event any such owner or person responsible for property shall feel aggrieved because of any such order of the chief of the fire department, such owner or person may appeal to the city commission by written protest filed with the city clerk. The commission shall set a time and place for such hearing to be held within thirty (30) days of the date of the filing of such protest. The determination of the commission at such hearing shall be final. 
(Code 1957, § 5-2.17) 
Sec. 12-58. - Address numbers. 
    New and existing building shall have approved numbers, building numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting this property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of six (6) inches high with a minimum stroke of one-half (0.5) inches for commercial/multifamily occupancies, and a minimum of three (3) inches high with a minimum stroke of one-half (0.5) inches for one- and two-family dwellings. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Secs. 12-59, 12-60. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-61. - Required pressure margin. 
    In order to account for seasonal and daily water pressure demands and future growth demands within the water supply, the fire code official is authorized to require a pressure margin of up to ten (10) percent over the minimum design criteria for installed automatic fire sprinkler systems. Where this margin cannot be achieved, approved means shall be taken to provide this margin. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-62. - System records reporting. 
    All required inspection, testing, and maintenance records of fire protection systems shall be submitted to the fire authority in an approved electronic format. 
(Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXPLOSIVES AND PYROTECHNICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Permit required for setting off fireworks, § 16-60. 

Sec. 12-64. - Obedience to state law, rules and regulations required. 
    No person shall violate any law of the state, nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state, pertaining to explosives or pyrotechnics. 
(Code 1957, § 5-3.01) 
Sec. 12-65. - Blasting, when prohibited. 
    No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operations without first having obtained a written permit from the city clerk. Before any such permit is issued, the applicant therefor shall furnish a bond deemed adequate by the city manager to pay for any damage to public or private property and any personal injuries resulting from the blasting. The bond so furnished shall be available for the payment of such claims. In addition to the above requirements, a policeman shall be in attendance at the scene while blasting is being done and the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of providing such police protection. 
(Code 1957, § 5-3.02) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 12-66. - Storage of explosives. 
(a)  No person shall construct, erect, alter or use any magazine for the storage of explosives as permitted by state law except in industrial districts as established by the zoning ordinance or without first obtaining a license therefor as provided for in chapter 14. 
(b)  No person shall store more than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds of explosives or more than five thousand (5,000) blasting caps in any magazine within the corporate limits. 
(c)  No blasting caps, or other detonating or fulminating caps or detonators, shall be kept or stored in any magazine in which other explosives are kept or stored. 
(Code 1957, § 5-3.03) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
Sec. 12-67. - Explosive or inflammable dust. 
    No person shall operate any plant wherein inflammable dust is created unless: 
(1)  Any and all sources of ignition within the area of explosive or inflammable dust exposure are eliminated; 
(2)  Elevator legs, spouts, hoppers and other conveyances are dusttight; 
(3)  Accumulations of dust are not permitted in the interior of the building and a suitable dust removal system is maintained; 
(4)  Open flame or spark-producing equipment is not permitted in rooms containing dusty atmospheres; 
(5)  Magnetic separators are maintained ahead of all grinding or pulverizing machines; 
(6)  Operation is under competent supervision; and 
(7)  Machinery and parts of the crushing, drying, pulverizing, and conveying systems are adequately grounded. 
(Code 1957, § 5-3.04; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 576-18, adopted January 15, 2018, amended § 12-67 to read as set out herein. Previously § 12-67 was titled "Inflammable dust." 
Secs. 12-68-12-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS 

Sec. 12-74. - Obedience to state laws, rules and regulations required. 
    No person shall violate any law of the state nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state pertaining to gasoline service stations (Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, and Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules). 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.01; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-75. - Definitions. 
(a)  The term "gasoline service station," when used in this division, shall mean any premises, including all buildings and structures thereon, devoted to selling or dispensing at retail or wholesale gasoline or volatile liquids as fuel for any motor-propelled vehicle, watercraft, aircraft or internal-combustion engine; or where oil, oil changes or other lubricating service is offered to the public at wholesale or retail. 
(b)  The term "gasoline or volatile liquids," when used in this division, shall mean any inflammable liquid that will flash or emit an inflammable vapor below the temperature of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit. The fire code official of the fire department shall determine the flash point by standard, approved methods. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.02; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-76. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, operate or manage a gasoline service station without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk in the manner provided for in chapter 14. 
(b)  No license required by this division shall be issued by the city clerk except upon certification by the fire code official of the fire department that such gasoline service station complies with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.03; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 12-77. - Prohibited locations of service stations. 
    No gasoline service station shall hereafter be constructed or opened for business within a radius of forty (40) feet of any school building, public park or playground, church, community building, theater, or any other place where the public frequently gather in large numbers; provided that this section shall not extend to any gasoline station operating or in the process of being constructed at the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.04; Ord. No. 7, § 1 (5-5.04), 7-7-58; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-78. - Equipment permit, when required. 
    The storing or keeping of gasoline, or the installation, erection, alteration or replacement of any gasoline pump, gasoline tank, pipe, appliance or device used in connection with the storage or handling of gasoline at a gasoline service station shall not be undertaken until a written permit has been issued therefor by the fire code official of the fire department. This section shall not apply to general maintenance activities of wholesale stations, nor to emergency repairs, except that such work must be done in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.05; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-79. - Installation of underground storage tanks. 
(a)  All underground gasoline tanks hereafter installed shall be placed outside of buildings in a location approved by the fire code official of the fire department. The top of such tanks shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches below the surface of the ground with the space between the top of tanks and ground properly filled, or shall be covered with one (1) foot of earth and six (6) inches of concrete. 
(b)  All pipes used in connection with underground storage tanks other than vent and filling pipes shall be at least twelve (12) inches underground, shall have a fall toward the tank, shall be free of sags or pockets, and shall be standard, full weight, galvanized steel or iron, or copper. 
(c)  Tanks and pipes shall not be covered until inspected and tested by the fire code official of the fire department and permission to do so has been granted by the fire code official. The fire code official of the fire department shall be notified when the installation is complete and ready for inspection. The fire code official of the fire department shall not approve any installation until the same has been inspected by such fire code official and has been tested with air at a pressure of five (5) pounds per square inch above atmospheric pressure and has demonstrated its ability to hold air at such pressure without loss of pressure due to leakage for a period of one (1) hour. 
(d)  All underground tanks, and piping shall be in accordance with the Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.06; Ord. No. 576-18, 1-15-18) 
Sec. 12-80. - Safety provisions. 
(a)  Smoking is hereby prohibited on the premises of a gasoline service station. The motor of an automobile shall not be in operation while the fuel tank is being filled with gasoline. Notice to that effect shall be conspicuously posted as required by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  No fuel tank shall be filled at a retail gasoline service station except through a hose connected to a pump of a type approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Incorporated. 
(c)  No gasoline or inflammable liquid shall be kept or conveyed in open receptacles or in glass bottles or other breakable containers on the premises of a gasoline service station, except in glass bottles of not more than eight (8) ounces capacity used for sample purposes. No gasoline shall be used for cleaning purposes on such premises. No glass container gasoline pump shall be installed in any building. 
(d)  All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase drainings, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until removed from the gasoline service stations. 
(e)  No gasoline, oil, grease or inflammable liquid shall be allowed to flow into or be placed in the drainage system of gasoline service stations. Oil and grease shall not be allowed to accumulate on the floor of gasoline service stations. Sawdust shall not be kept in any gasoline service station or place of storage, and sawdust or other combustible material shall not be used to absorb oil, grease or gasoline. 
(f)  All gasoline service station proprietors and attendants, upon being notified by the chief of the fire department of the presence of gasoline or volatile liquids in sewers, shall cooperate in ascertaining the reason therefor. Any expense to the city in tracing gasoline leaks shall be paid by the owner of the station responsible for such gasoline leak. 
(g)  The chief of the fire department is hereby empowered, subject to approval by the commission, to make reasonable and necessary rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, respecting the use, operation, maintenance and construction of any appliance, device, apparatus, equipment or oil burner used in connection with gasoline or volatile liquids, including fuel oil. 
(h)  There shall be constantly maintained in good working order at least one two and one-half (21/2) gallon fully charged, approved, portable type fire extinguisher at each gasoline service station. 
(i)  When a gasoline service station is discontinued or dismantled, the owner thereof shall forthwith remove all underground tanks that were used in connection therewith or completely fill the same with sand. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.07) 
Sec. 12-81. - Location of gasoline pumps. 
(a)  No gasoline service station shall be permitted to operate within the boundaries of any street, alley or public place. 
(b)  All apparatus for the servicing of motor vehicles shall be so placed that any and all motor vehicles shall be serviced while standing upon the property of the service station with no part of the vehicle projecting over the sidewalk area, street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 5-5.08) 
Secs. 12-82-12-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 

Sec. 12-88. - Scope. 
    This division shall apply to materials not otherwise covered in this Code which are highly flammable, or which may react to cause fires or explosions, or which by their presence create or augment a fire or explosion hazard, or which because of their toxicity, flammability or explosive character render fire fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult; also to flammable liquids which are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive compounds, or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or evolve sufficient heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals shall include but shall not be restricted to such materials as compressed gases, flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, and poisonous gases. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.01) 
Sec. 12-89. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Compressed gas shall mean and include any mixture or material having in its container either an absolute pressure exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch at seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit or an absolute pressure exceeding one hundred and five (105) pounds per square inch at one hundred thirty (130) degrees Fahrenheit, or both; or any liquid flammable material having a Reid vapor pressure exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch at one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Corrosive liquids shall mean and include those acids, alkaline caustic liquids and other corrosive liquids which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage to such tissue by chemical action; or which are liable to cause fire when in contact with organic matter or with certain chemicals. 
    Flammable solid shall mean and include a solid substance, other than one classified as an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through absorption of moisture, through spontaneous chemical changes, or as a result of retained heat during manufacturing or processing. 
    Oxidizing materials shall mean and include substances such as chlorates, permanganates, peroxides or nitrates, that yield oxygen readily to stimulate combustion. 
    Poisonous gas shall mean and include any noxious gas of such nature that a small amount of the gas when mixed with air is dangerous to life. Examples are chlorpicrin, cyanogen, hydrogen cyanide, nitrogen peroxide and phosgene. 
    Radioactive material shall mean and include any material or combination of material that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation. 
    Vapor pressure shall mean the pressure, measured in pounds per square inch (absolute) exerted by a volatile liquid as determined by the "Standard Method of Test for Vapor Pressure of Petroleum Products (Reid Method)," American Society for Testing Materials designation (A.S.T.M.D. 323). 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.02) 
Sec. 12-90. - Permit required. 
    A permit from the city clerk shall be required for the storage, use or handling of more than fifty-five (55) gallons of corrosive liquid; or more than five hundred (500) pounds of oxidizing materials; or more than five hundred (500) millicuries of radioactive material; or more than two thousand (2,000) cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or any amount of poisonous gas. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.03) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 12-91. - General requirements. 
(a)  The storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals shall be safeguarded with such protective facilities as public safety requires. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department may require the separation or isolation of any chemical that in combination with other substances may bring about a fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous gas. The chief of the fire department may require separation from other storage, occupancies or buildings when in the chief's opinion the quantity stored constitutes a material hazard. 
(c)  Defective containers which permit leakage or spillage shall be disposed of or repaired, in accordance with recognized safe practices; no spilled materials shall be allowed to accumulate. 
(d)  Where specific requirements are not otherwise established compliance with the recommendations contained in the Table of Common Hazardous Chemicals of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA No. 49), the Safety Data Sheets of the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, or the Pamphlets G-1, G-2, G-3, G-4, P-1, and P-2 of the Compressed Gas Association, Inc., with respect to the particular chemicals shall be considered as prima facie evidence of compliance with this section. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.04) 
Sec. 12-92. - Compressed gases. 
(a)  Storage rooms for compressed gases shall be cool, dry and well ventilated. 
(b)  Cylinders shall be stored away from radiators and other sources of heat. No part of any cylinder containing compressed gas shall be subjected to temperatures above one hundred twenty-five (125) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(c)  Where caps are provided for valve protection they shall be kept on all cylinders not connected to gas utilization equipment. 
(d)  Cylinders shall not be used as rollers, supports or for any purpose other than to store the gas for which they are designed. Cylinders shall not be handled with lifting magnets, rope slings or chain slings; a crane may be used when a safe cradle or platform is provided to hold the cylinders. 
(e)  Refilling of cylinders shall be done only in compliance with interstate commerce commission regulations. 
(f)  Each cylinder shall carry a legible label or stencil identifying its contents. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.05) 
Sec. 12-93. - Oxidizing materials. 
    Oxidizing materials shall be stored in dry locations and separated from organic materials including wooden surfaces. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.06) 
Sec. 12-94. - Radioactive materials. 
(a)  Adequate signs warning of radiation dangers shall be placed at entrances to locations where radioactive materials are used or stored. Signs will not be required for storage of manufactured articles, other than liquids, such as instruments or clock dials of which radioactive materials are a component part and luminous compounds, when securely packed in strong containers provided the gamma radiation at any surface of the package is less than ten (10) milliroentgens in twenty-four (24) hours. 
(b)  When not in use, radioactive materials shall be kept in adequately shielded fire-resistant containers of such design that the gamma radiation will not exceed two hundred (200) milliroentgens per hour or equivalent at any point of readily accessible surface. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.07) 
Sec. 12-95. - Poisonous gases. 
(a)  Storage of poisonous gases shall be in rooms of at least one-hour fire-resistant construction and having natural or mechanical ventilation adequate to remove leaking gas. Such ventilation shall not discharge to a point where the gases may endanger any person. 
(b)  Adequate warning signs stating the nature of the hazard shall be placed at all entrances to locations where poisonous gases are stored or used. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.08) 
Sec. 12-96. - Corrosive liquids. 
    Satisfactory provisions shall be made for containing and neutralizing or safely flushing away leakage of corrosive liquids which may occur during storage, handling or use. 
(Code 1957, § 5-6.09) 
Secs. 12-97-12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 12-201. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that a significant potential exists for fire department responses to incidents involving the release or threatened release of hazardous materials. Such incidents create a great likelihood of personal injury and/or property damage. The control and abatement of such incidents places a significant financial and operational burden upon the city's firefighting and rescue services. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 12-202. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Building means any structure. 
    Emergency response means the providing, sending and/or utilizing firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city, or by a private entity or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city or state, for an incident resulting in a hazardous material release or threatened release. 
    Expenses of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city, or a private person, corporation, or other assisting government agency, which is operating at the request or direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the hazardous materials incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue services, emergency medical services, containment, and abatement of all hazardous conditions at the scene of the incident. The costs further include all of the salaries and wages of city personnel responding to the incident, salaries and wages of city personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and report preparation regarding said incident, all salaries and wages of personnel assisting government agencies operating at the request or direction of the city, and all costs connected with the administration of the incident relating to any prosecution of the person(s) responsible, including those relating to the production and appearance of witnesses at any court proceedings in relation thereto. Costs shall also include such items as disposable materials and supplies used during the response to said incident, the rental or leasing of equipment used for the specific response, replacement of equipment which is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during the response to said incident, special technical services and laboratory cost, and services and supplies purchased for any specific evacuation relating to said incident. 
    Hazardous material means explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, combustible liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, etiological material, radioactive material, corrosive materials, or liquefied petroleum gas. 
    Owner means any person having a vested or contingent interest in the building, personal property, premises, container or vehicle involved in the hazardous materials incident. 
    Premises means any lot or parcel of land and includes a parking lot, tourist camp, trailer camp, airport, stockyard, junkyard, wharf, pier, public roadway, and any other place however owned, used or occupied. 
    Vehicle means any device which is used as an instrument of conveyance, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, railroads, boats or aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 12-203. - Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
    Person(s) responsible. The owner, lessee, operator, or occupant or [of] any building, premises, personal property or vehicle regarding which an incident arises which involves the release or threatened release or hazardous materials on or about said building, premises, personal property or vehicle shall be required to reimburse the city for all expenses of any emergency response to said hazardous materials incident. This personal liability shall be joint and several among the various parties. 
    Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person(s) responsible under this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, express or implied. 
    Cost recovery schedule. The city shall, by resolution adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. 
    Billing. The city may, within ten (10) days of receiving itemized costs or any part thereof incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person(s) responsible for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill(s) shall require full payment within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing or service of said bill upon the person(s) responsible. 
    Failure to pay and procedure to recover costs. Any failure to pay said bill within the thirty (30) days of mailing or service of this bill shall constitute a default on said bill. In case of default, the city shall have the right and power to add all emergency response costs to the tax roll as to any such property involved in the hazardous materials incident. The city shall follow section 10.9 of the Charter and chapter 21 of the Code in the making of such assessment. The city shall also have the concurrent right to bring action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect said costs against the person(s) responsible if the city deems such action to be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 12-204. - Conflicting ordinances repealed. 
    Any and all other ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of the article and any changes adopted thereto are, to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 12-205. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, clause, paragraph or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall only apply to the said portion thereof adjudicated invalid, and the full remaining portions of parts of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 12-206. - Savings clause. 
    All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired, or incurred at the time this article takes effect are hereby saved, and such proceedings may be consummated under and according to the ordinance in force at the time such proceedings are or were commenced. This article shall not be construed to alter, affect, or abate any pending prosecution or proceeding or prevent prosecution or proceeding hereafter instituted under any ordinance specifically or impliedly repealed by this article and any changes thereto for any liabilities incurred or offenses committed before the effective date of this article and all proceedings pending at the effective date of this article and all proceedings or prosecutions instituted after the effective date of this article for any liabilities incurred or offenses committed before the effective date of this article may be continued or instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance in force at the time of the liability incurred or commission of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 488-06, § 1, 3-6-06) 
Chapter 13 - GARBAGE, RUBBISH, LITTER AND JUNK[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Air pollution prevention and control. Ch. 4 depositing substances in waterways prohibited, § 16-47; nuisances, Ch. 18 streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27; performance standards for open storage of an equipment, vehicles and all materials including waste. App. A. 1-1.17(1708)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Placing dead animals in rubbish or garbage containers prohibited, § 7-3. 

Sec. 13-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Ashes means the residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
    Frequency of collection means the time elapsing between two (2) successive collections as established herein. 
    Garbage means animal or vegetable wastes which arise from the use, preparation or storage of food for human consumption not including wastes from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible material from residential commercial and institutional property, such as ashes, paper cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, bedding, furniture, metal, tin cans, dirt, clay, gravel, grass, crockery and miscellaneous mineral refuse not including gravel, sand or building materials. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.01) 
Sec. 13-17. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city may provide for the supervision, collection and disposal of rubbish and garbage accumulated in this city. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby empowered to promulgate rules, regulations and collection fees necessary for the effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. Such rules, regulations or collection fees shall be in writing. 
(c)  A copy of each such rule, regulation or collection fee shall be filed with the city clerk before the same is put into effect. The clerk shall present such rule, regulation or collection fee to the city commission for its consideration not later than the next regular meeting of the commission after the filing of same. No such rule, regulation or collection fee shall remain in effect if disapproved by the city commission. 
(d)  No person shall disobey any such rule or regulations promulgated in accordance with this section. Any violation of such rule or regulation shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and shall be prohibited. Punishment for such rule or regulation violation shall be the same punishment as is accorded for ordinance violations. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.07; Ord. No. 338-90, § 1, 7-23-90) 
Sec. 13-18. - Disposition in general. 
    No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, scatter or abandon rubbish or garbage on any public or private place in this city, except as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.02) 
Sec. 13-19. - Placement in containers for collection. 
(a)  Every tenant, lessee, or occupant of any premises where garbage is created shall provide such premises with a sufficient number of receptacles to contain garbage and rubbish until such time as garbage shall be collected for disposal at a central dump. "Receptacle" shall be defined to mean either: 
(1)  A galvanized metal garbage receptacle with tight-fitting galvanized metal covers; or 
(2)  A mold [molded] plastic garbage receptacle with tight-fitting mold plastic lid. 
Should the use of any particular type of container by a resident result in recurring instances of scattered garbage, debris and resultant unsanitary and unhealthful conditions, the city manager may require the tenant, lessee or occupant to replace the receptacle being used with a more suitable type. 
The city manager, pursuant to § 13-17, may mandate use of uniform containers, such as "totes" to be used for all residential customers within the city. 
(b)  All such containers for garbage or rubbish shall be equipped for easy handling and shall not be filled above the top edge thereof, or so as likely to spill their contents either from bottom, sides or top, when being picked up and dumped into the collecting conveyance. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this article may be deemed to be rubbish by the city or waste collector, and, after due notice to the users, be collected as rubbish by the waste collector. 
(c)  Receptacles for garbage or rubbish shall be kept clean and sanitary by the owner or occupants of the premises on which they are located. 
(d)  Rubbish and garbage receptacles shall be placed in a location convenient for collection, no earlier than twelve (12) hours before the regularly established collection time, which location shall be one that is acceptable to the city manager, and shall be placed in such location in a manner that will not cause a nuisance or create a public eyesore, and such empty receptacles shall be removed and returned to the private property of the owner or occupants of the premises from which they were placed for collection, within twelve (12) hours after collection and no later. 
(e)  Garbage and rubbish shall be enclosed and sealed in one (1) or more plastic bags prior to placement in the hard-sided container for pickup. Such bags shall be of sufficient size and weight to prevent loss during transfer from garbage container to the waste haulers truck. No person shall place garbage in receptacles provided for the accumulation of garbage without first draining, provided this shall not apply to restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled commercially. Garbage containers placed out for pickup shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight and thirty-two (32) gallons in volume. 
(f)  No person shall place or cause to be placed in regular rubbish or garbage receptacles any explosive or highly inflammable materials. All such materials shall be disposed of under the supervision and direction of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.05; Ord. No. 108, § 7-4.05, 8-21-72; Ord. No. 199, 11-16-79; Ord. No. 472-03, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 13-20. - Disposition of materials connected with infectious diseases. 
    Removal of wearing apparel, bedding, rubbish or other materials from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision of the health officer of the city. Such rubbish shall not be placed in containers for regular collections of rubbish or garbage. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.05) 
Sec. 13-21. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-22. - Collection; licensing of collectors. 
(a)  Collection of domestic garbage and rubbish shall be made at least once each week between May 1 and October 15 and at least every two (2) weeks between October 15 and May 1 of each year. Collections from hotels, apartment houses, stores, office buildings, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments shall be made not less than once each week or more often in accordance with the need as determined by the city manager. The number of receptacles for these institutions shall be adequate to contain the waste materials. Multiple dwellings in which each unit has its own garbage and rubbish receptacles, for the purpose of this section, shall not be deemed an apartment house. 
(b)  Except as provided herein no person shall engage in the business of the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish in this city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(c)  Every person required to secure a license by the terms of this chapter shall first make written application therefor in the manner and form provided by chapter 14. The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that he will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter and rules promulgated hereunder, and that the license may be revoked at any time for cause by the city manager. The granting or revocation of such license shall be discretionary with the city manager, providing that any person feeling aggrieved by the city manager's decision may appeal to the city commission, whose decision shall be final. 
(d)  The city may undertake the general collection of garbage and rubbish throughout the city, or it may let a contract to one or more persons for making such collections in whole or in part. The city may pay therefor such reasonable amount as the city commission shall determine. All such contractors shall enter into a bond in such amounts as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city commission to be approved by the city attorney conditioned for the faithful performance of their contracts and they will collect all garbage and rubbish in accordance with this chapter. 
(e)  All vehicles for the transportation of garbage or rubbish shall have metal lined bodies, shall be watertight, and be so constructed that no leakage can escape from such vehicle while transporting garbage and rubbish. The body of such vehicle shall be kept covered at all times except when being loaded or unloaded. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.06; Ord. No. 338-90, § 1, 7-23-90) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 13-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 414-96, § 2, adopted Oct. 21, 1996, deleted § 13-23, burning of garbage, trash, rubbish, etc., derived from the 1957 Code, § 7-4.04; and Ord. No. 361-91, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1991. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and control, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 13-24. - Hauling. 
(a)  No person shall use or cause to be used any truck, wagon, cart, trailer or vehicle for hauling garbage, rubbish, or ashes, unless the box of such vehicle shall be so constructed as to prevent the scattering, dropping, or spilling of the contents thereof on the streets, alleys or other public places of the city. 
(b)  No person shall load or cause to be loaded any truck, wagon, cart, trailer or other vehicle above the side or end board thereof, or in any other manner so that the contents shall be scattered, dropped or spilled on the streets or alleys of the city. 
(c)  No person shall haul shavings, sawdust, dirt, ashes, mortar, lime or other substances likely to be blown about by the wind unless the same shall be securely covered by canvas or other suitable material. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.02) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 
Sec. 13-25. - Unlawful accumulation; abatement. 
(a)  No person owning or occupying any lot or building or premises in this city shall allow any garbage or rubbish to accumulate and remain upon such lot or premises for a period of time in excess of that herein stated as the "frequency of collection"; provided, however, this section shall not apply to lands designated as garbage or rubbish dumps or sanitary landfills. 
(b)  Whenever any person owning or occupying any lot, building or premises in this city permits or allows garbage or rubbish to accumulate and remain upon such lot or premises for a period longer than that permitted in subsection (a), the city manager may order the garbage or rubbish removed. 
(1)  The city manager shall give the owner or agent thereof a notice in writing, in accordance with section 1-8, ordering that the garbage or rubbish be removed within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice; provided, however, that where the city manager finds an emergency to exist, the city manager may order that the garbage or rubbish be removed immediately. 
(2)  If, after the expiration of the designated time, the garbage or rubbish has not been removed, the city manager may direct that the garbage or rubbish be removed. 
(3)  At the next regular meeting of the city commission, the city manager shall present to the commission a certified copy of the notice served upon the owner or agent thereof, together with a statement in writing and signed by the city manager, showing the record title, the legal description of such premises, that garbage or rubbish had been allowed to accumulate contrary to this section, that such garbage or rubbish was not removed in accordance with the notice, that its removal was made as directed by the city manager, and the cost expended to effect the removal. 
(4)  The commission shall thereupon levy against such property a special assessment to defray the cost and expense to the city of having the garbage or rubbish removed. This assessment shall stand as a charge against the property so assessed as taxes. The same shall be collected and payment enforced in the same manner as other city taxes. 
(Code 1957, § 7-4.03) 
Secs. 13-26-13-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Distribution of handbills, Ch. 3, Art. II. 

Sec. 13-38. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Aircraft shall mean any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Authorized private receptacle shall mean a litter storage and collection receptacle constructed so to reasonably confine and retain litter and trash. 
    Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter shall mean garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Park shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and its inhabitants, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designated or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place shall mean any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds or building. 
    Refuse shall mean all solid waste, except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and solid market industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastic and similar materials. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Sec. 13-39. - Placing in receptacles-Required. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, or in authorized receptacles for collection. 
Sec. 13-40. - Same-So as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
Sec. 13-41. - Sweeping into gutters; cleanliness of sidewalks. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 13-42. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free from litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep all premises, including sidewalk, service alleys, and parking area of their business, free of litter. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 13-43. - Throwing from vehicle prohibited. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 
Sec. 13-44. - Vehicle loads. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 
Sec. 13-45. - Parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
Sec. 13-46. - Bodies of water. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream, ditch, canal or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
Sec. 13-47. - Throwing from aircraft prohibited without permit. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill, or any other object, without obtaining a permit from the city. 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 13-48. - Private property. 
    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to throw, deposit, keep or allow to be kept or deposited, or to allow to remain, any litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter, garbage, refuse, or rubbish will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 268-87, § 1, 6-1-87) 
Sec. 13-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 268-87, § 2, adopted June 1, 1987, provided for the deletion of § 13-49, requiring the owner to maintain private premises. Such section bore no history note. 
Sec. 13-50. - Vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
Sec. 13-51. - Posting of signs. 
    The public works department of the city is directed to install and maintain adequate signs at appropriate places throughout the city outlining the substance of this article, such signs warning the public that any violations hereof will be prosecuted. In addition, the city clerk is authorized to give proper publicity hereto. 
Secs. 13-52-13-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Regulation of junk dealers and junkyards, Ch. 9, Art. II. 

Sec. 13-63. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Junk shall mean any wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded appliance, furniture, machinery, vehicles, trailers, all terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, and tools of every nature. 
(2)  Owner of real property shall mean any person in possession of any lands under an oral or written lease, the person listed as the real property owner in the tax records of the city assessor or the last grantee in the chain of title at the register of deeds office. 
(3)  Disabled motor vehicle. Disabled motor vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle which is either: 
a.  Dismantled, in whole or in part, or which is unable to be operated on a public street as the result of a mechanical defect, malfunction or absence of properly functioning required safety equipment. A mechanical defect or malfunction includes, but is not limited to, one (1) or more deflated or missing tires, or a motor vehicle resting on supports other than inflated tires. The absence of minor and non-essential parts such as antennas, or ornaments, hub caps, etc., shall not cause a motor vehicle to be deemed dismantled and thus disabled; or 
b.  Not licensed and insured as required by law for operation in the rights-of-way of the streets, alleys or highways of the city. 
(Ord. No. 431-98, § 1, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 13-64. - Keeping prohibited. 
(a)  In general. No owner shall permit any disabled motor vehicle to be parked, placed, or allowed to remain within the City of Sault Ste. Marie in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Prohibited on streets. Disabled motor vehicles shall not be permitted on rights-of-way of the streets, alleys or highways of the city; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the towing or similar transportation of such vehicles; and provided further, that a reasonable time (not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours from the time of disability) shall be permitted for the removal or servicing of the disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle. 
(c)  Prohibited from front, side and rear yards. Disabled motor vehicles or any parts of a motor vehicle shall not be permitted in the front, side, or rear yards of all parcels of land in the city, except as provided below: 
(1)  Disabled motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles may be kept in an entirely enclosed garage or other entirely enclosed structure; or 
(2)  A disabled motor vehicle is permitted to be stored in conjunction with a permitted gasoline service station, auto repair garage, or a junk yard, as those uses are defined in the city zoning ordinance, subject to the zoning ordinance regulations controlling the location and the operation of such uses, and provided that such use has all appropriate licenses and zoning approvals. 
(Ord. No. 431-98, § 1, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 13-65. - Junk regulated. 
    With the exception of a lawfully established junk yard conforming to all of the terms and regulations of the city zoning ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or deposit, or allow to be kept or deposited, or allow to remain, any junk on property located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 431-98, § 2, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 13-66. - Public nuisance. 
    The presence of junk and/or disabled vehicle or vehicles, in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 431-98, § 2, 4-20-98) 
Secs. 13-67-13-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECYCLING AND COMPOSTING 

Sec. 13-100. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    City designated disposal facility: A facility which the city has identified from time to time as an approved location for the disposal of refuse, leaves, yard waste, and/or recyclable materials. 
    City refuse bag: A bag sold by the City of Sault Ste. Marie as a suitable container for the purpose of residential refuse collection. 
    City refuse tag: A tag sold by the City of Sault Ste. Marie which may be attached to an acceptable refuse container for the purposes of residential refuse collection. 
    Commingled: Source-separated, nonputrescible recyclable materials that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same container). 
    Compostables: Yard waste to include grass clippings, leaves and brush trimmings which are less than one-quarter-inch in diameter or less than a standard pencil in diameter. 
    Newspaper: All newsprint and materials that are a part of a newspaper only. 
    Recyclable material: A material which would otherwise become solid waste, which can be collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products. 
    Recycling drop off: Any facility designed and operated solely for the receiving and storing of source separated, nonputrescible metal, glass, paper, plastic containers and cardboard. 
    Site of generation: Any premises in the City of Sault Ste. Marie in or on which solid waste or recyclable materials is generated by any person. 
    Solid waste: Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from domestic and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials, including liquids. 
    Source separate: To separate recyclable materials from the solid waste stream at the point of waste generation. 
    Yard waste: All grass, weeds, leaves, small twigs and shrub clippings, flowers and basic waste materials resulting from landscaping. 
    Yard waste collection season: A period each year as scheduled by the city manager during which a yard waste collection service is provided in specified areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-101. - Purpose. 
(a)  The City of Sault Ste. Marie finds that the reduction of the amount of solid waste and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public purpose. 
(b)  The separation and collection of paper, cardboard, glass, cans and vegetative yard waste for recycling from the residential, commercial and institutional establishments in this municipality will minimize the adverse environmental effects of landfilling by reducing the need for landfills and conserving existing landfill capacity, facilitate the implementation and operation of other forms of resource recovery, conserve natural resources and reduce the cost of solid waste disposal in general. The promotion and use of recyclable materials, goods produced from recyclable materials and goods which facilitate recycling, will further serve the same purposes by encouraging and facilitating recycling. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-102. - Police powers. 
(a)  The city manager and those assistants and employees of the city designated by the city manager, shall be authorized to issue warning notices, violation notices, court complaints, civil or criminal, for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When enforcing the provisions of this article the city manager, assistants, and employees shall be ordinance officers and shall have all the powers of the same as exists under the laws of this state for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-103. - Curbside program established; collection schedule. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the city a program ("curbside program") for the separate collection of compostables and recyclable materials from all residents of the city and from all other persons, including commercial or institutional establishments located inside the city. 
(b)  Separate collections of compostables and recyclable material shall occur in the manner and on the schedule as set forth by the city manager. 
(c)  Such schedules shall be published by the city and shall define the area and dates of collection and the material designated for recycling. 
(d)  All residents and other persons in charge of any premises located within the city areas serviced by the curbside program, established by this article, shall source separate all designated recyclables and compostables and place them between curb and sidewalk where possible at the side of the public right-of-way fronting their premises in the manner designated by this article on the dates specified for collection. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-104. - Preparation of compostables and recyclables for curbside collection. 
(a)  All compostables and recyclables placed at the curbside for collection shall be prepared for collection in accordance with the requirements of this article together with the special requirements as may be set by the city manager. 
(b)  All newspapers shall be placed in paper bags or tied in bundles not exceeding thirty-five (35) pounds in weight nor exceeding one (1) foot in thickness. 
(c)  All brush shall be cut into three-foot lengths or less and tied into bundles weighing not more than thirty-five (35) pounds in weight. No individual piece of brush may exceed six (6) inches in diameter. 
(d)  All compostables must be placed in a city yard waste bag or in a container clearly marked with a city yard waste tag. Compostables not so bagged or tagged will not be picked up. The gross weight of city refuse bags, or containers with city refuse tags, placed for collection shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(e)  The city may provide brush clipping services upon request of the owner or occupier of any premises. The fee for such services may be set by the city manager, which fee may be requested in advance of such services being rendered. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-105. - Separation of brush, leaves, yard waste and other compostables or recyclables. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of leaves, yard waste, compostables, or designated recyclables, nor arrange for the disposal of the same or cause the same, to be disposed of at any solid waste facility other than at the city designated disposal facility. 
(b)  All persons who gather leaves, yard waste, compostables or designated recyclables, shall source separate the items and place them for collection at the times and in the manner heretofore or hereafter specified by this chapter, article or the city manager. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prevent any person from gathering leaves for compost, mulch or other gardening purposes. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-106. - Unlawful activities, scavenging. 
(a)  Designated recyclable materials and compostable materials placed at curbside in accordance with this article shall become the exclusive property of the city or the city's authorized agent. There shall be a presumption that the occupier or owner of the premises intended to recycle or compost the material under this article if the material is placed at curbside. It shall be unlawful for any person not duly authorized by the city, to collect, remove, pick up, or cause to be collected, removed, or picked up, any such material. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, cause to be violated, or assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other than compostable or designated recyclable material in or near any recycling drop off or city designated disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-107. - Failure to separate. 
    The city, or any other person collecting solid waste generated within the city limits, may refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has failed to source separate designated recyclables or compostables. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-108. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties: 
(1)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation that violates the provisions of sections 13-103, 13-104, or 13-105, of this article shall be deemed responsible for a civil infraction for which a civil fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less may be ordered. 
(2)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs. 
(b)  Criminal penalties: Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any section of this article, other than sections 13-103, 13-104 or 13-105, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under Section 1-6 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-109. - Other remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, this municipality may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as authorized by section 13-108. 
(b)  The penalties and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent this municipality from exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-110. - Authority, costs, notice to remove solid waste. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner and/or tenant(s) of any premises to remove solid waste found to be not in compliance with this chapter or article on such premises unless the same is on the abutting public right-of-way in which case no notice is required. Such notice shall be by hand delivery or certified mail, addressed to the said owner and/or tenant(s) at the last known address. 
(b)  If solid wastes are not removed from the premises within six (6) days after the date of mailing such notice, or if the solid waste is on abutting public right-of-way, the owner and/or tenant(s) of the premises shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 13-108(b) of this article. The city manager is also hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the removal of the solid waste or to order the removal [of the solid waste] by the city. 
(c)  When the city has effected the removal of such solid waste or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the date of removal, shall be charged to the owner of the premises on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable at the time of payment of such tax bill. 
(d)  Where cost of removal is not paid by the owner within sixty (60) days after the removal of such solid waste as set forth in parts (b) and (c) of this section, then the city manager shall cause to be recorded in the treasurer's office the date and premises on which removal was done. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for collection of taxes; further, the total amount shall be subject to a delinquency penalty of one (1) percent per month in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date of the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent; said sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the premises described in the statement that the same is due. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-111. - Refuse bag and tag specifications. 
(a)  City refuse bags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to refuse collectors that the refuse bags are intended for residential refuse collection service. 
(b)  City refuse tags shall be of a distinctive color, and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to refuse collectors that when the tag is affixed to a refuse container it is intended for residential collection. 
(c)  Specifications for city refuse bags and tags and their use, and any future changes to those specifications shall be developed in accordance with this article. Those specifications shall include, but shall not be limited to, the materials used and the content of printed information. 
(d)  The city refuse bags and tags shall be sold at a price determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  The city or its authorized representatives may sell city refuse bags and tags to individuals and/or retail sales establishments. Participating sales establishments shall sell city refuse bags and tags for not more than the maximum price specified by the city commission. However, the appropriate sales tax may be charged by the retail establishment if so required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-112. - Yard bag and tag specifications. 
(a)  City yard waste bags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to yard waste collectors that the bags are intended for residential yard waste collection service. 
(b)  City yard waste tags shall be of a distinctive color and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to yard waste collectors that when the tag is affixed to yard waste container, it is intended for residential yard waste collection service. 
(c)  Specifications for city yard waste bags and their use and any future changes to those specifications shall be developed in accordance with this article. These specifications shall include, but shall not be limited to, the materials used and the content of printed information. 
(d)  City yard waste bags shall be sold at a price determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  The city or its authorized representatives may sell city yard waste bags to individuals and/or to retail sales establishments. Participating sales establishments shall sell city yard waste bags for not more than the maximum price specified by the city commission. However, the appropriate sales tax may be charged by the retail establishment if so required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Sec. 13-113. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city manager shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The rules and regulations shall be enforceable in the same manner as set forth in section 13-108. 
(Ord. No. 343-90, § 1, 9-17-90) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license, § 2.3(r). 
Cross reference- License for bowling, pool and billiards, Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 2; license for public dance halls and dances, Ch. 6, Art. III, Div. 2; licenses for carnivals, circuses and other similar exhibitions, Ch. 6, Art. IV, Div. 2; license for transitory shows and exhibitions, Ch. 6, Art. V, Div. 2; license required for slaughtering of animals for human consumption, § 7-2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; licenses for electrical work, Ch. 8, Art. III, Div. 2; license for drain laying, Ch. 8, Art. IV, Div. 2; businesses and business regulations, Ch. 9; license required for junk dealers, § 9-24; license for peddlers, Ch. 9, Art. III, Div. 2; license for solicitors and canvassers, Ch. 9, Art. IV, Div. 2; license for transient and itinerant merchants and vendors, Ch. 9, Art. V, Div. 2; license for dealers of used automobiles and parts, § 9-129; license for auctioneers, Ch. 9, Art. VII, Div. 2; license for pawnbrokers, § 9-172; license for massage parlors, Ch. 9, Art. IX, Div. 2; permit for blasting, § 12-65; licenses for storage of explosives, § 12-66; license for operation of gasoline service station, § 12-76; permit for use of hazardous chemicals, § 12-90; licensing of garbage and rubbish collectors, § 13-22; permit for throwing objects from aircraft, § 13-47; permit for setting off fireworks, § 16-60; permit to use loud instruments to attract attention, § 18-7(9); sign erector's licenses, § 20-40 et seq.; permit for placing or removing of poles and wires, § 22-46; bicycle license, Ch. 24, Art. IV, Div. 2; permit for cutting, trimming, etc., trees in public places, § 25-18; permit to plant certain species of trees on private property, § 25-21; license for taxicabs, Ch. 26, Art. II, Div. 2. 

Sec. 14-1. - Required. 
    No person shall engage or be engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege for which any license, permit or fee is required by this Code without first obtaining a license or permit from the city clerk in the manner provided for in this chapter and by the sections of this Code requiring such license or permit. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.01) 
Sec. 14-2. - Application; oath. 
    Unless otherwise provided in the section requiring a license or permit, such person required to obtain a license or permit from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license or permit to the city clerk upon forms provided by the clerk. All statements required to be made as to facts which are required or which are applicable to the issuing of any license or permit required by this city shall be made under oath or affirmation, if so required by the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.03) 
Sec. 14-3. - Investigation of application. 
    The city clerk may refer any application for a license or permit to the appropriate city official or department for an investigation and recommendation on matters pertaining to the exercise of the license or permit applied for, and the city clerk may require the giving of fingerprints and such other information as may be necessary to establish the identity of the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.04) 
Sec. 14-4. - Conditions of issuance. 
    No license or permit shall be granted or delivered until the applicant therefor has complied with all the conditions precedent to its issuance, as set forth in the sections of this Code requiring such license or permit. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.02) 
Sec. 14-5. - State license or permit prerequisite to issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence of securing such state license or permit. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.05) 
Sec. 14-6. - Fees; schedule. 
(a)  No license or permit shall be issued under this Code except upon payment of the fee therefor provided for in this Code; provided, however, that no license fee shall be required to be paid by any person who is exempt from the payment of such fee by any provision of state or federal law. Such person shall comply with all other provisions or requirements in connection with the issuance of the license. 
(b)  The license issued by the city clerk shall constitute a receipt for the license fee paid. 
(c)  The city commission from time to time will determine which activities undertaken inside the city will require the issuance of a license or permit. All licenses and permits presently established will remain in effect until modified by city commission resolution. 
    All fees and charges for the above stated license and permit shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city commission. 
(d)  With respect to sign permits a double permit fee will be charged if the construction and/or erection of a sign is started before issuance of the permit but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve said persons from the responsibility of fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.07; Code 1957, Ch. 9, Art. 2; Ord. No. 3, § 1, 7-1-57; Ord. No. 233-83, § 1, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 245-85, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 281-87, § 1, 9-14-87; Ord. No. 288-88, § 1, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 14-7. - Termination. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a license or permit shall begin on May first of each year and shall terminate on April thirtieth of the following year. Annual licenses issued after May first in any year shall terminate on April thirtieth of the following year. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for a period of less than one year, any license so issued shall become effective on the date of the issuance thereof and shall terminate at the end of the period for which it is issued. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.08) 
Sec. 14-8. - Renewal. 
    Applications for the renewal of any license shall be considered to be and shall be treated in the same manner as an original application for such license. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.09) 
Sec. 14-9. - Carrying and display. 
    No person to whom a license or permit has been issued shall fail to carry such license or permit upon the person thereof when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was issued; except that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such license or permit shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in such place or establishment. No person shall fail to produce any license or permit issued by the city when requested to do so by any city police or health officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.12) 
Sec. 14-10. - Prohibited display. 
    No person shall display any expired license or permit or any license or permit for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.13) 
Sec. 14-11. - Transferability. 
    Licenses or permits issued by this city shall not be transferable, unless specifically authorized under this Code, and then only in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.14) 
Sec. 14-12. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license or permit required by this Code may be suspended or revoked, or the renewal thereof refused, for misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such license or permit or for any good cause by the city manager. The term "good cause" as used in this section shall mean any act, omission, or the permitting of a condition to exist, with respect to the license or permit in question, which is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  Unlawful or fraudulent; 
(3)  A violation of the section under which the license or permit was issued; 
(4)  Beyond the scope of the license or permit issued; 
(5)  A fact, circumstance or condition which, had it existed or been known to the issuing authority at the time the license or permit was issued, would have been sufficient grounds for the refusal thereof; 
(6)  The sale or offering for sale of any article or commodity purporting to be in quantities of standard weight or measure, when the same is not actually of the weight or measure purported; 
(7)  The sale or offering for sale of any defective, faulty, incomplete or deteriorated articles of merchandise, when the goods are not so represented to the purchaser or prospective customers; 
(8)  Any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.10) 
Sec. 14-13. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
    An applicant for any license or permit who has been refused such license or permit, or whose license or permit has been revoked or suspended, for any reason, by the authorized issuing officer or the city manager, unless an appeal is provided to another agency by the section of this Code requiring such license or permit, may appeal such action to the commission by setting forth all the facts in written petition and filing the same with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last-known address. The city clerk shall submit such petition and a report by the clerk or the report of the officer taking such action to the commission before its next regular meeting. The city commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in writing of the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee or permittee at the last-known address of such licensee or permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. The commission may act on the petition upon the facts set forth therein or may grant a further hearing to the applicant. The decision of the commission on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1957, §§ 9-1.06, 9-1.11) 
Sec. 14-14. - Clerk's records. 
    The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications for licenses or permits made under this Code, indicating whether the license or permit applied for in each case has been issued or withheld, and if withheld, the reason therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 9-1.15) 
Chapter 15 - MINORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Age requirement for license for bowling, pool and billiards, § 6-28; curfew for minors at transitory shows and exhibitions, § 6-91; loitering by minors prohibited on premises of junk dealers, § 9-26; purchases by dealers of used automobiles and parts from minors prohibited, § 9-130; issuance of massage parlor licenses to minors prohibited, § 9-195(3); operation of off-road vehicles, §§ 24-159, 24-160. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Curfew. 
(a)  No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, public building, place of amusement or entertainment, vacant lot or other unsupervised place after the hour of 10:00 p.m. or before the hour of 6:00 a.m. unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult person, having the care and custody of such minor or unless the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult person, having the care and custody of the minor, or unless such a minor has been in attendance at a function sponsored by a church, school, civic or fraternal organization and is returning home from such a function at an hour not later than 12:30 a.m. 
(b)  Any person of the age of sixteen (16) years or over, including but not limited to parents and guardians, assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to violate the provisions of section 15-1(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 6-2.01; Ord. No. 215-81, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-81) 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL § 722.751 et seq., MSA § 28.342(1) et seq. 
Sec. 15-2. - Misrepresentation of age. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall falsely represent himself to be of the age of eighteen (18) or over when purchasing or procuring, offering to purchase or procure, or attempting to purchase or procure beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No person shall make any false representation concerning the age of another under the age of eighteen (18) years in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages to the minor. 
(c)  No person shall give false information concerning the age of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to any law enforcement officer when such officer has good reason for requesting such information. 
(Code 1957, § 6-2.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL §§ 750.141c, 750.141d; MSA §§ 28.336(3), 28.336(4). 
Sec. 15-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 581-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 15-3, in its entirety. Former § 15-3 pertained to "Soliciting and peddling," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-2.03. 
Sec. 15-4. - Responsibility of parents and guardians. 
    No parent, guardian or other adult person, having the care and custody of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, shall permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 6-2.04) 
Sec. 15-5. - Complaint under juvenile laws when found to be incorrigible, neglected or delinquent. 
    If investigation discloses that any minor violating the provisions of this article is an incorrigible, a neglected, or a delinquent child, a complaint shall be made by the chief of police, city manager or judge of competent jurisdiction under the juvenile laws of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 6-2.01) 
Secs. 15-6-15-26. - Reserved. 
Chapter 16 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Public place defined. 
    "Public place" as used elsewhere in this chapter shall be deemed to include the grounds and buildings of any public or private elementary or secondary school located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 133, § 6-3.01(gg), 12-17-73) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 16-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 542-13, adopted December 2, 2013, repealed § 16-2 in its entirety. Former § 16-2 pertained to begging and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(o). 
Sec. 16-3. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any street or sidewalk or in a park or public building or conduct themselves in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(n)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Disorderly persons, MCL § 750.167, MSA § 28.364. 
Sec. 16-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-4, in its entirety. Former § 16-4, pertained to "Illegal businesses," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-5. - Frequenting unlawful establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attend, frequent, operate, own or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(r)) 
State Law reference- Frequenting gaming places, MCL § 750.309, MSA § 28.541. 
Sec. 16-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-6, in its entirety. Former § 16-6, pertained to "Inciting, inducing or exhorting commission of offense," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-7, in its entirety. Former § 16-7, pertained to "Obstructing, resisting officers," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(n). 
Sec. 16-8. - Falsely personating public officers. 
    Any persons who falsely assume or pretend to be an officer or employee of this city, and shall take upon themselves to act as such, or to require any person to aid and assist them in any matter pertaining to their duties, or shall falsely take upon themselves to act or officiate in any office or place of authority, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; police, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 750.215, MSA § 28.412. 
Sec. 16-9. - Spitting in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public carrier, or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public assemblage. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 16-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-10, in its entirety. Former § 16-10, pertained to "Playing in streets," and was derived from Code 1957, § 7-1.05. 
Sec. 16-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-11, in its entirety. Former § 16-11, pertained to "Possessing instruments for commission of crime," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-12. - Possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages in schools, city buildings, etc. 
(a)  No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, including, but not limited to, intoxicating liquors, beer and wine, in any building owned by the city, when posted, including any building which may be leased by the city for special events, or in any elementary or high school building located within the city. 
(b)  No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic beverage, including, but not limited to, intoxicating liquors, beer and wine in a container which is uncapped or upon which the seal is broken in or upon any public street, walkway, alley or right-of-way or any public or private parking area which is open to or accessible to the public and not otherwise posted or authorized by special license and/or previous approval by authorities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 6-3.01(ee), 2-7-72; Ord. No. 230-82, § 1, 11-1-82) 
Sec. 16-13. - School premises-Unlawful entering or remaining on school grounds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or remain in any public, private or parochial school building or enter or remain upon any grounds of such a school on days in which school is in session who is not a regularly enrolled student thereof or an employee thereof, or who is not lawfully attending school-sponsored or school-authorized activities therein, unless such person shall have immediately upon entry proceeded to the administrative offices of such school and shall have identified themselves and have stated their business to the principal or to the principal's representative, and shall have thereafter received permission of the principal or the duly authorized representative of the principal to remain upon such school grounds or in such school building for the purpose of transacting such business as so stated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or remain in any public, private or parochial school building or upon the grounds of such school between the hours of sunset and sunrise, unless such person is participating in or attending as a spectator at some school-authorized or school-sponsored activity. 
(Ord. No. 133, § 6-3.01(ff), (gg), 12-17-73) 
Sec. 16-14. - Same-Disrupting classes. 
    Any person who shall by acts, words, conduct or mere presence unlawfully divert or unlawfully tend to divert the attention of pupils, teachers, or other persons from the normal instructional program of a public or private school shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 16-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-15, in its entirety. Former § 16-15, pertained to "Same-Borrowing from students," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-16. - Abandoned refrigerator. 
    Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 750.493d., MSA § 28.761(4). 
Sec. 16-17. - Catching fish by "snagging" unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to snag or attempt to snag any fish within the corporate limits of the city, except that the city manager may designate an area for those persons who are authorized by law to snag. It shall be further unlawful to possess any snagging apparatus, and the possession of such apparatus within one hundred fifty (150) feet of waters where fish are found, shall be prima facie evidence of attempt to snag. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
Snagging means the taking or the attempt to take fish by a hook, either barbed or unbarbed, through penetration of some part of the fish's body other than the mouth. 
Snagging apparatus means any pointed hook, barbed or unbarbed, attached to a line or pole in such manner that the weight or sinker is on or below the shank of the hook, or any hook used without bait or lure for fishing. 
(c)  Any person shall upon conviction of violation of this section be punished by fine not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), by confiscation of snagging apparatus in possession and by imprisonment in the Chippewa County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, at the discretion of the trial court. 
(Ord. No. 237-83, §§ 2-4, 8-17-83) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 237-83, §§ 2-4, adopted Aug. 17, 1983, did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 16-17, has been at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16-18. - Rotary Park maximum age limitation for fishing. 
(a)  The area of water bounded on the northeast by Rotary Park Island and its causeway and bounded on the southwest by Portage Ave/Riverside Drive shall be known as the city children's fishing pond. 
(b)  No person seventeen (17) years of age or older shall be allowed to engage in the act of fishing in the city children's fishing pond except as provided in subsection (c). 
(c)  An intellectual and developmental disabilities person or resident of a home for the aged who has been issued a permit pursuant to MCL 324.43515 shall be allowed to fish in the city children's fishing pond. It shall be a rebuttable presumption of this section that a person age seventeen (17) years or over has not been issued a permit under MCL 324.43515. 
(d)  Fishing is defined by MCL 324.43503 or any amendatory statute relating to this section. 
(Ord. No. 476-04, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 548-14, 4-21-14) 
Secs. 16-19-16-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 16-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-28, in its entirety. Former § 16-28, pertained to "Assault and battery," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-29. - Fighting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in any public place. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(m)) 
Sec. 16-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-30, in its entirety. Former § 16-30, pertained to "Annoying others," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(i). 
Sec. 16-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-31, in its entirety. Former § 16-31, pertained to "Unlawful use of telephone," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-32, in its entirety. Former § 16-32, pertained to "Nonsupport," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-33. - Unlawful discrimination in housing and/or real property. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. 
(1)  In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its Constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is hereby declared the policy of the city, to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters. 
(2)  It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or real property within the city, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or services in connection therewith. 
(3)  Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meaning as described in this subsection and as used in this section. 
    Decent, sanitary, healthful standard living quarters means housing which is in sound, clean, and weather tight condition in conformance with applicable local, state, and national codes. 
    Discriminate or discrimination mean any difference expressed in any way toward a person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person. 
    Housing accommodation includes any building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more human beings, or any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use. 
    Financial institution means any person, institution or business entity of any kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower. 
    Owner means any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations. 
    Real estate broker means any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of another. 
    Real property means any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing accommodations within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee, real estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation and/or real property. 
    In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial institution dealing with housing or real property in the city: 
(1)  To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(2)  To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of any person. 
(3)  To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation and/or real property. 
(4)  To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability. 
(5)  To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood. 
(6)  To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located. 
(7)  For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability. 
(8)  For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or tenant. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city, to specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 567-16, §§ 1-4, 7-5-16) 
Secs. 16-34-16-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 16-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-44, in its entirety. Former § 16-44, pertained to "Malicious mischief," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(cc). 
Sec. 16-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-45, in its entirety. Former § 16-45, pertained to "Larceny," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-46. - Trespassing prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go or trespass upon any public or private property in the city for any purpose, not otherwise authorized by law, without the consent of the owner or owners of such premises. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(aa)) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL § 750.546 et seq., MSA § 28.814 et seq. 
Sec. 16-47. - Depositing substances in waterways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any canal, artificial waterway, stream or river, any garbage, offal, sticks, stones, debris, or other substances that may tend to foul, clog or contaminate the water of such canal, artificial waterway, stream, or river, or the machinery appertaining to it. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(bb)) 
Cross reference- Garbage, rubbish, litter and junk, Ch. 13. 
Secs. 16-48-16-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 16-59. - Disturbing the peace generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of any neighborhood by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(j), (k)) 
Sec. 16-60. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, or use any fireworks in the city in a manner that allows the waste materials of the device to land upon any public or private land not owned by the person. MCL 28.451 et seq. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, or use any fireworks on any public property including any streets or rights-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to set off any fireworks on any private property not owned by the person unless they have expressed permission of the property owner. MCL 28.451 et seq. 
(c)  (1)  It shall be lawful for any person to ignite, discharge, or use any fireworks between the hours of: 11:00 a.m. December 31 until 1:00 a.m. the immediate following January 1; 
11:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day; 
11:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m June 29 through July 4 inclusive; 
11:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m July 5 but only if that date is a Friday or Saturday; 
11:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day. MCL 28.457. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, or use any fireworks between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 11:00 a.m. except as allowed in (c)(1) above. MCL 28.457. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a)-(c) the city clerk may issue a permit to any applicant to allow the applicant to set off fireworks in a manner or place prohibited by this ordinance. 
(e)  A violation of this ordinance shall be assessed a civil fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation of the ordinance and no other fine or sanction. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) of the fine collected under this ordinance shall be remitted to the local law enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance. MCL 28.457(3). 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(z); Ord. No. 540-13, § 1, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 592-19, § 1, 4-1-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 540-13, § 1, adopted August 19, 2013, amended § 16-60 to read as set out herein. Previously § 16-60 was titled setting off fireworks. 
Cross reference- Regulation of explosives and pyrotechnics, Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 3; licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 16-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-61, in its entirety. Former § 16-61, pertained to "Public intoxication," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(a). 
Sec. 16-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-62, in its entirety. Former § 16-62, pertained to "Jostling, crowding others," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(l). 
Sec. 16-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-63, in its entirety. Former § 16-63, pertained to "Unlawful assembly," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-64, in its entirety. Former § 16-64, pertained to "Riot," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-65, in its entirety. Former § 16-65, pertained to "Incitement to riot," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-66. - Disorderly places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by such person to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(q)) 
Sec. 16-67. - Disturbance in business or public place or of lawful meetings. 
    Any person who shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 750.170, MSA § 28.367. 
Sec. 16-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-68, in its entirety. Former § 16-68, pertained to "Window peeping," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(b). 
Sec. 16-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-69, in its entirety. Former § 16-69, pertained to "Indecent language or conduct," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-70. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of their person in any street, alley, lane or other public place, or upon any private lot or premises of another. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(f)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 750.335a, MSA § 28.567(1); disorderly persons, MCL § 750.167, MSA § 28.364. 
Sec. 16-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-71, in its entirety. Former § 16-71, pertained to "Nude swimming in public," and was derived from Code 1957, § 6-3.01(g). 
Sec. 16-72. - Burlesque shows and live entertainment; specific activities prohibited. 
(a)  Burlesque shows and live entertainment, as herein defined, means the presentation of acts which are presented live for the enjoyment of the audience. 
(b)  No person, firm, corporation or licensee shall present or allow to be presented, or participate in, any live acts which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below: 
(1)  Specified sexual activities: 
a.  Human genitals in state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttock or female breast. 
(2)  Specified anatomical areas: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  human genitals, pubic region; 
2.  buttock; and 
3.  female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(c)  Any person, member of a partnership, and/or officer and director of a corporation, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense. 
(d)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon that day during or when the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 243-84, 11-5-84) 
Editor's note- For purposes of classification, provisions enacted by Ord. No. 243-84, relative to specific prohibited live performances and designated as §§ 16-72-16-75, have been included herein as § 16-72(a)-(d). 
Secs. 16-73-16-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed art. V, §§ 16-83-16-85, in its entirety. Former art. V, pertained to "Prostitution," and was derived from Code 1957, §§ 6-3.01(h), (s), (v). 

Secs. 16-83-16-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 16-97. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "firearms," except as otherwise specifically defined in this Code, shall be construed to include any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion. 
Sec. 16-98. - Exemptions. 
    Police officers, peace officers and persons in the military service, in pursuit of official duty, and persons duly authorized by federal or state law to carry firearms, are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 16-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-99, in its entirety. Former § 16-99, pertained to "Transportation," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-, in its entirety. Former § 16-, pertained to "Minors," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-101. - Unlawful handling and discharging of guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, handle, flourish, fire, or set off any gun in any street, alley, park, or other public place except under the conditions enumerated below: 
(1)  This restriction shall not apply to any police officer acting in the line of duty; 
(2)  This restriction shall not apply to black powder muzzle loaded guns when the guns are used in conjunction with an organized event sponsored by a legal entity and supervised by representatives of that organization or entity and so long as the discharging of the gun occurs on a shooting range approved by the chief of police and so long as the organization or entity carries one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability insurance naming the city as a co-insured and so long as the public shall be notified by public advertisement as to the time and location of the discharging of the black powder muzzle loaded weapons. 
(b)  The chief of police is enabled by this section to set standards and guidelines for the implementation of the section. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(y); Ord. No. 242-84, §§ 1, 2, 5-22-84) 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as Ord. No. 242-84, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 22, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code, such provisions have been codified as superseding former § 16-101, which pertained to the same subject matter. 
State Law reference- Reckless use and discharge of firearms, MCL § 752.a863, MSA § 28.436(24). 
Sec. 16-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed § 16-102, in its entirety. Former § 16-102, pertained to "BB guns; use by minors, prohibition, exception," and was derived from Original Code. 
Sec. 16-103. - Destroying or injuring property by careless, reckless or negligent use of bow or arrow. 
    Any person who, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not willfully or wantonly, shall cause or allow any bow or arrow under such person's control to be used so as to destroy or injure the property of another, real or personal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Cross reference- See also § 16-103. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 752.882, MSA § 28.436(32). 
Sec. 16-104. - Throwing missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any ball, snowball, stone, stick, brick, bottle, glass or other missile in or into any street, lane, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1957, § 6-3.01(w)) 
Sec. 16-105. - Bow or arrow usage inside the city limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any bow or arrow inside the city limits unless: 
(1)  A special permit is issued by the chief of police for usage on public property; or 
(2)  The bow and/or arrow is used upon private property with the express consent of the owner; and 
(3)  All arrows fired by the bow remain upon the private property at all times while in flight. 
Violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 267-87, § 1, 6-1-87) 
Cross reference- See also, § 16-103. 
Sec. 16-106. - St. Mary's River, mainland, and island prohibited area for firearms. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, handle, flourish, fire, or set off any firearm, except pursuant to a permit issued by the chief of police, in the area of the city described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the intersection of the west line of fractional Section six, township forty-seven north of range one east and the north right-of-way of West Pier Drive (formerly Portage Avenue) and being the brass disk in the historical stone monument marking the Michigan Meridian; thence running from said point easterly along the northerly right-of-way line of West Pier Drive to West Portage Avenue; thence continuing in a more or less easterly direction along the north right-of-way of West Portage Avenue to Riverside Drive; thence continuing easterly and southerly along the north right-of-way of Riverside Drive to an intersecting point on the south line of fractional section 15, Township 47 North of range 1 east; thence easterly along the south line extended of said fractional section 15 to a point in the center of the principal or tug channel of the branch of the St. Mary's River entering into Lake Nicolet (former Hay Lake) and being the most southeasterly point of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan as of the year 2005; thence northerly along the center of said channel and following the easterly boundary of said City of Sault Ste. Marie to the said international boundary line in the main and steamboat channel of the St. Mary's River; thence westerly along the said international boundary line until the same reaches an intersecting point produced from the extended west line of fractional section six, township forty-seven north of range one east; thence south along said west line of fractional section six to the place of Beginning; said description embracing portions of fractional sections six, five, four, nine, ten, fifteen and sixteen, township forty-seven north of range one east, and encompassing the islands and bed of the St. Mary's River lying within the limits of the said City of Sault Ste. Marie, all in the County of Chippewa and State of Michigan, according to its original government survey. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any police officer acting in the line of duty. 
(Ord. No. 485-05, 9-6-05) 
Secs. 16-107-16-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 582-18, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed art. VII, §§ 16-116-16-126, in its entirety. Former art. VII, pertained to "Controlled Substances," and was derived from Original Code. 

Secs. 16-116-16-137. - Reserved. 
Chapter 17 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; special permits for trailer courts, App. A, § 10-1.17(1707)(3); MH mobile home districts, App. A, § 10-28. 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Double wides shall mean two (2) or more mobile home units, separately towable but designed without a permanent foundation to be joined into one integral unit, capable of being again separated for repeated towing. 
    Expandables shall mean a mobile home containing a collapsible or telescoping unit which meets highway towing standards when "closed"; expanded at site ("pulled out like a bureau drawer to form a bay or an ell") for added living space. 
    Mobile home, trailer, house trailer shall mean a transferable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. 
    Trailer coach means a mobile home, a trailer or single-family manufactured living unit which is transported to a site as one or more modules, any of which is so constructed as to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place by one or more persons, and licensable as a "trailer coach" under Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949 [MCL § 257.1 et seq., MSA § 9.1801 et seq.], as amended. 
(Code 1957, § 8-5.04; Ord. No. 12, § 1 (8-5.04), 3-7-60; Ord. No. 96, § 8-5.04, 2-28-72; Ord. No. 142, § 8-5.04, 4-15-74) 
Sec. 17-2. - Permanent occupancy; temporary parking permit. 
(a)  Mobile homes, trailer coaches, trailers, house trailers, double wides and expandables shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a permanent dwelling or for indefinite periods of time in any area of the city not zoned for the use of such vehicles; provided, that not more than one such trailer properly connected with the city water supply and sanitary sewer systems, and constructed and located in compliance with all requirements of the building, plumbing, sanitary, health, zoning and electrical ordinances of the city and not inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed may be permitted on any premises under permits properly secured as provided for in the building, plumbing, electrical, sanitary, health and zoning ordinances. 
(b)  Prior to any trailer being parked or occupied under this section, the owner of the property upon which it is to be placed, or the person who is to occupy such trailer, shall obtain a temporary trailer parking permit from the city clerk. Such trailer parking permit shall be kept current at all times and shall be displayed on the trailer for which it is issued, on the side of such trailer nearest the fronting public street in a manner which shall make it readily noticeable, and shall be protected in such a manner as to prevent such permit from becoming illegible. 
(Code 1957, § 8-5.04; Ord. No. 12, § 1 (8-5.04), 3-7-60; Ord. No. 96, § 8-5.04, 2-28-72; Ord. No. 142, § 8-5.04, 4-15-74) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate house trailers, § 2.3(t). 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to abate nuisances, § 2.3(q), (v). 
Cross reference- Distribution of handbills, Ch. 3, Art. II; air pollution prevention and control, Ch. 4; keeping of animals when causing annoyance in neighborhood prohibited, § 7-1; slaughtering of animals, § 7-2; disposition of animals when sick or dead, § 7-3; garbage, rubbish, litter and junk, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; removal of noxious weeds, § 25-1; removal of tree roots causing damage to public property, § 25-20; Dutch elm disease, Ch. 25, Art. III; zoning regulations considered to be public nuisances per se, App. A, § 10-1.25(2501). 

Sec. 18-1. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as anything prohibited by this chapter or as any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or 
(2)  Offends decency; or 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; or 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(5)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Sec. 18-2. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.02) 
Sec. 18-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager may elect to enforce the provisions of this chapter by one of the following methods or by any combination thereof: 
(1)  Prosecute the person committing, creating or maintaining the nuisance for a violation of the provisions of this Code; or 
(2)  Cause the nuisance to be immediately abated under section 18-12; or 
(3)  Give notice in the manner provided in section 18-8 ordering such nuisance to be abated. 
(b)  Whenever any nuisance endangers the health of the public the health officer shall have the power to enforce this chapter in the same manner as such power is delegated to the city manager in subsection (a). 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.03) 
Sec. 18-4. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation; 
(2)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things; 
(3)  Any condition which provides harborage for rates, mice, snakes, and other vermin; 
(4)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located; 
(5)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises; 
(6)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; 
(7)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death; 
(8)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances; 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained; 
(10)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground; 
(11)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
Sec. 18-5. - Barbed wire fences near public places. 
    No fence composed, in whole or in part, of barbed wire or so constructed as to be dangerous and liable to injure persons passing near the same shall be constructed or maintained around or along any area or bordering upon any sidewalk, street, alley or any public place. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.05) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 18-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1D., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed § 18-6, which pertained to interference with radio and television reception, and derived from the 1957 Code, § 6-1.07. 
Sec. 18-7. - Noise. 
(a)  Enumeration. No person shall make any unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, convenience, repose, health or safety of the public. Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and is prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horn or signal device. No person shall use a horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle otherwise than as a reasonable warning nor shall any person make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other sound device. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 
(2)  Radio, phonograph or musical instrument. No person shall play any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any building, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(3)  Yelling, whistling and singing. No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle, sing or make any loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or make any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  Hawking goods. No person shall hawk goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
Cross reference- Peddlers, Ch. 9, Art. III. 
(5)  Animals. No person shall keep any animal or bird whose noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 7. 
(6)  Whistles and sirens. No person shall blow any whistle or siren except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(7)  Engine exhausts. No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle engine or any other type of engine except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 
(8)  Construction. No person shall carry on the erection (including excavation), demolishing, alteration or repair of any building, street or highway other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless a permit is first obtained from the city clerk, who shall issue such permit only after certification by the superintendent of public works that such construction, for emergency reasons, is necessary and ought to be permitted. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
(9)  Instruments to attract attention. No person shall use any drum, musical instrument, loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose; provided, that any governmental unit or any bona fide nonprofit organization may use such a device if proper application is made to the city clerk and a permit is issued therefor. In no case shall the city clerk grant such a permit for use on a Sunday or at any time or in any manner which, in the opinion of the city clerk, will constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions of subsection (a) shall apply to or be enforced against any police or fire vehicle, car or ambulance while engaged upon necessary public emergency business or the reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.08) 
Cross reference- Noise control at transitory shows and exhibitions, § 16-90. 
Sec. 18-8. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city manager or some other duly designated officer of the city shall give five (5) days written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
Sec. 18-9. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
Sec. 18-10. - Service of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law. 
Sec. 18-11. - Abatement by city. 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, the city manager or other duly designated officer of the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
Sec. 18-12. - Emergency abatement by city. 
    When, in the opinion of the city manager or other duly designated officer, there is actual and immediate danger to the public or occupants of a particular premises caused by a nuisance on such premises, the city manager or duly designated officer is hereby authorized and empowered, without any notice or hearing, to order and require such premises to be vacated. The city manager or other duly designated officer shall immediately post the premises, warning of the dangerous condition, and shall then abate such nuisance and prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
Sec. 18-13. - Collection of city's costs of abatement. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected from the owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance was committed, created or maintained in an action at law, or they may be charged against the premises as a special assessment in accordance with the provisions of article V of chapter 21. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.03) 
Sec. 18-14. - Motor vehicle sound. 
    An owner, operator, person in charge of, in possession, exercising control over or responsible for a motor vehicle, whether in operation or parked, on public or private property, from which sound, music, noise, loud voices and the like, produced by radio, phonograph, stereo system, compact disc player, cassette player, eight track, television set, amplified or unamplified musical instrument, microphone, sound system, sound amplification device or any other means of sound production, is plainly audible at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the vehicle which is the source of the above referenced noise is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 456-02, § 1, 6-3-02) 
Secs. 18-15-18-23. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-24. - Prohibition on installation of outdoor wood- or coal-fired boilers and outdoor furnaces. 
    No person shall install an outdoor furnace or boiler or cause or permit the installation of an outdoor furnace or boiler within the city. 
(Ord. No. 497-07, § 1, 9-17-07) 
Sec. 18-25. - Outdoor furnace and boiler defined. 
    Outdoor furnace or boiler shall mean, but is not limited to, any device, apparatus, or structure that: 
(a)  Is designed or used to provide heat or hot water to any structure; and 
(b)  Operates by burning wood, wood products, paper or coal; and 
(c)  Is not located within the structure for which it is providing heat or hot water. 
(Ord. No. 497-07, § 1, 9-17-07) 
Sec. 18-26. - Existing uses. 
    Section 18-24 shall not apply to any outdoor furnace or boiler that was installed connected and operating as of September 18, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 497-07, § 1, 9-17-07) 
Secs. 18-27-18-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1D., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed §§ 18-27-30 and 18-40-18-43, which pertained to moratorium on installation of wind powered electricity generating devices; and moratorium on marijuana dispensary manufacture facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 507-09, adopted April 6, 2009; Ord. No. 521-10, adopted September 28, 2010; Ord. No. 526-11, adopted March 7, 2011; and Ord. No. 529-11, adopted September 6, 2011. 
Sec. 18-51. - Designating and regulating flood hazard areas. 
    Preamble. An ordinance to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Sault Ste. Marie located in Chippewa County, and to designate regulated flood hazard areas under the provisions of the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. 
A.  Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Department Building Official of the City of Sault Ste. Marie is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Sault Ste. Marie under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Sault Ste. Marie assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through out the corporate limits of the community adopting this section. 
B.  Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the jurisdiction of the community adopting this section. 
C.  Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Chippewa County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated 10/16/2014 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26033C; 0244D, 0263D, 0264D, 0477D, 0479D, 0481D, 0482D, 0501D, 0502D, 0506D, 0508D, dated 10/16/2014 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
D.  Repeals. All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 553-14, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 553-14, § 1, adopted October 6, 2014, designated the inclusion of a new § 18-25. Inasmuch as said section already existed in the Code, said section has been redesignated as § 18-51 at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 18.5 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18.5-1-18.5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Sections 1-7 of Ordinance No. 192, adopted June 5, 1978, enacted provisions not specifically amendatory of the Code, hence codification herein as Art. II, §§ 18.5-11-18.5-18, was at the discretion of the editors. Additionally, it should be noted that Ord. No. 388-94, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, provided for "a service charge in lieu of taxes for proposed multiple-family dwelling projects for senior citizens of low or moderate income . . . which include Downtown Commercial Redevelopment in a target area of the city." Such provisions are not set out at length in this Code, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 18.5-11. - Title. 
    This article shall hereafter be known and cited as "Low and Moderate Income Housing Developments Article." 
(Ord. No. 192, § 1, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-12. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is the public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low and moderate income, with such purpose and policy being enunciated in Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended MCLA Section 125.1415-a, which provides for exemption from all property taxation of those housing developments for persons of low and moderate income financed with a mortgage loan made by the state housing development authority. 
(b)  It is further acknowledged that such property tax exemption will serve to stimulate the development of housing for citizens of low and moderate income, and the city will be benefited and improved by the development of such housing. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 2, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-13. - Definitions. 
    Act: The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Authority: The Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Housing development: A development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low and moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low and moderate income. 
    Mortgage loan: A loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Mortgagor: Persons or entities which have applied to the authority for mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Property: A portion of the vacated public square as described in the Whelphey Survey of 1854-1856, in the City of Sault Ste. Marie; being the north two hundred (200) feet in depth parallel to the north line of said vacated public square (south line of Ridge Street) and bounded on the east by the east line of said vacated public square (west line of Pine Street), on the west by the west line of said vacated public square (east line of Magazine Street). 
(Ord. No. 192, § 3, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-14. - Class of housing projects established. 
    The city herein establishes a class of housing projects, such class being defined as multiple dwelling for families and elderly persons of low and moderate income. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-15. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The city, acknowledging that the reliance of the mortgagor and the authority on the exemption from all property taxes and payments in lieu thereof as described above has hereby ordained and established that the property and the development to be constructed on the property shall be exempt from all property taxes as provided in the act from and after their commencement of construction of the development, and, in consideration of the foregoing and on behalf of the city, the city council hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes in an amount equal to four (4) percent of the ninety-five (95) percent of the contract rents (as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in rules promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974) of the preceding calendar year exclusive of the utilities and the amount paid to the city during the preceding calendar year for the annual service charge. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 5, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-16. - Development exempt from all property taxes. 
    Pursuant to the authority vested in the city council of the city by the act and by the charter of the city, the city council hereby determines that the development is qualified for exemption from all property taxes as provided in the act. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-17. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 7, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-18. - Malcolm School Property development. 
(a)  The city acknowledges that Tempo, Incorporated, on behalf of a limited dividend housing association to be formed as mortgagor, proposes to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Malcolm School Property, which development is of the class described above, on certain property located at property described as: 
A portion of the vacated public square as described in the Whelphey Survey of 1854-1856, in the City of Sault Ste. Marie; being the north two hundred (200) feet in depth parallel to the north line of said vacated public square (south line of Ridge Street) and bounded on the east by the east line of said vacated public square (west line of Pine Street), on the west by the west line of said vacated public square (east line of Magazine Street) 
in the city, which development will be financed with a mortgage loan made by the authority, and which development is intended to serve persons of low and moderate income. 
(b)  The mortgagor has agreed to pay to the city, on or before the fifteenth day of September of each year, on account of the development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes from and after the commencement of construction of the development so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 2, 6-5-78) 
Sec. 18.5-19. - Supportive Housing Project. 
(a)  Definitions. [For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines [will] improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means the person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(b)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be family housing developments, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that the Supportive Housing Project is of this class. 
(c)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as the Supportive Housing Project and the property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of Ordinance No. 453-02 and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in such ordinance, and in consideration of the sponsor's officer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four (4) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected, except that for the first year in which the housing development shall be occupied by rent paying tenants, there shall be no service charge. 
(d)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low-income" as used herein shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(e)  Contractual effect of ordinance. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of Ordinance No. 453-02. 
(f)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under Ordinance No. 453-02 shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before April 1 of each year. 
(g)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect for as long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid of [or] the authority has an interest in the property; provided that construction of the housing development commences within two (2) years from the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 453-02, §§ 3-9, 2-18-02; Ord. No. 467-03, § 1, 4-21-03) 
Sec. 18.5-20. - Park Place City Center development. 
(1)  [Title.] This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Park Place City Center Development Ordinance". 
(2)  Preambles. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL § 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such taxation. 
The City of Sault Ste. Marie acknowledges that Park Place City Center LDHA, LLC (the "sponsor") has offered subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") program, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Park Place City Center, on certain property located at 416 and 418 Ashmun Street in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, more particularly described: 
As Lot 138, Assessors Subdivision Number 2, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
And 
Lot 139 and Lot 140, Assessors Subdivision Number 2, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan 
to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(3)  Definitions. 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(c)  Annual shelter rent means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(d)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
(e)  Low-income persons and families means those persons and families who are determined to be eligible to move into the housing. 
(f)  Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(g)  Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan or allocation under the LIHTC program to finance a housing development. 
(h)  Authority mortgage loan means the loan(s) entered into between the authority, as mortgagee, and the sponsor, as mortgagor. 
(4)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that this development is of this class. 
(5)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Park Place City Center shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city acknowledged that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program, to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four (4) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected. 
(6)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (5), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. The term "low-income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(7)  Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor, with the authority as a third-party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes as previously described is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(8)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes and are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before the first day of July each year (beginning in 2009), based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year. 
(9)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the authority's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the construction of the housing development commences within four (4) years from the effective date of this section. 
(10)  Severability. The various sections ands provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 498-07, § 1, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 509-09, § 1, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 513-09, § 1, 11-16-09) 
Sec. 18.5-21. - Wood Creek Apartments development. 
(1)  [Title.] This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Wood Creek Apartments Development Ordinance". 
(2)  Preambles. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such taxation. 
    The city acknowledges that JPS Wood Creek Limited Dividend Housing Association, Limited Partnership (the "sponsor") has offered subject to receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit ("LIHTC") program, to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Wood Creek Apartments, on certain property located at 1708 Meridian Street in the city, more particularly described: 
A PART OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF THE NORTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 12, T47N, R1W, CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, CHIPPEWA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, AS DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: BEGINNING AT THE EAST 1/4 CORNER OF SAID SECTION 12; THENCE SOUTH 89°47'14" WEST, ALONG THE EAST-WEST 1/4 LINE, 658.87 FEET; THENCE NORTH 00°19'39" WEST 328.38 FEET; THENCE NORTH 89°46'02" EAST 658.42 FEET TO THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION 12; THENCE SOUTH 00°24'20" EAST 328.61 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(3)  Definitions. 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(c)  Annual shelter rent means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(d)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
(e)  Low-income persons and families means those persons and families who are determined to be eligible to move into the housing development assisted by the authority and/or rural development. 
(f)  Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(g)  Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority or rural development for a mortgage loan or allocation under the LIHTC program to finance a housing development. 
(h)  Rural development means the United States Department of Agriculture-Rural Development through the rural rental housing program under section 515 of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, as amended. 
(i)  Mortgage loan means a loan made, transferred, to be made or to be transferred by rural development and/or the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation and/or permanent financing of the housing development. 
(4)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that this development is of this class. 
(5)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Wood Creek Apartments shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the earlier of: transfer of deed to the sponsor or commencement of construction. The city acknowledged that the sponsor and rural development or the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program or a rural development mortgage loan, to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to six (6) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected. 
(6)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (5), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
The term "low income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(7)  Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority and/or rural development as third-party beneficiaries under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(8)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes and are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before the first day of July, each year (beginning in 2009) based upon rents collected during the months of the preceding calendar year. For the 2009 payment, only the rents collected during the 2008 period of ownership by the sponsor shall be used to calculate the service charge. 
(9)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the authority's or rural development's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority or rural development has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the construction or rehabilitation of the housing development commences within one (1) year from the effective date of this section. 
(10)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 505-08, § 1, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 18.5-22. - Edge of the Woods Apartments. 
(1)  [Title.] This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Edge of the Woods Apartments Ordinance". 
(2)  Preambles . It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such taxation. 
    The city acknowledges that EDGES-2006 LDHA, LP (the "sponsor") has offered subject to receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit ("LIHTC") program, to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Edge of the Woods Apartments, on certain property located at 301 24th Avenue West in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Chippewa County, Michigan, more particularly described as follows: 
    Parcel 1 : Commencing at the West 1/4 corner of Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 1 East; thence North 89 degrees 08'14" East along the East-West 1/4 line of said Section 18, a recorded distance of 620.60 feet; thence South 00 degrees 00'08" West 30.00 feet to the Point of Beginning of this description, said Point of Beginning being on the South right of way line of 24th Avenue; thence North 89 degrees 08'14" East along said right of way line 681.26 feet (recorded as 680.60 feet) to the West 1/8 th line of Section 18; thence South 00 degrees 24'10" East along the West 1/8 line 625.87 feet to the South line of the North 1/2 of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 (North 1/2 of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4) of said Section 18; thence South 88 degrees 58'43" West along said South line 685.72 feet to a point which lies North 88 degrees 58'43" East along said South line 620.60 feet from the West line of said Section 18; thence North 00 degrees 00'08" East 627.82 feet to the Point of Beginning; being a part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 18. 
    Parcel II: (Easement Parcel) An exclusive perpetual easement for stormwater drainage purposes, 20 feet in width, over and across the premises lying to the South, extending first Southerly approximately 609 feet, thence Westerly approximately 590.6 feet and then Southerly an additional approximately 511.9 feet, as set forth in Liber 394, page 269. 
to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(3)  Definitions . 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(c)  Annual shelter rent means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(d)  Federally-aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(i)  A below market interest rate mortgage, insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(ii)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements. 
(iii)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(iv)  A mortgage on a housing project to which the Authority allocates low income housing tax credits. 
(e)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
(f)  Low income persons and families means those persons and families who are determined to be eligible to move into the housing. 
(g)  Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(h)  Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan or allocation under the LIHTC program to finance the acquisition and rehabilitation of a housing development. 
(4)  Class of housing developments . It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that this development is of this class. 
(5)  Establishment of annual service charge . The housing development identified as Edge of the Woods Apartments shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the acquisition of this housing development and the commencement of rehabilitation. The city acknowledged that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program, to rehabilitate, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four (4) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected. 
(6)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge . Notwithstanding subsection (5), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(7)  Contractual effect of section . Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as a third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(8)  Payment of service charge . The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the section shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day of June each year (beginning in 2011) based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year. Calculations, which in the sole opinion of the city, are sufficiently detailed to document the service charge, as based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year shall be provided with the payment. 
(9)  Duration . This ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the authority's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; or a federally-aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the Department of Housing and Urban Development has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the rehabilitation of the Housing Development commences within four years from the effective date of this section. 
(10)  Severability . The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 514-09, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 514-09, § 1, adopted March 1, 2010, added § 18.5-21 to the Code. Inasmuch as said section already existed, the new provisions have been redesignated as herein set out at the editor's discretion and with the agreement of the city. 
Sec. 18.5-23. - Wood Creek Apartments. 
(1)  Title. This sections shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Wood Creek Apartments ordinance". 
(2)  Preambles. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such taxation. 
    The city acknowledges that Wood Creek LDHA, LP (the "sponsor") has offered subject to receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit ("LIHTC") program, to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Wood Creek Apartments, on certain property located at 1606 Meridian Street in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Chippewa County, Michigan, more particularly described as follows: 
    A part of the Southeast 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 12, T47N, R1W, City of Sault Ste. Marie, Chippewa County, Michigan, described as follows: Commencing at the East 1/4 corner of said Section 12; thence South 89° 47' 14" West, along the East-West 1/4 line, 658.87 feet; thence North 00° 19' 39" West 328.38 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence continuing North 00° 19' 39" West 328.37 feet; thence North 89° 44' 52" East 657.97 feet to the East line of said Section 12; thence South 00° 24' 20" East, along said East Section line, 328.60 feet, thence South 89° 46' 02" West 648.42 feet to the Point of Beginning. 
Property Address: 1606 Meridian, Sault Ste. Marie, MI 49783 
Parcel Number: 17-051-062-023-00 
    to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(3)  Definitions. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of the housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Federally-aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(i)  A below market interest rate mortgage, insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(ii)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements. 
(iii)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(iv)  A mortgage on a housing project to which the Authority allocates low income housing tax credits. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Low-income persons and families means those persons and families who are determined to be eligible to move into the housing. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
    Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan or allocation under the LIHTC program to finance the acquisition and rehabilitation of a housing development. 
    Rural development means the United States Department of Agriculture Rural Development through the rural rental housing program under section 515 of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, as amended. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan made, transferred, by rural development and/or the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation or financing of the housing development. 
(4)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that this development is of this class. 
(5)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Wood Creek Apartments, shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the tax day (December 31) immediately following both: 
(i)  The recording of the deed of acquisition of this housing development; and 
(ii)  The substantial commencement of rehabilitation as verified by the city building inspection department. 
    The city acknowledged that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program, to rehabilitate, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to eight (8) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected. 
(6)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Not withstanding subsection (5), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low-income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(7)  Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority or rural development as a third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(8)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the ordinance shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day of June, each year (beginning in the first year of the service charge as defined in subsection (5) above) based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year. Calculations, which in the sole opinion of the city, are sufficiently detailed to document the service charge, as based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year shall be provided with the payment. 
(9)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the authority's or rural development's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority or rural development has any interest in the property; or a federally-aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the Department of Housing and Urban Development has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the rehabilitation of the Housing Development commences within two (2) years from the effective date of this section. 
(10)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 527-11, 8-8-11) 
Sec. 18.5-24. - Bridge Village Apartments for GDC-BV Limited Dividend Housing Association, LLC. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Tax Exemption Ordinance - Bridge Village Apartments Ordinance." The previous resolution of the city for Bridge Village Limited Dividend Housing Association adopted June 3, 1974 is vacated by this section; the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived as set forth in subsection (e). 
(b)  Preambles. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low-income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Act. The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for low-income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments, which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that GDC-BV Limited Dividend Housing Association, LLC (the "sponsor" as defined below) has offered, subject to receipt of mortgage loan from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Bridge Village Apartments, on certain property located at 1630 Victor Knox Dr. in the city, Parcel Number: 17-051-037-009-00, to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Annual net shelter rents means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of the housing development representing rent, plus any subsidy to the occupant, and plus any occupancy charges. Annual net shelter rents shall be reduced by charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Federally-aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A below market interest rate mortgage, insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements. 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(4)  A mortgage on a housing project to which the authority allocates low-income housing tax credits. 
(5)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income housing, consistent with this act. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low-income persons and families and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for low-income persons and families. 
    Low-income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move into a housing project. 
    Utilities means charges for natural gas, other heating fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
    Sponsor means GDC-BV Limited Dividend Housing Association, LLC and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan. 
    Rural development means the United States Department of Agriculture Rural Development through the rural rental-housing program under section 515 of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, as amended. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan made, transferred, by rural development and/or the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation or financing of the housing development, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project. 
(d)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments which are financed with a mortgage loan by the authority. It is further determined that Bridge Village Apartments is of this class. 
(e)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Bridge Village Apartments, and the property on which it is located shall be exempt from all property ad valorem property taxes from and after the tax day (December 31) immediately following both: 
(1)  The recording of the deed of acquisition of this housing development; and 
(2)  The substantial commencement of rehabilitation as verified by the city building inspection department. 
    The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section, and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section. Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to rehabilitate and operate the housing development the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan, the annual service charge shall be equal to four (4.00) percent of the annual net shelter rents actually collected by the housing development during each operating year. 
(f)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (e), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(g)  Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as a third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(h)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day of June, each year (beginning in the first year of the service charge as defined in subsection (e)) based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year. Calculations of annual net shelter rents, which in the sole opinion of the city, are sufficiently detailed to document the service charge, as based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year shall be provided with the payment. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
(i)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the authority's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid; or a federally-aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the department of housing and urban development has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the rehabilitation of the housing development commences within two (2) years from the date the ordinance, from which this section is derived, is adopted. 
(j)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(k)  Inconsistent ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this section are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(l)  Financial statements. The sponsor shall supply a copy of its most recently supplied audited, reviewed or compiled financial statements to the city. 
    This section shall become effective ten (10) days after its adoption and publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 565-16, 4-4-16) 
Sec. 18.5-25. - Osborn Commons Apartments for Osborn Commons Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Tax Exemption Ordinance- Osborn Commons." 
(b)  Preambles. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Act. The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that Osborn Commons Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (the "sponsor" as defined below) has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation of low income housing tax credit under the LIHTC program from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Osborn Commons on certain property located at ASSESSORS SUBD NO 1 LOT 2; ALL OF LOTS 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 45, AND 46; ALSO LOT 33 EXL N 20FT OF E 30FT; LOT 35 EXL S 142.57FT; LOT 36 EXL S 151.43FT in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, MI 49783, Parcel Number: #051-141-002-20 , to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Annual net shelter rents means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of the housing development representing rent, plus any subsidy paid on behalf of the occupant, and plus any occupancy charges. Annual net shelter rents shall be reduced by charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Federally-aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A below market interest rate mortgage, insured, purchased, or held by the secretary of the department of housing and urban development. 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the secretary of the department of housing and urban development and augmented by a program of rent supplements. 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the secretary of the department of housing and urban development. 
(4)  A mortgage on a housing project to which the authority allocates low income housing tax credits. 
(5)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate income housing, consistent with this act. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income persons and families and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for low income persons and families. 
    LIHTC program means the low income housing tax credit program administered by the authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
    Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move into a housing project. 
    Utilities means charges for natural gas, other heating fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
    Sponsor means Osborn Commons Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan that is secured by a federally-aided mortgage on the housing project or a loan or grant to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation or financing of the housing development, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project. 
(d)  Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments which are financed with a mortgage loan. It is further determined that Osborn Commons Apartments is of this class. 
(e)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Osborn Commons Apartments, and the property on which it is located shall be exempt from all property ad valorem property taxes from and after the tax day (December 31) immediately following both: 
(1)  The recording of the deed of acquisition of this housing development; and 
(2)  The substantial commencement of construction as verified by the city building inspection department. 
    The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section, and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section. Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to rehabilitate and operate the housing development the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan, the annual service charge shall be equal to three (3.00) percent of the annual net shelter rents actually collected by the housing development during each operating year from the residential units plus an amount equal to what the ad valorem taxes would be on the commercial portion of the development if it were taxed separately. 
(f)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (e), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low income" as used here shall be the same as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(g)  Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as a third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, and to pay a municipal service fee, as described herein, is effectuated by enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(h)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day of June, each year (beginning in the first year of the service charge as defined in subsection (e)) based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year from the residential units of the development; the portion of the service charge that is equivalent to the amount that would be equal to what the ad valorem taxes would be on the commercial portion of the development if it were taxed separately shall also be paid each year at this time. Calculations of annual net shelter rents, which in the sole opinion of the city, are sufficiently detailed to document the service charge, as based upon rents collected during the preceding calendar year shall be provided with the payment. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
(i)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the Authority's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid; or a federally-aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the Department of Housing and Urban Development has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided, that the rehabilitation of the housing development commences actual site construction within two (2) years from February 19, 2018. 
(j)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(k)  Inconsistent ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this section are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(l)  Financial statements. The sponsor shall supply a copy annually of its most recently supplied audited, reviewed or compiled financial statements to the city. 
(m)  Municipal services contract. The granting of this PILOT ordinance is based in part on the sponsor's agreement to enter into a municipal services agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 571-17, 3-20-17; Ord. No. 580-18, § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 18.5-26. - Tax exemption ordinance. 
    An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a housing project for low income persons and families to be financed with a Mortgage Loan or an advance or grant from the Authority pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq ) (the "Act"). 
(1)  Title. This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Sault Ste. Marie Tax Exemption Ordinance-Malcolm Lofts". 
(2)  Preamble. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Act. The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of the housing projects that is constructed or rehabilitated with financing extended in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC Program by the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct and rehabilitate, own and operate a housing project identified as MALCOLM LOFTS on certain property located at: Section 6, Township 47 Range 1 East, a public square bounded by Ridge and Pine Streets and Spruce and Magazine Streets; extending North 200 feet par with Ridge St; also extending commencing at Southeast corner public square North 88 degrees 55'32" West 380.66 feet to Point of Beginning; thence continuing North 88 degrees 55'32" West 200 feet to Southwest corner public square; thence North 12 degrees 30'21" East 332.64 feet; thence South 80 degrees 16' East 136.31 feet; thence South 01 degrees 12'09" West 305.52 feet to Point of Beginning; also excludes portion of public square commencing at Southeast corner of said public square and Point of Beginning; thence North 09 degrees 25'08" along westerly row line of Pine Street 190 feet; thence North 80 degrees 16' West 142 feet; thence South 11 degrees 40'37" West 93 feet; thence North 88 degrees 55'32" West 30.00; thence South 11 degrees 40'37" West 120 feet; thence South 88 degrees 55'32" East 182 feet to Point of Beginning. 1.752 AC +/- in the city to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing project an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(3)  Definitions. 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Annual shelter rents (rents) means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of the housing development representing rent, plus any subsidy paid on behalf of the occupant, and plus any occupancy charges. Annual shelter rents shall be reduced by charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(c)  LIHTC Program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program administered by the Authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(d)  Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move into a housing project. 
(e)  Mortgage loan means a loan that is Federally-aided (as defined in Section 11 of the Act) or a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation, acquisition and/or permanent financing of a housing project, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project. 
(f)  Sponsor means CHN Malcolm Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan. 
(g)  Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer and other utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing project. 
(4)  Class of housing projects. It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing projects for low income persons and families that are financed with a mortgage loan. It is further determined that Malcolm Lofts is of this class. 
(5)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing project identified as Malcolm Lofts and the property on which it will be located shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction or rehabilitation. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance, and the qualification of the housing project for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance. Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct to the specifications as approved by the City Planning Commission and operate the housing project, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan, the annual service charge shall be equal to seven (7) percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected by the housing project during each operating year. 
(6)  Contractual Effect of Ordinance. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance. 
(7)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection 5, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing project that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the housing project were not tax exempt. 
(8)  Payment of Service Charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day of June, each year (beginning in the first year of the service charge as defined in section 5) based upon annual shelter rents collected during the preceding calendar year from the residential units of the development; the portion of the service charge that is equivalent to the amount that would be equal to what the ad valorem taxes would be on the commercial portion of the development if it were taxed separately shall also be paid each year at this time. Calculations of the annual shelter rents which in the sole opinion of the city, are sufficiently detailed to document the service charge, as based upon annual shelter rents collected during the preceding calendar year shall be provided with the payment. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
(9)  Duration. This Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as a mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid and the housing project remains subject to income and rent restrictions under the LIHTC Program. 
(10)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this Ordinance, other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(11)  Inconsistent Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(12)  Financial statements. The sponsor shall supply a copy annually of its most recently supplied audited, reviewed or compiled financial statements to the city. 
(13)  Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after publication as provided for in the city charter. 
(14)  Automatic Repeal. This Ordinance shall automatically be repealed should the sponsor not commence actual site construction within three (3) years from the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 589-19, § 1, 3-4-19) 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18.5-27-18.5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AREA NO. ONE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 258-86, adopted Nov. 17, 1986, did not specify manner of codification, but has been included herein as Div. 2, § 18.5-31, at the discretion of the editors. The development plan and tax increment financing plan for Downtown Area No. One is not set out at length in this volume, but copies of the full text as amended, are available for inspection by and distribution to the public in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 18.5-31. - Development plan and tax increment financing plan, adoption. 
(a)  The purpose of Ordinance No. 258-86 is to approve and adopt a development plan and a tax increment financing plan, for the City of Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Area No. One, generally described as the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal on the south, Bingham Avenue and Court Street on the east, Maple/Ridge Street on the north and Osborn Boulevard on the west, and the Edison Sault Power Canal on the north, Court Street from the power canal to Easterday Avenue, Easterday Avenue from Court Street to Ashmun Street then south on Ashmun Street to Adam's Avenue on the east and the south side of Pine Street on the west. All properties adjoining or abutting the west side of Court Street, the north side of Easterday Avenue or either side of Ashmun Street would be included in the district. 
(b)  The development plan and tax increment financing plan for the City of Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Area No. One provides that the method of financing the development is feasible, and the downtown development authority has the ability to arrange the necessary financing; that the proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of the act; that the land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of the development plan and the act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner; that the development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city; that public services are adequate to protect the area; and that any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities proposed are reasonably necessary for the development and for the city. 
(c)  Improvements. Each of the improvements explained below is considered important to the welfare of downtown Sault Ste. Marie. Explanations of the general types of improvements to be constructed are followed by a detailed table which indicates the location, estimated cost, and priority level of the specific projects. The location description shows the rough area of a project, while the specific parcels to be affected are indicated on Maps 4 through 7. The estimated cost figures are based on preliminary evaluation of the proposed projects [by] the city planning and development department. 
    Every project is assigned to one (1) of four (4) priority levels. Projects assigned a higher priority (level one being higher than level two) are expected to be undertaken before lower priority projects are begun. Each priority level also has an estimated construction time frame. Level one corresponds to the first two (2) years of the plan, level two represents the next four (4) years, level three matches the next nine (9) years, and level four encompasses the last five (5) years of the plan. These time frames indicate when the DDA estimates the projects in the levels can be constructed. 
    It is recognized that circumstances may alter actual construction dates and affect the order in which projects may be undertaken. The DDA may undertake any project contained within the plan at any time regardless of the priority level when the DDA determines it is in the best interest of the plan to do so. However, no project can be added or deleted without amending the plan, nor can the life of the plan extend beyond twenty (20) years. 
    It is also recognized that circumstances may require some variation in the precise location of a project or improvement. Some variation in the exact location of a project or improvement is acceptable if the DDA determines that variation is still consistent with the intent of the plan. 
    The reason for organizing the improvements in this manner is that available financing may vary widely. While the downtown development authority considers its tax increment revenue projections for the development area to be reasonable, such figures are projected estimates only, and the actual amount of tax increment funds generated will vary from the projection to some degree. (See Area One Tax Increment Financing Plan). It is recognized that the total estimated cost of the development projects is greater than the projected revenues in the tax increment financing plan. This overrun is deliberate and reflects the possibility that the authority may receive more funds than it projected and/or actual project costs may be less than anticipated. 
    In the reverse case, if sufficient funds do not become available and/or costs are greater than anticipated so that all projects cannot be completed within the twenty-year life of the plan the priority level system provides that higher priority projects will be completed first. 
    Finally, much depends on the human side of the equation. Several of the projects outlined in this plan require the help and cooperation of citizens, businesses and property owners. Such cooperation will affect the timetable and details of the projects. The DDA shall make every effort to complete the plan as outlined, although actual circumstances may dictate otherwise. In such an event, the development plan shall be amended as necessary. (Grounds for amending the plan include: dropping a project from the development plan, adding new projects, or substantially altering the nature or the location of a project. All amendments require city commission approval.) 
(d)  The duration of the plan shall be twenty (20) years from the date of the amended Ordinance No. 491-06 adopted October 16, 2006, or until such time that all planned improvements are completed, whichever comes first. 
(e)  Transactions between city and authority. It is the general intent of the plan that any property acquired and improvements completed as a result of the plan will become the property of the city. The city will retain full control of all improvements unless it chooses to make arrangements with other parties. The DDA, as a public entity created by the city with its own authority to own land and other property, may elect to be the purchasing or holding party. Subsequent arrangements regarding ownership of such acquired lands and facilities may be made by the city and the DDA as may be in the best interest of both the city and the development plan. In the event there is a dispute between the city and the DDA as to ownership of property, the decision of the city commission shall prevail and be final. 
(f)  The plan provides for the preparation of a base year assessment roll; the preparation of an annual captured assessment value assessment roll; establishment of a development fund; payment of tax increments to downtown development authority; for use of monies in the development fund; an annual report; downtown development authority budget; and an annual audit. 
(g)  The boundaries of the plan area as defined in subsection (a) shall be developed in accordance with the amended development plan and amended tax increment finance plan adopted June 15, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 258-86, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 293-88, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 373-93, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 475-04, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 508-09, 6-15-09) 
Secs. 18.5-32-18.5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AREA NO. TWO[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 259-86, adopted Nov. 17, 1986, did not specify manner of codification, but has been included herein as Div. 3, § 18.5-36, by the editors. The full text of the development plan and tax increment plan for Downtown Area No. Two is not set forth at length herein, but is on file and available for public inspection and distribution in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 18.5-36. - Development plan and tax increment financing plan, adoption. 
(a)  The purpose of Ordinance No. 259-86 is to approve and adopt a development plan and a tax increment financing plan, for the City of Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Area No. Two generally described as Maple/Ridge Street on the south, Bingham Avenue/the east edge of the Federal Building property on the east, the St. Mary's River on the north and MAGAZINE STREET on the west, excepting a residential area south of Water Street between Ashmun and Bingham and the Corps of Engineers Building. Particularly described as: 
Beginning at the intersection of the Centerline of Maple Street and the east line of Bingham Avenue, thence northerly along said east line to the south line of the public alley running east/west through Block 4, Fort Brady Addition, thence easterly along said south alley line to the east line of Lot 1, Block 4, Fort Brady Addition extended, thence northerly along said east property line to the south line of Portage Avenue, thence easterly along said south line to the west line of Brady Street, thence northerly along said west line of Brady Street to the north line of Water Street, thence easterly along the north line of Water Street to the east end of the Federal property known as Brady Park, thence northerly to the St. Mary's River. Thence westerly along the south shore of the St. Mary's River to the fence line on the western edge of the U.S. Corps of Engineers property known as Brady Park, thence southerly along said fence line extended to the south line of Water Street, thence easterly along said south line to the west line of Bingham Avenue, thence southerly along said west line to the north line of the public alley running east/west through the block containing lots 166-167 of Assessor's Subdivision No. 3 and Block 1 of Fort Brady Addition. Thence westerly along said north alley line to the east line of lot 166, Assessors' Subdivision No. 3, thence northerly along said east property line to the north line of Water Street, thence westerly along said north line to the east line of Ashmun Street extended, thence northerly along said east line extended to the St. Mary's River, thence westerly along the south shore of the St. Mary's River to the west line of Magazine Street extended, thence south along said west line of Magazine Street extended to a point lying directly west of the southwest corner of Lot 398, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence east to said southwest corner of Lot 398, thence east 170.7 feet along the south lines of said Lot 398 and Lot 397, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, to the southeast corner of said Lot 397, thence north along the east line of Lot 397 to a point 63.3 feet north of the southeast corner of said Lot 397, thence 49 feet east to a point in the east line of Lot 386, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, located 200 feet south of the northeast corner of said Lot 386, thence south to a point 260 feet south of the northwest corner of Lot 385, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence east 92 feet to a point 181 feet north of the southwest corner of Lot 382, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence east 143.4 feet along the north lines of Lots 383, 379, and 378, Assessors Subdivision No.8, to the northeast corner of said Lot 378, thence south 48 feet along the east line of Lot 378 to a point 90 feet north of the southeast corner of said Lot 378, thence 105.5 feet east to a point in the east line of Lot 375, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, located 90 feet north of the southeast corner of said Lot 375, thence north 134 feet along the east line of said Lot 375 to a point in the east line of said Lot 375 224 feet north of its southeast corner, thence east 65.3 feet along the north line of Lot 5, Great Lakes Addition, to the northeast corner of said Lot 5, thence north 27 feet to along the west line of the Pine Court right-of-way to the terminus of the west line of said right-of-way, thence east 9.8 feet to the east line of Lot 4, Great Lakes Addition, thence north 35 feet along said east line of Lot 4 to the northeast corner of said Lot 4, thence west 17.8 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 373, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence north 177 feet along the east line of said Lot 373 to the southwest corner of Lot 371, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence east along the south line of said Lot 371 to the northeast corner of Lot 372, Assessors Subdivision No. 8, thence south 58.3 feet along the east line of said Lot 372 to the southwest corner of Lot 5, John G. Ferris' Addition, thence east 92.5 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 5, thence east 50 feet across the Ferris Street right-of-way to the southwest corner of Lot 6, John G. Ferris' Addition, thence east 92.5 feet along the south line of said Lot 6 to the southeast corner of said Lot 6, thence north 1.3 feet along the east line of said Lot 6 to the southwest corner of Lot 433, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence east 38.3 feet along the south line of said Lot 433 to a point 185.5 feet south of the northeast corner of said Lot 433, thence south 78.3 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 432, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence west 38.3 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 428, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence south 280 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 428 thence east 128.7 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 428, thence north 256.1 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 426, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence east 24 feet along the south line of said Lot 426 to the southeast corner of said Lot 426, thence north 80 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot 426, thence west 24 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 426, thence north 5 feet along the east line of Lot 430, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence east 60 feet along the north line of Lot 425, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence south 153.3 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 423, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence east 131.7 feet along the south line of said Lot 423 to a point 132 feet north of the southwest corner of Lot 419, Assessors Subdivision No. 9, thence east 223.3 feet to the west line of Governor Osborn Boulevard. Thence southerly along west line of Governor Osborn Boulevard to the south line of Spruce Street, thence easterly along the south line of Spruce Street to the west line of Osborn Boulevard, thence southerly along the west line of Osborn Boulevard to a point 110 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Peck Street, thence easterly a distance of approximately 200 feet to a point along the south property line of lot 17 of R. H. Carleton's Subdivision of PLC No. 90, 80 feet easterly of the west property line of said lot 17, thence north 350 feet to the north line of lot 23 of R. H. Carleton's Subdivision of PLC No. 90, to a point that is 80 feet easterly of the west property line of said lot, thence westerly along said north property line of lot 23 to the east property line of Division, thence north along the east property line of Division to the North right-of-way boundary of Spruce Street, thence westerly along the north line of Spruce Street to the east line of Governor Osborn Boulevard, thence northerly along the east line of Governor Osborn Boulevard to the centerline of Ridge Street. Thence easterly along said centerline of Ridge Street 146 feet, thence south along the west property line of the Fire Hall parking lot to the north line of Arlington Street, thence east along the north line of Arlington Street to the west line of the Fire hall Parking lot, thence north along this line to the centerline of Ridge Street, thence easterly along this line to a point where this line becomes the centerline of Maple Street, continuing easterly along said centerline to the Point of Beginning. 
(b)  The development plan and tax increment financing plan for the City of Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Area No. Two provides that the method of financing the development is feasible, and the downtown development authority has ability to arrange the necessary financing; that the proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of the act; that the land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of the development plan and the act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner; that the development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city; that public services are adequate to protect the area; and that any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities proposed are reasonably necessary for the development and for the city. 
(c)  Improvements. Each of the improvements explained below is considered important to the welfare of downtown Sault Ste. Marie. Explanations of the general types of improvements to be constructed are followed by a detailed table which indicates the location, estimated cost, and priority level of the specific projects. The location description shows the rough area of a project, while the specific parcels to be affected are indicated on Maps 4 through 7. The estimated cost figures are based on preliminary evaluation of the proposed projects [by] the city planning and development department. 
    Every project is assigned to one (1) of four (4) priority levels. Projects assigned a higher priority (level one being higher than level two) are expected to be undertaken before lower priority projects are begun. Each priority level also has an estimated construction time frame. Level one corresponds to the first two (2) years of the plan, level two represents the next four (4) years, level three matches the next nine (9) years, and level four encompasses the last five (5) years of the plan. These time frames indicate when the DDA estimates the projects in the levels can be constructed. 
    It is recognized that circumstances may alter actual construction dates and affect the order in which projects may be undertaken. The DDA may undertake any project contained within the plan at any time regardless of the priority level when the DDA determines it is in the best interest of the plan to do so. However, no project can be added or deleted without amending the plan, nor can the life of the plan extend beyond twenty (20) years. 
    It is also recognized that circumstances may require some variation in the precise location of a project or improvement. Some variation in the exact location of a project or improvement is acceptable if the DDA determines that variation is still consistent with the intent of the plan. 
    The reason for organizing the improvements in this manner is that available financing may vary widely. While the downtown development authority considers its tax increment revenue projections for the development area to be reasonable, such figures are projected estimates only, and the actual amount of tax increment funds generated will vary from the projection to some degree. (See Area Two Tax Increment Financing Plan). It is recognized that the total estimated cost of the development projects is greater than the projected revenues in the tax increment financing plan. This overrun is deliberate and reflects the possibility that the authority may receive more funds than it projected and/or actual project costs may be less than anticipated. 
    In the reverse case, if sufficient funds do not become available and/or costs are greater than anticipated so that all projects cannot be completed within the twenty-year life of the plan the priority level system provides that higher priority projects will be completed first. 
    Finally, much depends on the human side of the equation. Several of the projects outlined in this plan require the help and cooperation of citizens, businesses and property owners. Such cooperation will affect the timetable and details of the projects. The DDA shall make every effort to complete the plan as outlined, although actual circumstances may dictate otherwise. In such an event, the development plan shall be amended as necessary. (Grounds for amending the plan include: dropping a project from the development plan, adding new projects, or substantially altering the nature or the location of a project. All amendments require city commission approval.) 
(d)  The duration of the plan shall be twenty (20) years from the date of the amended Ordinance No. 491-06 adopted October 16, 2006, or until such time that all planned improvements are completed, whichever comes first. 
(e)  Transactions between city and authority. It is the general intent of the plan that any property acquired and improvements completed as a result of the plan will become the property of the city. The city will retain full control of all improvements unless it chooses to make arrangements with other parties. The DDA, as a public entity created by the city with its own authority to own land and other property, may elect to be the purchasing or holding party. Subsequent arrangements regarding ownership of such acquired lands and facilities may be made by the city and the DDA as may be in the best interest of both the city and the development plan. In the event there is a dispute between the city and the DDA as to ownership of property, the decision of the city commission shall prevail and be final. 
(f)  The plan provides for the preparation of a base year assessment roll; the preparation of an annual captured assessment value assessment roll; establishment of a development fund; payment of tax increments to downtown development authority; for use of monies in the development fund; an annual report; downtown development authority budget; and an annual audit. 
(Ord. No. 259-86, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 294-88, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 374-93, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 508-09, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 554-14, § 1, 11-17-14) 
Secs. 18.5-37, 18.5-38. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRINCIPAL SHOPPING DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 452-01, §§ 1-4, adopted Dec. 17, 2001, pertained to a Principal shopping redevelopment district. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 4, §§ 18.5-39-18.5-39.2, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18.5-39. - Designated. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Act No. 120 of the Public Acts of 1961, as it may be amended from time to time, a Principal Shopping District for the city having the same and exact boundaries as the Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975 (being MCL 125.1651 et seq), is hereby designated. 
(Ord. No. 452-01, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 18.5-39.1. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the principal shopping district are described as follows: 
(1)  The Edison Sault Power Canal on the south, Bingham Avenue on the east, the St. Mary's River and Falls Canal on the north, and Osborn Boulevard on the west. All properties adjoining or abutting Bingham Avenue or Osborn Boulevard would be included in the district. The downtown development district physical boundary description is further defined as being those properties encompassed by a line drawn and commencing at a point on the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power canal and the Bingham Avenue Bridge, then a northeasterly direction along the easterly property line boundaries of those properties adjoining or abutting Bingham Avenue on the east side of the street, to the point where this line intersects the St. Mary's River; then westerly along the shores of said St. Mary's River and the St. Mary's Falls Canal to the point where a line from Osborn Boulevard, extended intersects the shore line of said St. Mary's Falls Canal; then southwesterly along the westerly property lines of those properties abutting or adjoining Osborn Boulevard to a point where Osborn Boulevard extended through the intersection with Peck Street proceeds to the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal; then along the power canal centerline in an easterly meandering direction to the point of beginning. 
(2)  The Edison Sault Power Canal on the north, Court Street from the power canal to Easterday Avenue, Easterday Avenue from Court Street to Ashmun Street then south on Ashmun Street to Adam's Avenue on the east and the south side of Pine Street on the west. All properties adjoining or abutting the west side of Court Street, the north side of Easterday Avenue or either side of Ashmun Street would be included in the district. 
(3)  Portage Avenue on the north, Magazine Street on the west, Osborn Boulevard on the east, with the southern limits being the southern property line of all properties bordering Portage Avenue between Osborn Boulevard and Magazine Street including adjacent right-of-way areas and not already included within the boundaries of the downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 452-01, § 2, 12-17-01; Ord. No. 543-13, § 1, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 18.5-39.2. - Downtown management board created; powers and duties. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 120 of the Public Acts of 1961 (being MCL 125.981 et seq), the commission hereby provides that the members of the board of the Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Authority, which manages the downtown district, shall compose the board of the Principal Shopping District for the city. 
(b)  The board of the Principal Shopping District shall exercise such powers and duties as provided and in accordingly with the terms of Act No. 120 of the Public Acts of 1961 (being MCL 125.981 et seq), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 452-01, §§ 3, 4, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 18.5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT AREA[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 262-86, adopted Dec. 15, 1986, did not specify manner of codification, but has been included herein as Div. 4, § 18.5-41, at the discretion of the editors. The full text of the airport development and tax increment financing plan is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for public inspection and distribution in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 18.5-41. - Development plan and tax increment financing plan, adoption. 
(a)  The purpose of Ordinance No. 262-86 is to approve and adopt a development plan and a tax increment financing plan, for the City of Sault Ste. Marie Airport Development Plan generally described as 8th Avenue West on the north; 24th Avenue West on the south; Meridian, Davitt Street and M-129 on the east and the general alignment of 8th Street West on the west. 
(b)  Approval and adoption of development plan and tax increment financing plan. Based on the following determinations, the development plan amendments and the tax increment financing amendments are hereby adopted: 
(1)  The amendments to the development plan and tax increment financing plan constitute a public purpose. 
(2)  The amendments to the development plan meet the requirements set forth in section 16(2) and the amendments to the tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth in section 13(1) of said act. 
(3)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(4)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of said act. 
(5)  The amount of captured assessed value estimated to result from adoption of the plan is reasonable. 
(6)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the approved master plan of the municipality. 
(7)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area. 
(8)  Any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
(c)  The plan provides for the preparation of a base year assessment roll; the preparation of an annual captured assessment value assessment roll; establishment of a development fund; payment of tax increments to tax increment financing authority; for use of monies in the development fund; an annual report; tax increment financing authority budget; and an annual audit. 
(d)  Duration of the plan. The duration of the plan shall be forty (40) years from the date of first adoption [December 15, 1986,] or until such time that all planned improvements are completed, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 262-86, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 470-03, § 2, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 564-16, § 1, 2-15-16) 
Secs. 18.5-42-18.5-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 18.5-75. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as it may be amended from time to time, the Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Authority shall be and hereby is created. 
(Ord. No. 201, 2-18-80) 
Sec. 18.5-76. - Powers and duties. 
    The Sault Ste. Marie Downtown Development Authority shall exercise such powers and duties as provided and in accordance with the terms of 197 PA 1975, being MCLA 125.1651 et seq., including, but not limited to, the definition of a development area; the origination of a development plan; and, the implementation of a development program as provided in this Act. 
(Ord. No. 201, 2-18-80) 
Sec. 18.5-77. - Boundaries designated. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of 197 PA 1975, the boundaries of the downtown district are generally described as being: 
(a)  The Edison Sault Power Canal on the south, Bingham Avenue on the east, the St. Mary's River and Falls Canal on the north, and Osborn Boulevard on the west. All properties adjoining or abutting Bingham Avenue or Osborn Boulevard would be included in the district. 
The downtown development district physical boundary description is further defined as being those properties encompassed by a line drawn and commencing at a point on the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power canal and the Bingham Avenue Bridge, then a northeasterly direction along the easterly property line boundaries of those properties adjoining or abutting Bingham Avenue on the east side of the street, to the point where this line intersects the St. Mary's River; then westerly along the shores of said St. Mary's River and the St. Mary's Falls Canal to the point where a line from Osborn Boulevard, extended intersects the shore line of said St. Mary's Falls Canal; then southwesterly along the westerly property lines of those properties abutting or adjoining Osborn Boulevard to a point where Osborn Boulevard extended through the intersection with Peck Street proceeds to the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal; then along the power canal centerline in an easterly meandering direction to the point of beginning. 
(b)  The Edison Sault Power Canal on the north, Court Street from the power canal to Easterday Avenue, Easterday Avenue from Court Street to Ashmun Street then south on Ashmun Street to Adam's Avenue on the east and the south side of Pine Street on the west. All properties adjoining or abutting the west side of Court Street, the north side of Easterday Avenue or either side of Ashmun Street would be included in the district. 
(c)  Portage Avenue on the north, Magazine Street on the west, Osborn Boulevard on the east, with the southern limits being the southern property line of all properties bordering Portage Avenue between Osborn Boulevard and Magazine Street including adjacent right-of-way areas and not already included within the boundaries of the downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 201, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 508-09, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 541-13, 9-3-13) 
Chapter 19 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Presence of special police officer required at public dance halls and dances, § 6-36; payment for extraordinary police protection at carnivals, circuses and other similar exhibitions, § 6-62; duty of police to require peddlers to produce a license, § 9-47; duty of police to ask solicitors and canvassers for a license, § 9-75; miscellaneous offenses and provisions, Ch. 16; false personation of public officers, § 16-8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; chief of police approval required for transitory shows and exhibitions, § 6-104. 

Sec. 19-16. - Chief of police. 
(a)  The police department shall be headed by the chief of police, who shall be the commanding officer of the police force. The chief of police shall direct the police work of the city and be responsible for the enforcement of law and order. 
(b)  The police chief shall assign officers to each division of the department, the supervisors of which shall be responsible for the assignment of the officers in such manner as will afford the maximum police service. Reassignment from one division to another shall be made only by the police chief. 
(c)  The police chief shall designate a competent officer of the department to act as police instructor, who shall conduct such schools of instruction as are approved by the police chief. The police chief shall also coordinate the department's public relations policies. 
(d)  The police chief shall have authority, after determining the necessity therefor, to designate special police officers to do special duty at any fixed place at the expense of the person for whom such duty is performed. Persons so appointed shall possess qualifications satisfactory to the police chief and shall conform to and be subject to the chief's orders and the rules and regulations of the department. No such appointment shall become effective until a corporate surety bond has been filed with the city clerk in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned to pay any damages resulting from the failure of the appointee properly to perform such appointee's duties. The commission of any special policeman may be revoked at the discretion of the police chief. 
(Code 1957, § 2-2.01) 
Sec. 19-17. - Divisions. 
    The chief of police shall be responsible for and shall have authority to divide the department into such divisions, headed by such personnel as the chief may deem necessary for the efficient functioning of the department. 
(Code 1957, § 2-2.02) 
Sec. 19-18. - Auxiliary police corps. 
(a)  An auxiliary police corps, hereinafter called corps, is hereby established, composed of persons appointed by the chief of police, hereinafter called the chief. 
(b)  The chief shall have complete authority and control over the corps. The chief may appoint as members thereof any persons whom the chief deems to be qualified, and may reject any application for membership. The chief may provide for the training of candidates for membership and for the further training of members. 
(c)  No person shall become a member of the corps until such person has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the chief. When so qualified and selected, such person shall then be sworn in by the chief or by the chief's representative as a member of the corps. 
(d)  The duties of the corps, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order whenever and wherever its services are required. The chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the corps, including the fixing of specific duties of its members and the providing for the maintenance of discipline. The chief may change such orders from time to time. 
(e)  An identification card, badge and cap, and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member, who shall carry the card at all times. Each member shall surrender all city property issued to such member upon the termination of membership. 
(f)  The membership of any person in the corps may be terminated at the discretion of the chief at any time, and such member may resign from the corps upon notifying the chief in writing of such person's resignation. The personnel regulations of the city manager applicable to full-time, regular city employees shall not be applicable to the corps. 
(g)  No member of the corps shall carry any firearm until such person has qualified for and received a gun permit and then only upon necessity as determined by the chief and the city manager. 
(h)  A member of the corps, when on duty as assigned by the chief, shall have the authority to direct traffic and shall have no other powers. All powers are subject to any limitations which the chief may impose. 
(i)  The chief may, by order, diminish or expand the membership of the corps. 
(j)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person not a member of the corps: 
(1)  To wear, carry or display a corps identification card, badge, cap or insignia; or 
(2)  In any manner to represent themselves to be connected with the corps. 
(k)  The badge and cap may be worn only while on duty as assigned by the chief. 
(l)  Each member of the corps, while acting under the direction of the chief, shall be deemed to be an employee of the city and shall be entitled to receive workmen's compensation from the city in accordance with the provisions of the workmen's compensation law of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 2-2.03; Ord. No. 546-14, 2-3-14) 
Chapter 20 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389-94, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, replaced and updated Ch. 20, §§ 20-1-20-90, to read as herein set out. Previously, Ch. 20 pertained to signs and derived from the Code of 1957; Ord. No. 25, adopted June 1, 1964; and Ord. No. 376-93, adopted Aug. 16, 1993. It should also be noted that numerous sections bore no history note. 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate signs, § 2.3(p). 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; businesses and business regulations, Ch. 9; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; street name signs in subdivisions, § 23-67; zoning regulation of signs, App. A, § 10-1.17(1710). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-1. - Preamble. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and controls over the display of signs in the City of Sault Ste. Marie so as to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people, prevent the obstruction of vision or confusion or misleading of traffic, provide for reasonable uniformity in advertising or sign display by class of use or zoning district and to promote the city's interest in enhancing property values and the attractive appearance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-2. - Scope. 
    This chapter shall regulate the erection and maintenance of all signs in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions will apply in the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Abandoned sign. A sign which was erected on property in conjunction with a particular use which has been discontinued for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or more, or a sign the content of which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. 
    Address sign. A sign identifying a numerical designation commonly used to indicate the location of a building on a street. 
    Awning. A movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
    Billboard. A sign structure designed or intended to be used for posting, painting or otherwise affixing information advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located. A billboard may or may not have more than one face on the same structure. 
    Canopy. A permanently-roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, which may be wholly supported by a building or may [be] wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extended from the ground. 
    Clearance. The vertical distance from the lowest part of the sign face to the average ground level at the base of the sign. 
    Development entry sign. A sign identifying the name of a residential or industrial group of properties that constitute a unified development such as a subdivision. 
    Directional sign. A sign whose content identifies the entrances and exits of the premises. 
    Directory sign. A sign whose contents indicate the names of businesses and/or related customer services and facilities. 
    Electronic message sign. An electrical sign whose information can be changed or altered on a display composed of illuminated changeable segments. 
    Flashing sign. A lighted or electrical sign which emits light in sudden intermittent bursts. 
    Freestanding sign (column sign, pole sign). A sign solely supported by poles or braces in the ground. 
    Ground sign. A sign anchored to the ground similar to a freestanding sign but which has a monolithic or substantially uniform columnar line from grade to top of sign. 
    Height of sign. The vertical distance between the ground level at the base of the sign and the uppermost extremity of a sign. 
    Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem or decal providing incidental information about the use or service, such as credit card signs or a sign indicating hours of business. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure projecting over an entrance to a building. 
    Marquee sign. A sign attached to a marquee, canopy or awning. 
    Nameplate A non-electric on-premises identification sign providing only the name, address and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Non-conforming sign. A sign legally erected or displayed prior to the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto which does not conform with the standards of this chapter. 
    Off-premises sign (non-accessory sign). A sign which is located on property and transmits a message pertaining to a product, use, occupancy or function which is not located on the same property as the sign. 
    On-premises sign (accessory sign). A sign which identifies the occupant of the premises or relates to the use, business, or profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold, offered, or provided on the premises. 
    Painted wall sign. A sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the surface of a wall. 
    Portable sign. A sign not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to the ground or a structure on the lot it occupies; including trailered signs, tripod signs, and sandwich board signs. 
    Premises. Contiguous real property, whether or not titled or recorded as one (1) or more than one (1) property description, held under common ownership. 
    Projecting sign (overhanging sign). A sign which is attached to and projects at approximately an angle of ninety (90) degrees from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign. 
    Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building or, in the case of a building with a mansard roof, a sign which is above the top edge line of the mansard roof. 
    Temporary sign. A sign intended to be erected or displayed for a limited period of time. 
    Sign. Any device, structure, fixture or panel which is displayed with words, letters, figures, emblems, symbols or designs thereon for the purpose of identifying, providing directions, or advertising any establishment, product, goods or services and which is clearly intended to be visible from the exterior of a building. 
    Wall sign (flat sign). A sign which is attached directly to a building wall or dropped roof and which does not extend more than twelve (12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. 
    Window sign. A non-temporary sign which is applied, affixed or attached to the interior or exterior of any building window. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-4. - Measurement of sign area. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, sign area shall be the computed area of the background upon which the lettering, insignia or other devices are placed, such background including any frame or other materials or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. Supporting structures shall not be included in the area computation unless utilized as part of the total display area. For signs having two (2) sides, including signs placed back to back or in a "V" shape not exceeding forty-five (45) degrees at the apex of the "V" when viewed from above, the maximum display area shall be permitted on both sides, and the total area of one (1) side shall be deemed to be the total sign area. 
(1)  Where the display area is the face of a building or a sign that has open spaces between the letters or insignia, the total sign area shall be measured by multiplying the height of the letters or symbols by the distance between the outer edges of the two (2) furthermost letters or symbols. 
(2)  Where a sign includes an arch or decorative extension outside of the sign face, such arch, extension or similar sign decoration shall be deemed to be part of the total sign area, and shall be calculated as fifty (50) percent of the area resulting from multiplying the total extent of the extension from the main sign face by the distance between the outer edges of the furthest extensions (including any open spaces between the extensions). 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-5. - Signs exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Signs erected by the state, county or city giving directions to streets, places of interest, controlling traffic, establishing conditions of use for streets or public areas, identifying streets or highways, public entry signs, or signs required to be maintained or posted by law, governmental order, rule or regulation. 
(2)  Governmental use signs erected by governmental agencies to identify or designate hours of activity or conditions of use for parking lots, recreational areas, parks, governmental buildings or other public spaces. 
(3)  Historical or similar signs designating sites or buildings recognized by city, state or federal historical agencies, including historic landmarks, memorial plaques, cornerstones, or names of buildings when cut in the masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other similar material. 
(4)  Essential service signs denoting utility lines, railroad lines, hazards or precautions. 
(5)  Public bulletin boards, or message boards or informational locator signs erected by a public agency. 
(6)  Signs erected by the city or a non-profit organization sponsoring an approved community event on city property. 
(7)  House numbers identifying the address of a parcel of land or building. 
(8)  Nameplates displaying the name of the occupant of a building not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. 
(9)  Placards posted to control or prohibit hunting or trespassing not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. 
(10)  Flags or emblems of governmental, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations. 
(11)  Temporary window signs. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-6. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall not be permitted or located within the city: 
(1)  Any sign erected, constructed or placed within a public right-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Any sign which is not permitted by, or does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard or detriment to traffic safety by reason of its size, location, context, coloring or manner of illumination; by obstruction of vision of drivers at any intersection, driveway or crosswalk; by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on a public street; by imitating or simulating any traffic control sign or device; or by confusing or misleading traffic. 
(4)  Any sign which obstructs ingress or egress from a door, window, fire escape or other entrance or exitway. 
(5)  Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or abandonment, is not kept in good repair, or is likely to cause electrical shocks to persons likely to come into contact with it. 
(6)  Any sign which is erected, painted or maintained on any tree, rock or other natural feature: fence, fence post, utility pole, bench, flower box or perimeter or privacy wall, except for city, state, county or utility company signs. 
(7)  Any sign on a motor vehicle, trailer or other wheeled vehicle which is parked for the purpose of advertising a business, product or service. 
(8)  Trailered, tripod, sandwich board and other portable business signs except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(9)  Any sign which has any visible moving parts or visible motion. This section does not prohibit barber poles or a sign which rotates on a vertical axis. 
(10)  Signs incorporating any flashing, moving or animated lights other than electronic message signs. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-7. - Signs in or over a public right-of-way. 
    No sign shall be placed within or project over a public right-of-way except as set forth below: 
(1)  Any sign erected by the state, county or city to control traffic or to provide directions to streets, places of interest, public or institutional facilities, or other public purposes as approved by the city. 
(2)  Essential service signs denoting utility lines, railroad lines, hazards or precautions. 
(3)  Projecting signs or the sign face of a freestanding sign as provided for in this chapter provided that the lowest part of such sign is no nearer the ground elevation than nine (9) feet. 
(4)  Awnings. Canopies or marquees overhanging a public sidewalk, with or without a sign face, provided that awnings have no less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet of clearance, and canopies and marquees have no less than nine (9) feet of clearance, between the lowest projection of the awning, canopy or marquee and the surface of the public sidewalk. 
(5)  Banners overhanging a right-of-way are permitted by non-profit organizations and service groups advertising community special events occurring in the city, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-8. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs may be erected in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Sale, rent or lease signs erected to announce the sale or rental of property on which the signs are located, provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area for one- and two-family lots and buildings, thirty-two (32) square feet for subdivision developments containing a minimum of six (6) residential lots advertising building lots or dwellings for sale, thirty-two (32) square feet for multi-family or non-residential properties of one (1) acre or larger in size, and sixteen (16) square feet for all other properties. 
(2)  One (1) construction sign, not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in area identifying the project, its owners, the architect, engineer, contractors, development agencies and financial institutions, etc., is permitted on the site under construction. 
(3)  Temporary political signs or signs in connection with an election provided that such signs be removed within ten (10) days following that election day, and provided further that the maximum size for such signs be limited to eight (8) square feet for all residential zoning districts and thirty-two (32) square feet for all other zoning districts. 
(4)  One (1) sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, is permitted for a garage, rummage or estate sale or similar event, provided such sign is on the site of the sale, and provided that such sign may be erected and maintained for a period of not more than seven (7) days in any one ninety-day period. 
(5)  On-site banners, pennants, spinners, streamers, string lights and the like may be permitted in connection with commercial promotional events for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any ninety-day period. Garlands, string lights and other related Christmas decorations are not limited or restricted by this provision. 
(6)  One (1) sign, not exceeding thirty-two (32) feet in area, identifying or announcing a single celebration, project or endeavor for any charitable, educational or religious institution, located entirely within the premises of that institution, is permitted for a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 462-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Secs. 20-9-20-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-20. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-21. - Residential district signs. 
    Accessory signs for legally permitted uses in the RSV, R-I, R-IA, R-2, RM-1, RM-2 and R-3 zoning districts are permitted and regulated as follows, subject to the issuance of a sign permit as set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  For home occupations permitted in a residential district, one (1) non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
(2)  For tourist homes, tourist rooms or nursery schools, one (1) sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area nor six (6) feet in height, provided that such sign may have exterior illumination when such illumination is screened from abutting residences. No sign may be erected nearer the front lot line than one-half (1/2) of the required front yard setback nor nearer the side lot line than the side yard setback. 
(3)  For permanent development entry signs to a residential subdivision, one (1) ground sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, provided that such sign may have exterior illumination when such illumination is screened from abutting residences. 
(4)  For an apartment complex of four (4) or more units, or a fraternity or sorority house recognized by Lake Superior State University, one (1) identification sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area, provided such sign may have exterior illumination when such illumination is screened from abutting residences. 
(5)  For schools, churches, golf courses, hospitals, convalescent homes, funeral homes, museums, art galleries, airports and private and institutional recreation areas as may be permitted in one (1) or more of the residential districts, one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet, provided such sign may have interior illumination, or exterior illumination when such illumination is screened from abutting residences. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-22. - Commercial district signs. 
    Accessory signs for legally permitted uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3, T, O-S or P zoning districts are permitted and regulated as follows subject to the issuance of a sign permit as set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Number and type of signs: Each premises occupied by a business in a business zoning district is permitted the following signs, subject to the conditions and regulations controlling each type of sign: 
a.  All roof, marquee, canopy, projecting, window, nameplate and/or painted signs. 
b.  One (1) ground or freestanding sign. 
c.  Directional signs adjacent to each entrance or exit to a parking lot. 
d.  One (1) portable sign on a temporary basis. 
e.  Incidental signs. 
(2)  Wall, roof, marquee, canopy, projecting, window, nameplate and/or painted signs: 
a.  Maximum sign area for the total of all wall, roof, and/or painted signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet for each front foot of building face on a public street. In the B-2 district, no projecting sign shall exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area. 
b.  For roof signs, the maximum elevation above the roof or parapet for flat roofs, or above the eave for sloping roofs is four (4) feet. All roof signs shall be parallel to the face of the building. 
c.  The maximum elevation of the top of any sign above ground level shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
d.  A building fronting on more than one (1) public street may erect and maintain signs totalling three (3) square feet for each front foot of building face on each street, provided each building face is limited to a maximum of three (3) square feet of sign for each front foot of building facing such street. 
e.  Signs may be erected on any building wall, subject to the total maximum sign area for the building and for any one (1) wall as set forth herein. 
f.  No projecting sign, marquee, canopy or awning shall project horizontally from the face of a building for a distance greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the width of a sidewalk it overhangs, or four (4) feet in the B-2 district, ten (10) feet in all other districts, whichever is less, and must be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the edge of the travelled way or road shoulder; provided that in cases where street trees have been planted or are planned to be planted by the city, no signs shall extend within a five-foot radius from the trunk of the tree. 
g.  No projecting sign, marquee, canopy or awning shall project horizontally from the face of a building for a distance greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the width of a sidewalk it overhangs, or ten (10) feet, whichever is less, and must be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the edge of the travelled way or road shoulder; provided that in cases where street trees have been planted or are planned to be planted by the city, no such signs shall extend within a five-foot radius from the trunk of the tree. 
(3)  Ground or freestanding signs: 
a.  The maximum size of a ground or freestanding sign shall be as follows: 
1.  For properties located in the B-1, O-S or P districts, a maximum size of sixty (60) square feet in sign area. 
2.  For properties located in the B-2, B-3 or T districts, unless otherwise provided, and businesses located in an industrial district, a maximum size of one hundred (100) square feet in sign area. 
3.  For properties located in the B-3 district and fronting on the I-75 business spur between the centerline of 16th Avenue and the I-75/Three Mile Road interchange, or on Three Mile Road between the I-75/Three Mile Road interchange and 14th Street West, or abutting the I-75 freeway, a maximum size of one hundred thirty-two (132) square feet in sign area for the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of building floor area, and an additional one (1) square foot for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of retail building floor area up to a maximum of three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
b.  A ground or freestanding sign shall not be nearer than three (3) feet from any property line. 
c.  Not more than one (1) ground projecting or freestanding sign may be erected accessory to any building, structure or shopping center regardless of the number of separate parties, tenants or uses contained therein on a single property or development, provided, however, where the property or development abuts two (2) streets, one (1) ground or freestanding sign is permitted for each such street frontage. 
d.  No ground or freestanding sign having a surface area of sixty (60) square feet or greater shall be erected within one hundred fifty (150) feet of another ground or freestanding sign having a surface area of sixty (60) square feet or greater on the same side of the street. 
e.  No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height provided that in the case of a building, structure or shopping center with a total ground floor building floor area of one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet or more, the freestanding sign shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(4)  Directional signs: 
a.  Directional signs or symbols pertaining to safety or movement on private property, such as "entrance," "exit," and the like, are permitted subject to a maximum size of six (6) square feet per sign. 
b.  Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are permitted. 
(5)  Portable signs: 
a.  One (1) portable sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, may be placed for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any ninety-day period. 
b.  A portable sign must be located on the commercial property and not interfere with any vision clearance nor cause any traffic hazard. 
c.  The portable sign shall not use flashing lights, flashing or moving arrows, or other intermittent lighting. 
(6)  Incidental signs: 
a.  Incidental signs are permitted which do not exceed two (2) square feet per sign which contain only noncommercial messages including designation of restrooms, telephone location and direction of door openings. 
b.  Gasoline service stations may display customary lettering or other insignia on a gasoline pump not exceeding a total of three (3) square feet per pump. Directional signs or lettering displayed over entrance doors or bays such as "lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic on duty" or the like are permitted, provided that the total area of each such sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
c.  Credit card signs. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 510-09, § 1, 9-21-09) 
Sec. 20-23. - Industrial district signs. 
    Accessory signs for legally permitted uses in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts are permitted and regulated as follows, subject to the issuance of a sign permit as set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Industrial uses: 
a.  Total area for wall, marquee, canopy, nameplate and/or painted signs, is a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area for each building face fronting on a public street. Signs may be erected on any building wall subject to the total maximum sign area for the building and for any one (1) wall as set forth herein. 
b.  One (1) ground or freestanding sign with a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet located no nearer than three (3) feet from any property line, nor higher than thirty (30) feet. 
c.  Directional signs or symbols pertaining to safety or movement on the property, such as "entrance," "exit," "loading," "receiving" and the like, are permitted subject to a maximum size of six (6) square feet per sign. 
(2)  Business uses in an industrial district: 
Business uses shall conform to the provisions of section 20-22. "Commercial district signs." 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-24. - Non-accessory signs and billboards. 
    Billboards are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject to the following conditions, and subject to the issuance of a sign permit as provided in this chapter: 
(1)  For properties fronting on the I-75 Freeway between the International Bridge and Three Mile Road, no billboard shall exceed a sign area of six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet nor exceed a height of forty (40) feet. 
(2)  For all other properties, no billboard shall exceed a sign area of three hundred (300) square feet nor exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  No billboard shall be located nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to any residential zoning district. 
(4)  No billboard shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet to the nearest existing billboard on the same side of the street. 
(5)  No billboard shall be located nearer than three (3) feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-25. - Illumination. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, signs may be provided with interior or exterior illumination subject to the following: 
(1)  No illumination shall be permitted which casts glare upon any portion of any residential premises or residential zoning district. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall apply not only to exterior signs, but also to interior signs which are designed or placed to be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(3)  No sign shall contain any moving, flashing or animated lights except electronic message signs. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-26. - Special cases. 
(a)  Signs utilizing unusual foundations or mountings (such as vehicles or equipment), or which are attached to or painted on such unusual structures or mountings, may be permitted subject to the decision of the city manager and based on his findings that such sign meets the general intent and the size, area, height and location criteria established for more conventional signs in the same zoning district, and that such sign will not impair the property values of adjacent parcels nor adversely affect the general health, safety and public welfare of the community. The manager may impose such conditions on any approval of such a sign as he deems necessary, to insure reasonable equivalence with more conventional signs. 
(b)  In cases where more than one (1) business utilizes a common vehicular entrance or exit and/or traffic control and safety are affected, the city manager may authorize one (1) or more directional signs, subject to a maximum of six (6) square feet per sign, even though such sign or signs may be off-premise to the property it is directing to. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the sign size limitations in section 20-22(c) "Commercial district signs", the city manager may permit an increase in the maximum size of a freestanding sign to one hundred fifty (150) square feet for freeway service uses such as restaurants, motels, gasoline service stations, duty-free shops and the like where such use either abuts or is within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the centerline of the freeway and such sign would be visible from the freeway. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 20-27-20-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXISTING SIGNS 

Sec. 20-30. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Signs lawfully erected prior to adoption of this chapter which do not meet the standards of this chapter may be continued if properly repaired and maintained as provided in this chapter and continue to be in conformance with other city ordinances. Such signs are nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Any nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged, reworded, redesigned or altered in any way except to bring it into conformity with the provisions of this chapter, provided that a business which continues in the same location providing substantially the same services or products as the business to which the nonconforming sign is accessory, may alter such nonconforming sign to reflect the changed name of the business. Such alteration may only change the face of the sign and may not replace any structural members holding, anchoring or framing the face. 
(2)  Any such sign which has been destroyed or damaged to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of the sign at the time of the destruction or damage, shall not be repaired or replaced except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-31. - Unsafe and unlawful signs. 
    When any sign becomes unsecured, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the owners thereof or the person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice of the administrating official, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within not more than ten (10) days, make such sign safe, eliminate the dangerous condition, or shall remove it. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-32. - Abandoned signs. 
    An abandoned sign, including any support pole, mounting base, mounting brackets, etc., must be removed by the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-33. - Maintenance of signs. 
    The owner of any sign shall ensure that such sign be kept in good repair and shall provide that such sign is properly painted or otherwise cleaned and washed, and that all parts and supports of said sign be cleaned or painted, unless the same are galvanized or treated to prevent rust. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 20-34-20-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN ERECTOR LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 20-40. - Chapter 14 applicable. 
    The provisions of chapter 14, insofar as the same may be applicable and not in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-41. - Sign erector's license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting, altering or removing, or installing signs for which permits are required by this chapter without first obtaining a license therefor and paying the fee required by section 14-6, provided, however, that a sign erectors's license shall not be required for the following signs: 
(1)  Painted wall signs; 
(2)  Interior window signs; 
(3)  Portable signs; 
(4)  Non-electric directional signs; 
(5)  Non-electric wall signs having a sign area of sixteen (16) square feet or less; and/or 
(6)  Non-electric ground or freestanding signs having a sign area of sixteen (16) square feet or less and an overall height of six (6) feet or less. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-42. - Scope. 
    The license to engage in the business of erecting signs shall be known as a sign erector's license and shall only be issued to those persons who show sufficient knowledge and experience to satisfy the building department as to their ability to erect signs in a safe and substantial manner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-43. - Examination, approval. 
    No license shall be issued under this article until such applicant, or the partners, proprietors or officer in charge where the applicant is other than an individual, shall have been examined by the chief inspector as to the applicant's qualifications, and the chief inspector has approved such qualifications in writing. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-44. - Proof of insurance. 
    No sign erector's license shall be issued until the applicant provides proof of insurance, naming the city as additionally insured. The types and limits of such coverage shall be determined by the city clerk. The city shall be held harmless from any costs, damages or expense of any kind whatsoever which may be suffered by the city, or which may be put to, or which may accrue against it by charging to or recovering from the city from or by reason of the granting of the permission to erect such signs, or by reason of any acts or things done under or by the authorizing or permission granted to erect such signs in the city, or by reason of the negligence, failure or refusal of any person to comply with all the provisions of this chapter applicable to such signs. At any time the insurance of any sign erector lapses, the sign erector's license automatically becomes invalid or void. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-45. - Changes. 
    Holders of a sign erector's license shall notify the building department of any change in address and where a firm or corporation, of any change in ownership or management. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 20-46-20-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 20-50. - Application of city building code. 
    In the absence of provisions governing details of construction of signs in this chapter, the provisions of the applicable standards in the building codes adopted by or applying to construction in the city (state construction code, existing structures code, mechanical code, and electrical code) shall apply. Unless otherwise provided, in those instances where there is a conflict between construction requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-51. - Protection of public in erection or removal; permit to barricade street. 
    Before starting the erection or removal of any sign erected upon or over a street, alley, sidewalk or public place, or which involves the use of a street, alley, sidewalk or public place to achieve access to the sign, the sign erector shall protect the public from possible danger in connection with such sign work by adequately barricading the portion of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place to be used in erecting or removing such sign. A permit for such work in the public right-of-way, including any barricading, shall first be obtained from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 20-52-20-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-60. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city manager or by such department of the city as he may delegate for such work, such department head to be the administrating official of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-61. - Permits required. 
    Except as provided in section 20-41, no permit for the erection or alteration of a permanent sign shall be issued to any person who is not a licensed sign erector under this chapter. No person shall erect or alter any sign without first obtaining a permit from the administrating official, except that no permit shall be required for the erection or alteration of the following types of signs: 
(1)  Signs exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Temporary signs as enumerated in section 20-8, provided that such signs are nonetheless required to meet the provisions of this chapter as set forth in section 20-8 "Temporary signs." 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-62. - Application. 
    Application for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the administrating official and shall contain or be accompanied by such plans, drawings and specifications as are necessary to advise the administrating official of the type, size, shape, location, construction and materials of the proposed sign and the building, structure or premises upon which it is to be placed. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-63. - Fees. 
    A fee as established from time to time by the city commission, shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-64. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge, alter, move or convert any sign in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6 of the general provisions of the city Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health and safety shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be removed by the administrating official at the expense of the owner of the sign and assessed under the provisions of the city Code; and provided further, that any other sign unlawfully erected, altered, or maintained may be removed by the administrating official at the expense of the sign owner and assessed under the provisions of the city Code after said sign owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign and has refused to do so without providing justification for so refusing at a hearing to be held by the administrating official. The city attorney may apply to a court of appropriate jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of a sign in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties prescribed in paragraph (a), any sign erected in violation of this chapter in a public right-of-way may be removed by the administrating official and stored in a safe location for at least seventy-two (72) hours. During this period of time the owner of the sign may obtain his sign upon request and payment of a fee as established by the city commission for each sign to cover the costs of removal and storage. After seventy-two (72) hours, the administrating official may dispose of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 389-94, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-65. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order from the administrating official, may appeal to the city manager. Appeals shall be taken within ten (10) days after the occurrence of the event which forms the basis for the appeal, by filing in writing a request for appeal. Upon a finding of just cause resulting from unique circumstances affecting the property, development, or sign, the city manager may permit a variance to the strict provisions of this chapter, provided that: 
(1)  The variance would not be contrary to the public interest or general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)  The variance does not adversely affect properties in the immediate vicinity of the proposed sign, and 
(3)  The variance is not contrary to a zoning ordinance provision. 
Any such order permitting or denying the request may be appealed to the city commission, such appeal to be filed in writing within ten (10) days after the decision of the city manager. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
Chapter 21 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, Ch. 10; detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance, § 10.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Cost shall include the expense of survey, spreading of roll, notice, advertising, printing, financing, legal, engineering, construction and condemnation, and all other costs incidental to the making of improvements. 
    Engineer shall mean the city engineer unless an outside engineer is specifically employed for the work on an improvement in which case the word "engineer" shall mean the person so employed. 
    Improvement shall mean any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom. 
    Lot or parcel of land shall mean any subdivision lot or portion thereof as officially platted or any unplatted parcel of land as may be described upon any official records. 
    Owner shall mean the last-recorded titleholder of any lot or parcel of land, or the person whose name is last listed upon the city tax roll as owner of a certain piece or parcel of land. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4-1.01-4-1.05) 
Secs. 21-2-21-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY PETITIONS 

Sec. 21-16. - Receipt by city commission. 
    The commission, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented; but in either event, such petition shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.06) 
Sec. 21-17. - Contents. 
    All advisory petitions filed under this article shall be addressed to the commission and contain a brief description of the improvement sought to be made or the nuisance or hazard sought to be abated and shall be signed by property owners only, whose signatures shall be followed by a brief description of the property owned by them. The signatures on such petitions shall be verified by the oath of one or more of the circulators of such petition, before filing. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.07) 
Sec. 21-18. - Filing. 
    Advisory petitions under this article shall be filed with the clerk, who shall check them for signatures and correctness; and if they are found to be in order, the clerk shall refer them to the manager who shall present them to the commission at its next regular or special meeting called for that purpose, together with such manager's recommendations. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.08) 
Secs. 21-19-21-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 21-30. - Initiatory resolution. 
    When, by the provisions of the Charter and the laws of the state, the commission shall have power to make a public improvement by special assessment, they shall, by resolution, set forth the improvement intended to be made and direct the manager to prepare a report, with the assistance of the engineer, containing any information they may request concerning such improvement. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.09) 
Sec. 21-31. - Plans and specifications. 
    The city manager, pursuant to section 21-30, shall request the engineer to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the improvement to be made, an estimate of the life of the improvement and of the cost thereof, and plats of the lands affected thereby, and such other information as the commission may have requested. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.10) 
Sec. 21-32. - Report of manager. 
    The city manager shall prepare a report and include in it a schedule of all property affected by the proposed improvement under section 21-30, listing the assessed valuation, tax delinquencies, whether land is vacant or improved, and pertinent information on such parcels as are owned by public authorities, and such other information as the commission may have requested, and shall present it to the commission along with the plans and specifications of the engineer, together with such manager's recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city; the number of installments in which the assessment should be spread and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.11) 
Sec. 21-33. - Notice of hearing. 
    After the filing of the report and plans and specifications referred to in this article, a public hearing shall be held before the commission, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice of the time and place thereof has been published and sent by the clerk by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.12) 
Sec. 21-34. - Public hearing. 
    At the time and place specified in the notice for the public hearing under section 21-33, the commission shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the commission and the commission may make any changes in the proposed work or assessment which shall seem reasonable or proper in view of any objections, or for any other reason which may appear to be for the best interests of the city; provided that if the improvements intended to be made are enlarged upon or additions made to the district to be assessed, the same shall not be done until after another hearing is held pursuant to notice as required for original hearings. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.13) 
Sec. 21-35. - Resolution of determination. 
    After the public hearing under section 21-34, the commission may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution the commission shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement, determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the commission's determination, and designate the name by which such assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.14) 
Sec. 21-36. - Special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall, after a resolution of determination has been adopted under section 21-35, prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the commission and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.15) 
Sec. 21-37. - Certificate of assessor. 
    When the assessor shall have completed the assessment roll under section 21-36, such assessor shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, a certificate to the effect that such roll has been made by such assessor pursuant to a resolution of the commission, giving date of adoption of same, and that in making the assessment therein, the assessor has, as near as may be, according to such assessor's best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon, the assessor shall file such special assessment roll with the clerk, who shall present the same to the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.16) 
Sec. 21-38. - Notice of hearing on roll. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll under section 21-37, the commission shall order it filed in the office of the clerk for public examination and shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice thereof has been published and sent by the clerk by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. Such notice shall specify the time and place of such meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.17) 
Sec. 21-39. - Written objections. 
    Any persons deeming themselves aggrieved by the special assessment roll under this article may, in accordance with Section 10.2(c) of the Charter, file their objections thereto in writing with the clerk prior to the close of the hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect they deem themselves aggrieved. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.18) 
Sec. 21-40. - Hearing on objections. 
    The commission shall meet and review the special assessment roll under this article at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned date therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.19) 
Sec. 21-41. - Objection to improvement. 
    If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more than fifty (50) per cent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements, if the owners of more than fifty (50) per cent of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made without the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the commission, provided that this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.20) 
Sec. 21-42. - Corrections and changes. 
    The commission may correct the special assessment roll under this article as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the commission minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.21) 
Sec. 21-43. - Confirmation or rejection of roll. 
    After the hearing and review on the special assessment roll under this article, the commission may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made, if any, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.22) 
Sec. 21-44. - Certificate of confirmation. 
    The clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll under this article and upon confirmation such roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.23) 
Sec. 21-45. - Contractual assessment. 
    In the event that all persons or property owners to be affected by any proposed improvement agree that such proposed improvement be made and that a special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the city may, in lieu of the foregoing procedure, enter into a written contract with all of the persons or property owners affected thereby, which contract when properly approved and executed shall operate as a complete special assessment procedure and the assessment shall be made in accordance with such contract. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.24) 
Secs. 21-46-21-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK PROCEDURE 

Sec. 21-57. - Initiatory resolution. 
    When, in the opinion of the commission, any sidewalk needs to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired, they shall by resolution direct the manager to prepare a report, with the assistance of the engineer, containing any information they may request concerning such work. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.30) 
Sec. 21-58. - Plans and specifications. 
    The manager shall request the engineer to prepare or cause to be prepared plans and specifications of the work to be done pursuant to this article, a schedule of the lands affected and such other information as the commission may have requested. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.31) 
Sec. 21-59. - Report of manager. 
    The manager shall prepare a report as directed by section 21-57 and include in it a schedule of all property affected by the work proposed to be done, and pertinent information on such parcels as are owned by public authorities, and such other information as the commission may have requested, and shall present it to the commission along with the plans and specifications of the engineer, together with a recommendation as to what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which the assessment should be spread and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.32) 
Sec. 21-60. - Initiative by manager. 
    When, in the opinion of the manager, any sidewalk needs to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired, the manager may request the engineer to prepare or cause to be prepared plans and specifications of the work needed to be done, and a schedule of the lands affected, and the manager shall submit such information along with a report and recommendations to the commission, in the same manner as though the commission had requested it. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.33) 
Sec. 21-61. - Resolution of determination; notice. 
    After reviewing the plans and specifications and the report of the manager under this article, the commission shall, if they so desire, determine by resolution that the work be done, setting forth the details concerning it, prescribe a form of notice and direct the clerk to give such notice by first class mail, addressed to the last-known address of the owner of the land to be assessed. The notice shall specify the extent of the work to be done, describe the property affected by the work and require the owner to perform the work promptly in accordance with the plans and specifications of the engineer and designate a time within which the same shall be done. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4-1.34, 4-1.35) 
Sec. 21-62. - Work done by city. 
    If, at the expiration of the time limit specified in the notice under section 21-61, within which the work must be done, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the commission shall, by resolution, order such sidewalk to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired under the direction of the manager by the proper department or by contract or by hire. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.36) 
Sec. 21-63. - Manager's duties. 
    The manager shall take all steps necessary to carry out the direction of the commission in performing the work ordered under this article, shall keep, or cause to be kept, an accurate record of all expense in connection therewith, and upon completion of the work to be performed, shall submit a report of the work done and of all expense in connection therewith, to the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.37) 
Sec. 21-64. - Assessment of costs. 
    The commission shall, by resolution, after examination of the manager's report under this article, determine what amount or part of each such expense shall be charged and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By such resolution, the commission shall determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the commission's determination, and designate the name by which such assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.38) 
Secs. 21-65-21-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SINGLE LOT PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Removal of junkyards by the city and assessment of cost to property owner, § 9-38; abatement of nuisances, § 18-13; abatement of Dutch elm disease, § 25-38. 

Sec. 21-76. - Report of manager. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single lot or parcel of land, which expense is chargeable against such lot or parcel of land and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, the amount of labor and material or any other expense or service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the lot or parcel of land upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported by the manager to the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.39) 
Sec. 21-77. - Resolution of determination. 
    After reviewing the report of the manager under section 21-76, the commission may, if they so desire, determine by resolution what amount or part of each such expense shall be charged, and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By such resolution, the commission shall determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, designate the land and premises upon which the special assessment shall be levied, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the commission's determination, and designate the name by which such assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.40) 
Secs. 21-78-21-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL-SIDEWALK OR SINGLE LOT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 21-89. - Preparation by assessor. 
    Upon resolution by the city commission pertaining to a special assessment in connection with sidewalks or a single lot, the assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the commission and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such sums as may have been directed by the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.41) 
Sec. 21-90. - Certificate of assessor. 
    When the assessor shall have completed the assessment roll under section 21-89, such assessor shall attach thereto and endorse thereon a certificate to the effect that such roll has been made by such assessor pursuant to a resolution of the commission, giving date of adoption of same, and that in making the assessment therein, he has, as near as may be, according to such assessor's best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this Code. Thereupon, the assessor shall file such special assessment roll with the clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.42) 
Sec. 21-91. - Notice of hearing. 
    Upon receipt of a special assessment roll under section 21-90, the clerk shall give notice by first class mail, which notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the amount thereof, describe the property affected thereby and give a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, in which a hearing may be had thereon or payment made. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.43) 
Sec. 21-92. - Hearing on objections. 
    In the event payment is not made within the time specified in the resolution and notice under section 21-91, the commission shall meet at the time and place provided and hear any objections to such roll as prepared. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.44) 
Sec. 21-93. - Corrections and changes. 
    The commission may correct the assessment roll prepared under this article as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the commission minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.45) 
Sec. 21-94. - Confirmation. 
    After the hearing on the assessment roll under section 21-92, the commission shall confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made and the clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon and upon confirmation, such roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.46) 
Secs. 21-95-21-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LIENS 

Sec. 21-106. - Creation; character. 
    All special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by the Charter for city taxes, and shall include accrued interest and penalties, until paid. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.47) 
Sec. 21-107. - Destruction or impairment. 
    No judgment or decree, nor any action of the commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by regular mode of proceeding, might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.48) 
Sec. 21-108. - Effect of failure of owner to receive notice. 
    Failure of any owner to receive any notice required to be sent under the provisions of the Charter and this Code shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.49) 
Sec. 21-109. - Personal liability of owner. 
    In addition to the property tax lien created under this article, any special assessment levied by the city shall constitute a debt owed to the city from the owner of the lot or parcel of land assessed and may be collected in the same manner as any contracted debt, or in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of personal property taxes. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.50) 
Secs. 21-110-21-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 21-121. - Installment payments. 
    Annual installments for special assessment payments shall not exceed ten (10) in number, as the commission may determine at the time of confirmation of the roll; and in the event a division of the assessment operates to make any installment less than ten dollars ($10.00), the assessor shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to ten dollars ($10.00) as possible. The initial installment payment shall be due on such date as the commission shall prescribe, and subsequent annual installments shall be due on the anniversary of the due date of the first installment. 
    The commission may, however, provide that subsequent yearly installments be spread on the annual city tax roll. In such cases the second installment shall be collected as part of the first city tax roll which becomes due six (6) months or more after the due date of the initial installment. 
    All unpaid installments except the initial installment shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per year from such date as the commission shall prescribe. Such interest on the entire unpaid balance shall be spread as one item with each unpaid installment and shall be computed to the last day on which such installment may be paid without collection fee. The commission may provide for advance payment of unpaid installments with interest computed to such date as the commission prescribes. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.51) 
Sec. 21-122. - Notice to pay. 
    The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection immediately after confirmation, and in the event it is not a part of the annual tax roll, the treasurer shall give notice to each owner of such owner's assessment by first class mail specifying when and where payments may be made thereon; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.52) 
Sec. 21-123. - Charter procedure. 
    Each special assessment or installment thereof shall be collected in accordance with Section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.53) 
Secs. 21-124-21-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REFUNDS, REASSESSMENTS AND ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 21-135. - Compilation of cost and adjustment of assessment roll. 
    The manager shall, within sixty (60) days after the completion of each local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the assessor, who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond therewith. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.54) 
Sec. 21-136. - Additional assessments. 
    When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to pay the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the commission may make an additional pro rata assessment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.55) 
Sec. 21-137. - Refunds. 
    Should a special assessment prove larger than necessary by five (5) per cent or less, the same shall be reported to the commission, who may place the excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according to the assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by more than five (5) per cent, the entire excess shall be refunded to the owners of the property upon which payments have been made in full, pro rata according to the assessment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.56) 
Sec. 21-138. - Refund procedure on installments. 
    Any excess refund under section 21-137 where payment in full has not been received shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments exist, and the balance of such refund shall be made in cash. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.57) 
Sec. 21-139. - Restriction against refund. 
    No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.58) 
Sec. 21-140. - New assessments to cure illegal or invalid assessments. 
    Whenever the commission shall deem that any special assessment is invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal, for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the commission shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.59) 
Sec. 21-141. - Reassessment proceedings. 
    All proceedings on reassessments and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided in an original assessment; and if any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the persons making such payments. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.60) 
Secs. 21-142-21-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED 

Sec. 21-153. - Creation of special fund required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, and this Code, moneys raised by special assessments to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any moneys borrowed therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.61) 
Sec. 21-154. - Restricted use of funds. 
    Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied except as otherwise provided in Chapter 10 of the Charter. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1.62) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate streets and sidewalks, § 2.3(f). 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; airport, Ch. 5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; junkyards prohibited near public rights-of-way, § 9-37; use of streets by peddlers, § 9-48; cemeteries, Ch. 10; kindling of fires in public places, § 12-44; garbage, rubbish, litter and junk, Ch. 13; sweeping litter into gutters prohibited, § 13-41; merchants' duty to keep sidewalk free from litter, § 13-42; miscellaneous offenses and provisions, Ch. 16; public place includes school grounds, § 16-1; loitering, § 16-3; spitting in public, § 16-9; indecent exposure, § 16-70; nuisances, Ch. 18; barbed wire fences near public places prohibited, § 18-5; signs, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 23; street improvements in subdivisions, § 23-50; sidewalk improvements in subdivisions, § 23-51; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24; operation of off-road vehicles in alleys, on streets and sidewalks prohibited, § 24-159; vegetation, Ch. 25; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27; zoning ordinance, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Promulgation of rules and regulations by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall make such additional rules and regulations pertaining to the making of openings or excavations in streets, the building of any vault, stair or areaway in or under the streets; or the transportation of any heavy or frequent load upon or over the streets, as are necessary to secure the health, safety and property of the public. 
(b)  Any such rule or regulation so made shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be filed with the city clerk before it is put into effect. The clerk shall present such rule or regulation to the city commission for its consideration not later than the next regular meeting of the commission after the filing of same. No such rule or regulation shall remain in effect if disapproved by the city commission. 
(c)  Such rules or regulations shall not be violated by any person and shall constitute the standards upon which the required permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.08; Ord. No. 428-98, § 1, 2-2-98) 
Sec. 22-2. - Inspection by city manager relative to permits issued. 
    The city shall inspect all work done or privileges exercised under any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may, for cause, suspend or revoke any permit if the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the plans and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit, or if any of the terms of any permit or of this chapter are violated. No person shall perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any such work to be performed while such permit is suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.07) 
Sec. 22-3. - Bond and insurance policies necessary for permits. 
    In each case where a bond or policy of insurance is required of any person as a condition precedent to the granting of any permit required by this chapter, such bond or policy of insurance shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) unless a larger bond shall be required by the city manager at the time any permit is granted. All bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the streets of the city, to hold the city harmless from every other damage of every other nature, whether to persons or property for which such city may be held liable by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the bond or policy of insurance was based, not granted. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.09) 
Sec. 22-4. - Curb construction and repair. 
(a)  No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or remove any curb, gutter or structure for regulating, governing or facilitating the flow of water except in accordance with line, grade and specifications established by the city engineer, and without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. 
(b)  No person shall make any opening in or through any curb of any street or alley without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. Such opening shall be in accordance with plans and specifications established by the city engineer and approved by the engineer. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued under this section: 
(1)  When such opening is to be made permanent and is within twenty (20) feet of any other permanent opening on the same premises; 
(2)  When such opening is to be made permanent and is intended to be more than thirty-five (35) feet in its total width; 
(3)  When such opening is on corner property and is within the quadrant of the intersection or the sidewalk area; and 
(4)  When it is the finding of the city manager that such opening will interfere with the safety of the public. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.02) 
Sec. 22-5. - Street openings and excavations. 
(a)  Unless acting under a contract with the city, no person, other than a duly authorized city official or employee in the course of their employment, or an official or employee of a recognized public utility company, or a licensed drain layer, shall make any excavation or opening in or under any public street or alley or upon any public property without first obtaining the approval of the city manager and a written permit from the city clerk; provided, however, no railroad company shall be required to obtain a permit for the purpose of repairing the roadbed of its railway or replacing or repairing the pavement or surface between its tracks and two (2) feet outside thereof; provided further that in case of emergency arising out of office hours when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the same shall be reported to the city police, who may grant permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that an application to the city clerk be made before noon of the next following business day. 
(b)  The issuance of such permit shall be contingent upon fulfillment of the following conditions: 
(1)  That the applicant shall keep the operations carefully barricaded, lighted at night, and otherwise protected as required by the city manager or the city police for the protection of the public; 
(2)  That the applicant shall work as continuously as practicable to complete operations within the time specified in the permit. 
(c)  No person shall fail to complete the work within the time limit specified in the permit. If, in the judgment of the city manager, the work is not prosecuted in such a manner as to insure completion within the time limit specified, the city may undertake the work and may collect the cost therefor from the applicant in an action at law. 
(d)  Unless previously approved by the city manager, no person shall render more than one-half the traveled width of any street or alley unavailable for travel in connection with any opening or excavation. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. 
(e)  All work, including backfilling, shall be done under the supervision and in accordance with the instructions of the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.03) 
Sec. 22-6. - Permit required to interfere with normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(a)  Any person who, for any purpose, substantially: blocks, obstructs, impedes, or otherwise interferes with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic of any highway, street, alley, or sidewalk shall first obtain a "street closing permit" from the city clerk. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to department of public works, police or fire employees acting in performance of their duties. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.04; Ord. No. 559-15, § 1, 4-20-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 559-15, § 1, adopted April 20, 2015, amended § 22-6 to read as set out herein. Previously § 22-6 was titled "Closing of streets." 
Sec. 22-7. - Entry into construction area prohibited. 
    No person shall enter upon: any excavated area, utility construction area, street construction area, sidewalk construction area, new pavement, new sidewalk, new curbing, or new gutter, until: 
(1)  The same has been completed, and 
(2)  Any street closing sign or barricade posted or placed thereon has been removed by the proper city officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 559-15, § 1, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 22-8. - Interference with signs and barricades prohibited. 
    No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or destroy any part or accessory of any street or alley or any sign or barricade erected or placed thereon to protect, warn or guide the public. 
(Ord. No. 559-15, § 1, 4-20-15) 
Secs. 22-9-22-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to construct and maintain sidewalks, § 2.3(u). 

Sec. 22-18. - Permit required; specifications established by city engineer. 
    No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or remove any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk for such work in accordance with line, grade, slope and specifications established by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.01) 
Sec. 22-19. - State of disrepair prohibited; notice to abate; abatement. 
(a)  No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins such person's property to fall into a state of disrepair or to become unsafe. 
(b)  Whenever the city manager shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe, notice may be given in the manner set forth in section 1-8. 
(c)  In the event the owner fails to repair the sidewalk within five (5) days after delivery or posting of such notice, it shall be a violation of this section and each additional day the sidewalk shall remain out of repair shall be a separate violation. 
(d)  If the sidewalk remains out of repair for more than five (5) days after such notice has been given, the city manager may cause the same to be repaired and may collect the cost of the repairs from the owner in accordance with article V of chapter 21. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.01) 
Sec. 22-20. - Protection around openings required. 
    No person shall open or use any opening in a sidewalk unless the same is provided with a suitable protection and guard approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.01) 
Sec. 22-21. - Rebate to owner or occupant after completion. 
    In case the owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall, either upon permission being granted, or after being ordered by the city manager, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk according to specifications, and in accordance with this article, such owner or occupant shall be entitled, upon completion of the same, to the satisfaction of the city manager, to a rebate from the city as follows: 
For new sidewalks, twenty (20) per cent of the total cost of the construction in front of the property and all of the cost of construction in street or alley intersections; for sidewalks constructed to replace walks out of repair and requiring replacement, fifty (50) per cent of the total cost of such construction, provided, the rebate to be made by the city for the cost of construction of a sidewalk under which space is occupied in whole or in part as a part of the adjacent building and the construction of which requires special reinforcement and construction, shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. In case the owner of any property in the city shall neglect to, or refuse to, construct any concrete walk when the same is ordered by the city manager, and such walk be constructed at the expense of the city, then and in such case the owner of such property shall not be entitled to a rebate therefrom, but the entire cost if not paid shall be assessed against the abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 20, § 7-1.01, 4-22-63) 
Secs. 22-22-22-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 22-34. - Scope. 
    The requirements of this article shall be so construed as to allow the full exercise of municipal authority with respect to the public peace, health, safety and convenience in any manner which may be desirable. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Sec. 22-35. - Generally. 
    No person shall in any way obstruct or encroach upon any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Sec. 22-36. - Adjacent property owners or occupants to obey orders of superintendent of public works to remove obstructions. 
    No person, having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a paved or graded sidewalk, shall fail to remove promptly therefrom all rubbish, litter, obstructions of any kind, or nuisances of every sort, and snow and ice when ordered by the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.01) 
Sec. 22-37. - Moving of buildings. 
    No person shall move or cause to be moved any building along or across any public street, alley or other public property unless the same can be moved without impairing the public safety, without undue risk of damage or injury to property, public or private, and without unreasonable interference with traffic. An application to move any building shall be filed with the city clerk. The application shall set forth in detail the size and type of building proposed to be moved, and the points between which it is proposed to move the same. The city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made. If the city clerk finds the building can be moved without impairing the public safety, or unreasonably interfering with traffic, or undue risk of damage to private or public property, a permit may be issued upon payment of the proper fee. Such permit shall specify the time and route over which the moving shall be done. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed with the city clerk a bond or policy of insurance as provided in section 22-3. If the city clerk shall refuse any permit, the applicant may appeal to the city manager who shall grant a hearing thereon. The decision of the city manager shall be final. In granting a permit, the city manager may impose such conditions as such manager deems desirable to protect the safety of persons and property during the moving of such building and to assure the replacement of any utility wires, poles and other street appurtenances moved or taken down therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 22-38. - Construction or repair of structures lying in right-of-way. 
    No person shall construct or repair any structure of any nature whatsoever lying within the limits of a street or alley right-of-way without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. Such construction or repairs shall be in accordance with the line, grade and specifications established by the city engineer and shall be approved by such engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 22-39. - Leaving leaves or grass in streets or alleys. 
    No person shall place or leave any leaves or grass in the public streets or alleys except for immediate disposal. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Sec. 22-40. - Ashes left in public alleys. 
    No person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a public alley shall allow any ashes to remain in the alley adjacent to the premises. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Sec. 22-41. - Construction materials and facilities. 
    No person shall use any street or alley for the temporary storage of building material, equipment, merchandise or facilities or for barricading or protecting building operations without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. No building material, equipment or facilities so stored shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with the normal drainage facilities of the street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 22-42. - Suspension of awnings or other articles. 
    No person shall suspend or support in any manner any article or thing which will overhang any portion of a public street or alley, except as otherwise provided in this Code. Awnings overhanging a public sidewalk or other public pedestrian-way are permitted, provided such awnings have no less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet of clearance between the lowest projection of the awning and the surface of the public sidewalk or pedestrian way and provided that the awning projects over the public sidewalk or pedestrian way no more than nine (9) feet, or two (2) feet less than the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less, from the lot line of the adjacent premises. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05; Ord. No. 369-92, § 1, 5-4-92) 
Sec. 22-43. - Business merchandise, food and beverage. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to suspend, place or set out for display or sale any goods, wares, food, beverage, or merchandise on any public sidewalk. 
(2)  On sidewalks (i) contained in the area described in subsection (4) and (ii) adjacent to properties zoned under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sault Ste. Marie as T, B-2 and B-3, the adjoining owners, lessees or occupants may use the sidewalks in accordance with the provisions of this section for open-air display of goods, tools, equipment, flowers and similar merchandise, and for temporary seating and tables to the extent that such uses are accessory to the adjoining properties as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Displays, tables, or seating areas shall be limited to such areas that preserve an unobstructed five (5) feet of sidewalk width (as measured perpendicular from curb to private lot line of the business making the display) for pedestrian use. 
(b)  All displays (including shelving and racks) chairs and tables shall be removed from the sidewalk whenever the adjoining retail operation is closed and no later than 10 p.m. each night. 
(c)  Any display or seating area that interferes with the passage of pedestrians shall be removed. Items shall not pose trips hazards or otherwise pose a hazard to pedestrians including pedestrians with sight impairments. No display or seating area shall occupy the area two (2) feet inward from the side lot lines of the business making the display. 
(d)  Any display or seating area shall be positioned so as not to conflict with door openings of parked cars. 
(e)  All areas shall be well maintained and cleaned regularly by the adjoining property owner, lessee or occupant. 
(f)  No items may be placed in the area at street corners or alley/street corners created by extending the building lines to the traveled portion of the streets or alleys as described below. 
(3)  The use of the sidewalks as provided in subsection (2) shall be permissive and shall constitute no more than a license revocable at will by the city. The city may, if the use of the sidewalk in any way interferes with the use of the rights-of-way, require any or all items to be removed temporarily or permanently from the sidewalk areas. No use of the sidewalks under this section shall in any way entitle an owner, lessee, or occupant of any right, title or interest in and to the sidewalk or any right to continue the uses provided in subsection (2). 
(4)  The area of land in the city eligible for subsection (2) uses of sidewalk must be contained in the following boundaries: 
The physical boundary description is defined as being those properties encompassed by a line drawn and commencing at a point in the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal and the Bingham Avenue Bridge, thence in a northeasterly direction along the easterly property line boundaries of those properties adjoining or abutting Bingham Avenue on the east side of the street, to a point where this line intersects the St. Mary's River; thence westerly along the shores of said St. Mary's River and the St. Mary's Falls Canal to a point where a line from Magazine Street extended intersects the shore line of said St. Mary's Falls Canal; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Magazine Street to a point approximately 200 feet south of the south line of Portage Avenue West, thence easterly along the rear lot lines of those lots fronting on Portage Avenue to the centerline of Ferris Street, thence southerly along the centerline of Ferris Street to a point in the centerline of Ridge Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Ridge Street to the westerly property lines of those properties abutting Osborn Boulevard to a point where Osborn Boulevard extended through the intersection with Peck Street proceeds to the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal; thence along the Power Canal centerline in an easterly meandering direction to a point along the westerly property lines of those properties abutting Ashmun Street, thence southwesterly along said westerly property lines of those properties abutting Ashmun Street to the north line of James Street, thence easterly along the north line of James Street to the centerline of Ashmun Street, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Ashmun Street to a point where the centerline of Ashmun Street and the centerline of Adams Street intersects, thence easterly along the centerline of Adams Street to the easterly property line of those properties fronting on Ashmun Street, thence northeasterly along said easterly property l ine of those properties fronting on Ashmun Street to the a point in the centerline of Easterday Ave., thence easterly along the centerline of Easterday Avenue to a point where the centerline of Easterday Avenue and the centerline of Court Street intersects, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Court Street to the centerline of the Edison Sault Electric Company Power Canal, thence southeasterly along said centerline to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05; Ord. No. 479-04, 9-20-04) 
Sec. 22-44. - Keeping of animal carcasses. 
    No person shall hang, keep or cause, permit or suffer to be hung or kept, the carcass of any animal or fowl, or any part thereof, for any purpose, in, upon, or over any public sidewalk. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 22-45. - Use of raising and lowering devices. 
    No person shall raise anything from, or lower anything to, any street, alley or public place by means of rope, chain, pulley or similar device without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk, and providing protection for pedestrians and traffic using such street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Sec. 22-46. - Poles and wires. 
    No person other than the officials or employees of a recognized public utility company shall place or remove any pole, string or wire in the public streets or alleys without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. Such permit shall be granted only if the placement or removal of such pole or wire will not endanger the public safety and if the amount of tree trimming required can be held to a minimum. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 22-47. - Deposit of snow or ice. 
    No person within the city shall deposit snow or ice from any premises or sidewalks and driveways leading to the premises onto the portion of any street or adjacent public right-of-way which is being plowed and maintained for winter pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 1(7-1.05), 10-2-67; Ord. No. 421-97, § 1, 1-20-97) 
Sec. 22-48. - Designation of sidewalks for snow removal; notice to property owners. 
    The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to designate from time to time those graded or paved sidewalks from which the snow and ice shall promptly be removed by the owner or occupant of the adjacent premises who has the care of the same. Suitable notice shall be given the public by signs and public announcements of the periods so designated. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.01) 
Charter reference- Authority to compel property owners to remove snow and ice from abutting sidewalks, § 2.3(w). 
Sec. 22-49. - Legal liability of adjacent property owners or occupants. 
    Any person having the care either as owner or occupant of any premises bordered by a public street or alley shall be liable to the city for any legal liability that may be adjudged against the city as a result of the placing of obstructions of any nature in such public street or alley by such person, employees or agents thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.05) 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1982, enacted provisions regulating activities in parks and recreational areas designated as Art. IV, §§ 22-50-22-66, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 22-50. - Closing hours. 
    No unregistered camper or park visitor is to enter or remain in park, campground, day use area, beach or parking area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-51. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct; to disturb or annoy other persons; or to lounge, sit or lie upon outdoor furniture, walks, paths or roads, in such a manner as to obstruct the free use or passage of other people. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-52. - Excessive noise regulated. 
    No person shall use a loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplification system, of any kind, or operate a motor vehicle, radio, television, or any device in such a manner that produces excessive noise without proper written permission of the park and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-53. - Destruction of vegetation. 
    No person shall destroy, damage or remove any city property, living tree or shrub, planted grasses or other vegetation without proper written permission of the park and recreation department. This does not apply to the picking and removal of mushrooms, berries and other edible fruits and nuts and those wildflowers and the removal of which is not made unlawful by state law or other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-54. - Refuse and waste disposal. 
    No person shall deposit refuse or waste material which has originated outside the park, campground, or recreational area, in receptacles provided for on-site users, to set fire to the contents of a refuse container; or to place or burn garbage in a fire ring or stove. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-55. - Storage or abandonment of personal property. 
    No person shall store or leave a boat, fish shanty, camping equipment, or any other personal property for more than twenty-four (24) hours without proper written permission of the park and recreation department and community services board. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-56. - Business or commercial uses; permit required. 
    No person shall use the lands for a business or commercial purpose without proper written permission of the parks and recreation department and community services board. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-57. - Destruction of signs or markers. 
    No person shall move, remove, destroy, mutilate or deface posters, notices, signs or markers of the city or any other agency. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-58. - Advertising and construction activities; permit required. 
    No person shall post, place or erect signs; place or distribute advertising material; erect a fence or barrier; construct or occupy improvements or enclose the lands without proper written permission of the parks and recreation department and community services board. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-59. - Weapons restricted. 
    No person shall possess a firearm, air gun, gas gun, spring loaded gun or sling shot. Bows and arrows are allowed only with proper written permission of the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-60. - Camping. 
    Camping is allowed only at designated campsites, no more than one (1) camp shall occupy a campsite. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-61. - Fires. 
    No person shall build a fire except in a designated place or in a stove, grill, or fire ring, as designated by a representative of the park and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-62. - Camp occupancy time limit. 
    No person shall camp in one (1) location for more than ten (10) days without the written permission of the parks and recreation department. Seasonal permit owners can be asked to move or remove their vehicles, for just cause, provided they are given a twenty-four-hour advance notice. Refunds to seasonal permit owners shall be prorated at a regular daily rate, based upon the date the permit was obtained by the camper. The intent of this rule is to protect municipal parks from becoming a second home, and to [prevent] camper or campground problems. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-63. - Animals. 
(a)  No person shall possess a dog or other animal unless it is under immediate and complete control of a leash, not more than six (6) feet long. 
(b)  No animal is to be tied to any inanimate object, i.e. tree, car, table, post, etc. 
(c)  No person shall leave any animal unattended at any park, campground, or recreational site. 
(d)  No person shall in any way harass or attempt to do harm to any natural wildlife or domestic animals at any park or recreational site. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-64. - Operation of vehicles; permit required. 
    No person shall use or operate any wheeled or motorized vehicle: 
(1)  Where there is no visible evidence of a forest road or trail without the written permission of the park and recreation department; 
(2)  In an organized event including but not limited to races and acceleration or endurance contests without the written permission of the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-65. - Certain vehicles prohibited from recreational areas. 
    No person shall operate an off the road motor driven vehicle, such as a minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile, amphibious vehicle or any other motor vehicle except for entrance to and departure from a recreational area. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-66. - Obstruction of accessways. 
    No person shall obstruct any road or trail in a manner that hinders public access to public recreational properties. 
(Ord. No. 226-82, § 1, 8-2-82) 
Sec. 22-67. - Alcoholic beverages regulated. 
    Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed within the designated swimming area of Sherman Park, and one hundred (100) feet to the south of the designated swimming area, or in the adjacent waters within fifty (50) feet to the east and west of the swimming area, as posted. 
(Ord. No. 309-89, § 1, 8-21-89) 
Sec. 22-68. - Glass containers regulated. 
    Glass containers shall not be allowed within the designated swimming area of Sherman Park, and one hundred (100) feet to the south of the designated swimming area, or in the adjacent waters within fifty (50) feet of the east and west of the swimming area, as posted. 
(Ord. No. 310-89, § 1, 8-21-89) 
Chapter 23 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 234-83, adopted Apr. 18, 1983, amended Ch. 23, subdivision regulations, in its entirety to read as herein set forth. Prior to such amendment, Ch. 23 had pertained to the same subject matter, substantive sections thereof being §§ 23-1-23-5, 23-17-23-20, 23-32-23-37, 23-49-23-56, 23-68-23-71, as derived from Ord. No. 48, §§ 11-1.01-11-1.08, adopted Dec. 5, 1966. 
Cross reference- Planning and development commission, § 2-59 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL § 560.101 et seq., MSA § 26.430(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Sault Ste. Marie Subdivision Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-2. - Statutory authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967 (the Subdivision Control Act), Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931 (the Municipal Planning Act) and sections 2.3(x) and 7.7 of the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and liability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities; and to provide procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-4. - Application. 
    Any division of land which results in a subdivision as herein defined shall be surveyed and a plat thereof submitted, approved and recorded as provided by the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-5. - Interpretation. 
    The provision of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city nor to conflict with any statutes of the state or county, except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-6. - Construction of language and definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, words and phrases shall, wherever used in this chapter, have the meanings defined as follows: 
    Alley shall mean a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
    Caption shall mean the name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
    Cul-de-sac (court) shall mean a minor street of short length, having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement shall mean a quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the user. 
    Final plat shall mean a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and certified as to its accuracy by a registered engineer or land surveyor. Such maps must meet the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, as amended, and be suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
    Improvements shall mean street pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street trees, street signs and other appropriate items. 
    Land shall mean all land areas occupied by real property. 
    Lot shall mean a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plot. 
    Major thoroughfare shall mean an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate area and any region beyond and may be designated in the major thoroughfare plan as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway or equivalent term to identify streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
    Marginal-access street shall mean a minor street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare; and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Master plan shall include graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the planning and development commission. 
    Minor street shall mean a street supplementary to a secondary street intended to serve the local needs of the neighborhood and of limited continuity used primarily as access to abutting residential properties. 
    Outlot, when included within the boundary of a recorded plot, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
    Parcel or tract shall mean a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in this chapter. 
    Plat shall mean a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
    Preliminary plat shall mean a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
    Proprietor shall mean a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of such which may hold any ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Public utility shall mean a person, firm, corporation or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
    Public walkway shall mean a right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access through residential areas and located so as to connect to two (2) or more streets, or a street and public land parcel. 
    Secondary thoroughfare shall mean a street intended to serve as a major means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares and has considerable continuity within the framework of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Street shall mean a right-of-way dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane or however otherwise designated, and includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, curbs and gutters, shoulders, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas and other areas within the right-of-way lines. 
    Subdivide or subdivision shall mean the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by such proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease for more than one (1) year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels of land each of which is ten (10) acres or less in area; or five (5) or more parcels of land each of which is ten (10) acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten (10) years. 
    Subdivider shall mean any person proceeding under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land for such person or for another. 
    Subdivision Control Act shall mean Public Act 288 of 1967 of the State of Michigan (MCL Sec. 560.101 et seq., MSA Sec. 26.430(101) et seq.) as amended. 
    Surveyor shall mean either a land surveyor who is registered in Michigan as a registered land surveyor or a civil engineer who is registered in Michigan as a registered professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-7. - Platting procedure. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through three (3) stages, comprised of preliminary plat-tentative approval, preliminary plat-final approval and final plat. Approval of such plats shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-8, 23-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRE-PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 23-10. - Pre-preliminary plat. 
    Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdivider is encouraged to meet informally with the city manager to investigate the standards of the city with reference to this chapter and the proposals of the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The subdivider shall be concerned with the following factors: 
(1)  The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the intended use; 
(2)  An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to service the proposed subdivision shall be made by the subdivider; 
(3)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the subdivider. 
(4)  Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the city and health standards of the county and state shall be investigated by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-11-23-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT; TENTATIVE APPROVAL 

Sec. 23-20. - General requirements. 
    Before making or submitting a final plat for approval, the proprietor shall make a preliminary plat and submit copies to the city for review and tentative approval. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-21. - Filing. 
    An application, together with seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision and the filing fee, shall be submitted to the city clerk at least three (3) weeks prior to the regular planning and development commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing). The following information shall be included in the application and preliminary plat submission: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision, such name to not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in Chippewa County, unless the subject plat is contiguous to a plat of the same name. 
(2)  Legal description of the property. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the subdivider or owner and the designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout, together with the seal of the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat. The subdivider shall indicate his interest in the land as to whether it is a land contract interest or if the subdivider owns the property in fee. 
(4)  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch and shall be dated. 
(5)  The plat shall include the following existing conditions: 
a.  An overall map showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings; 
b.  The location of the proposed subdivision in relation to schools, shopping, parks and other community facilities; 
c.  The boundary line of the proposed subdivision and section or municipal corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract; 
d.  Adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract; 
e.  Locations, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision; 
f.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract; 
g.  Topography drawn as contours with an interval at least five (5) feet, except as may otherwise be required for proper review of special grading or drainage problems. 
(6)  The plat shall include the following information on the proposed development: 
a.  Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths and connection with adjoining platted streets, and widths and locations of alleys, easements and public walkways or bikeways; 
b.  Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines, and proposed addresses as designated by the engineering department; 
c.  Identification of parcels to be set aside or dedicated to public use for the use of property owners in the subdivision, or lands set aside for future street connections to adjacent tracts, or lots set aside for other purposes in conformance with the zoning ordinance; 
d.  The proposed systems for sanitary sewerage, water supply and storm drainage; 
e.  Proposed contour changes and areas of cut or fill; 
f.  Profile drawings showing proposed street center line profiles, the proposed sanitary sewer profiles and the proposed storm sewer profiles; 
g.  In the case where a subdivider wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly identified, and a staging program shall be submitted. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedures until the entire area is subdivided. 
The city clerk shall receive the preliminary plat and check for completeness and, if complete, cause the proposal to be placed on the agenda of the next planning and development commission meeting. Should any requirement in this section be omitted, the city clerk shall notify the subdivider of the additional data required and delay further planning and development commission action until the required data is received. The clerk shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the city engineer and city planner for their technical review. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-22. - Filing fee. 
    A fee payable to the city shall accompany an application for preliminary plat review. The fee amount shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 23-23. - Review by the planning and development commission. 
(a)  The planning and development commission shall review a preliminary plat at a public hearing, notice of such hearing to be sent by registered mail to the applicant and the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed tract as their names appear on the tax records of the city and to all utility companies serving the city; such notice to be sent not less than seven (7) days prior to such meeting. 
(b)  The planning and development commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of the master plan, the zoning ordinance and within the design standards of this chapter. 
(c)  Land requirements for public use within the framework of the master plan shall be considered in the review of a submitted preliminary plat. 
(d)  The planning and development commission, within thirty (30) days of the date such preliminary plat first appears on a regular meeting agenda, shall act on the preliminary plat, unless the subdivider agrees to an extension of time in writing: 
(1)  Should the planning and development commission reject the plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the meeting, a copy of which shall be sent to the subdivider and to the city commission; 
(2)  Should the planning and development commission approve the plat, the chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and return one (1) copy to the subdivider, forwarding three (3) copies to the city commission with recommendation for tentative approval, and retain one (1) copy for permanent records; 
(3)  Should the planning and development commission conditionally approve the plat, the preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the city commission until such conditions have been satisfied by the subdivider. The revised design shall follow submittal procedure in section 23-21 except that no additional fee shall be required. The planning and development commission may set a time limit for satisfaction or said conditions and deem the plat rejected without further action if not resubmitted within the time limit. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-24. - City commission action. 
    Following receipt of the planning and development commission recommendations, the city commission shall consider the plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The city commission shall take action within ninety (90) days from the date of filing of the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Should the city commission reject the plat, it shall indicate the requirements necessary for obtaining tentative approval, returning one (1) copy to the subdivider. 
(2)  Should the city commission approve the plat, such approval shall constitute tentative approval and shall be so noted on each copy of the preliminary plat, returning one (1) copy to the subdivider and retaining two (2) copies in the city's permanent records. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-25. - Approval; time limit. 
    Tentative approval of a preliminary plat by the city commission shall confer upon the subdivider for a period of one (1) year from the date of action, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the subdivider and granted by the city commission in writing. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-26-23-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRELIMINARY PLAT; FINAL APPROVAL 

Sec. 23-30. - General requirements. 
    Prior to submitting a preliminary plat for final approval to the city, the subdivider shall obtain the approval of the plat by all applicable county and state agencies required to review the plat, including the county road commission, county drain commission, department of transportation, conservation department, water resources commission, health department and county plat board. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-31. - Filing. 
    The subdivider shall submit the following information to the city clerk within one (1) year of the tentative approval of preliminary plat: 
(1)  A list of all authorities required to review the preliminary plat as per Sections 112 to 119 of the Subdivision Control Act. 
(2)  Approved copies of the preliminary plat, after all necessary approvals have been secured. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-32. - City commission action. 
    Following receipt of the necessary approved copies of the preliminary plat, the city commission shall consider and review the preliminary plat at its next meeting, or within twenty (20) days from the date of submission: 
(1)  Should the city commission reject the plat, it shall state the reasons in writing; 
(2)  If the subdivider has met all conditions laid down for approval of the preliminary plat, and substantially conforms to the tentatively approved plat, the city commission shall give final approval to the preliminary plat and shall notify the subdivider in writing. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-33. - Approval; time limit. 
    Final approval of a preliminary plat shall confer upon the subdivider for a period of two (2) years from the date of action, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which the approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the subdivider and granted by the city commission in writing. Written notice of such extension shall be sent by the city commission to the other approving authorities. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-34-23-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 23-40. - General requirements. 
    The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act, and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to develop at the time. The final plat shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A final plat shall be submitted no later than the two-year limit granted to a preliminary plat as stipulated in section 23-33. All approvals made on the preliminary plat shall expire as provided in section 23-33 and no final plat shall be accepted after the date of expiration of preliminary plat approval. 
(2)  All improvements set forth in this chapter shall have been completed to city standards and shall be so certified as acceptable by the city engineer prior to the approval of a final plat by the city commission. Provided, however, that a guarantee for such improvements in accordance with section 23-61, may be accepted in lieu of such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-41. - Filing. 
    Five (5) copies of the final plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the city clerk at least one (1) week prior to the regular planning and development commission meeting at which it will be considered. The plat shall meet all specifications and provide all information and certificates as provided in the Subdivision Control Act. The subdivider shall provide an abstract of title certified to date of the proprietor's certificate to establish recorded ownership interests and any other information deemed necessary for the purpose of ascertaining, whether the proper parties have signed the plat, or a policy of title insurance, currently in force, covering all the land included with the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-42. - Filing and review fees. 
    The following fees shall be deposited with the city clerk: 
(1)  A filing and recording fee, of twenty dollars ($20.00), such fee to be forwarded to the county plat board by the city clerk following approval of the final plat; 
(2)  A review fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-43. - Review by the planning and development commission. 
    The planning and development commission shall review the final plat as to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat and shall act on the final plat: 
(1)  Should the planning and development commission find that the final plat is in agreement with the approved preliminary plat, it shall approve same and notify the city commission of this action. 
(2)  Should the planning and development commission find that the final plat does not substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat and that it is not acceptable, the commission shall recommend to the city commission that the final plat be disapproved until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet with the approval of the planning and development commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-44. - City commission action. 
    Following receipt of the planning and development commission's recommendations, the city commission shall consider the final plat at its next regular meeting. The city commission shall take action within twenty (20) days of the filing of the final plat with the city clerk, unless the subdivider agrees to an extension of time in writing. The city commission shall review all recommendations of the planning and development commission, ensure that all required improvements have been either constructed or guaranteed, and take action to approve or disapprove the final plat. The city commission may, at its discretion, approve a final plat with conditions. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-45. - Certification of plat by city clerk. 
    Following approval of a final plat by the city commission, and the satisfaction of such conditions as may have been required by the city commission, the city clerk shall certify on the plat to the governing body's approval, and shall deliver the plat, together with the filing and recording fee to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-46. - Subsequent approvals by county and state agencies. 
    Subsequent approvals of the final plat shall be as specified, and shall follow the procedure, set forth (by county and state agencies) in the Subdivision Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-47-23-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 23-50. - General requirements. 
    The subdivision design standards set forth herein shall be considered minimum standards for the design of streets, blocks, lots and other aspects of the subdividing of land. No subdivision plat which is isolated from, or which isolates other lands from, existing public streets shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-51. - Streets. 
    Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements, general specifications, typical cross sections and other conditions set forth in Article VII of this chapter in addition to the following regulations: 
(1)  Location and arrangements of streets: 
a.  The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned major thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares and roads of the proposed plat which would be part of such thoroughfares, and shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. 
b.  The street layout shall provide for continuation of secondary thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided (generally not more than 1,300 feet apart); or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning and development commission. 
c.  The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
d.  Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the city commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
e.  Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an expressway, or other limited-access highway right-of-way, the city commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land, as for parks in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(2)  Design standards of streets: 
a.  Major thoroughfares shall have a right-of-way width of not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet, provided that a width of one hundred (100) feet may be permitted by the planning commission and the city commission in cases where a substantial portion of the length of the thoroughfare has already been platted with a width less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
b.  Secondary thoroughfares shall have a right-of-way width of eighty-six (86) feet. 
c.  Minor streets shall have a right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet. 
d.  Marginal-access streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than thirty-four (34) feet, unless approved by the city commission. 
e.  Cul-de-sac streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than sixty (60) feet and shall terminate in a vehicular turnaround with a minimum diameter of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet and with an approved roadway width of not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter. Maximum length for cul-de-sac streets shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
f.  Turnaround streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet and shall have an improved roadway width of not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter at its terminating loop. 
g.  Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter and where the city commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedication or platted and recorded half-street, the other half shall be platted. 
h.  Alleys, where permitted, shall have a width of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
i.  Access to streets across all ditches, watercourses, streams or ravines shall be provided by the subdivider in a standard method approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Street grades: 
a.  Minimum grades for concrete streets and gutters shall be 0.3 per cent, and for all other types of street surfacing shall be 0.5 per cent. 
b.  Maximum grades for major thoroughfares shall not exceed 3.0 per cent, and for secondary thoroughfares and minor streets shall not exceed 7.0 per cent. 
(4)  Street alignments: 
a.  Vertical curves: 
1.  Major thoroughfares shall have profile grade changes where the grade change is over a total of 1.5 per cent, connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade, expressed in feet/100. 
2.  Secondary thoroughfares shall have profile grade changes where the grade change is over a total of 1.5 per cent, connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade, expressed in feet/100. 
3.  Minor streets shall have profile grade changes where the grade change is over a total of 1.5 per cent, connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to ten (10) times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade, expressed in feet/100. 
b.  Horizontal curves. The radii of center line curvature shall be: 
1.  Four hundred seventy-five (475) feet radius for major thoroughfares. 
2.  Three hundred (300) feet radius for secondary thoroughfares. 
3.  Two hundred (200) feet radius for minor streets. 
A minimum of fifty (50) feet tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves. 
c.  Visibility requirements: 
1.  Minimum vertical visibility (measured from four and one-half-foot eye-level to eighteen-inch tail light) shall be: 
i.  Five hundred (500) feet on major thoroughfares. 
ii.  Three hundred (300) feet on secondary thoroughfares. 
iii.  Two hundred (200) feet on minor streets. 
iv.  One hundred (100) feet on minor streets less than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
2.  Minimum horizontal visibility shall be: 
i.  Three hundred (300) feet on major thoroughfares, measured on center line. 
ii.  Two hundred (200) feet on major thoroughfares, measured on the center line. 
iii.  One hundred (100) feet on minor streets, measured on the center line. 
d.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at ninety (90) degrees. 
e.  Curved streets intersecting with major thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of center line fifty (50) feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare. 
f.  Streets which intersect the same street shall have a distance of no less than one hundred (100) feet between them, measured from center line to center line. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 278-87, 8-3-87) 
Sec. 23-52. - Blocks. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Size: 
a.  Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet in length, except where in the opinion of the planning and development commission, physical conditions may justify a greater distance. 
b.  Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
c.  Block length shall not be less than six (6) times the minimum width of a residential lot, as prescribed in the city's zoning ordinance in the applicable zoning district or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is longer. 
(2)  Public walkways: 
a.  Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the city commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the subdivision where blocks exceed nine hundred (900) feet in length. 
b.  Widths of public walkways where required, shall be at least twelve (12) feet and shall be dedicated as a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Easements: 
a.  Utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than twelve (12) feet wide. Six (6) feet from each parcel. 
b.  Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements shall be obtained from all of the utility companies serving the area. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-53. - Lots. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Sizes and shapes: 
a.  Lot sizes, widths and building setback lines shall in no case be less than required by the zoning ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is proposed, provided however that in the case of lots to be served with on-site water supply, on-site sewage disposal, or both systems, minimum lot size shall be one-half acre or such larger size as may be required by the health department to ensure the proper operation of such on-site systems and the protection of the health and safety of the community. 
b.  Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one (3:1) shall normally be considered a maximum. 
c.  Corner lots shall be platted a minimum of at least ten (10) feet wider than interior lots in order to permit conformance to setback lines on side lotted streets. 
d.  Lots abutting a major or secondary thoroughfare shall be no less than one hundred forty-five (145) feet in depth on a major thoroughfare and one hundred thirty-five (135) feet in depth on a secondary thoroughfare. 
e.  Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking and off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Arrangement: 
a.  Every lot shall front on or have direct access to a street. 
b.  Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines, or as nearly possible thereto. 
c.  Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or secondary thoroughfares, where marginal-access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth as required in subsection (1)d. of this section. 
d.  Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-54. - Floodplains. 
    Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by storm water shall not be platted for any use which may increase danger to health, life or property. The subdivider may show, by way of accurately engineered plans, that a change to the topography in the proposed subdivision will eliminate flooding in the area in question and shall clearly demonstrate that any such planned topographical change will not aggravate the flood hazard beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision. If the city commission determines that a flood problem does exist, then it shall reject all or that part of the proposed subdivision lying within the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-55. - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the subdivider and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, may be required by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-56. - Other design requirements. 
    For industrial or commercial subdivisions, greenbelt buffers, fences, walls or other design features may be required when necessary to protect adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-57. - Easements for public utilities. 
    Easements for public utilities shall be included on the plat and shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide where the rear lines of lots are contiguous and at least six (6) feet wide if the lot has no adjoining subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Secs. 23-58, 23-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 23-60. - General requirements. 
    The improvements set forth under this article are deemed to be the minimum acceptable standards for subdivisions. Prior to issuing the certificate of approval on the final plat under section 23-45, all improvements required under this article must have been constructed or guaranteed as to completion as set forth in section 23-61. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-61. - Agreement or guarantee in lieu of construction. 
    In lieu of the completion of all or some of the required improvements: 
(1)  The city may require, as a condition of approval of the final plat, the subdivider to enter into an agreement to construct such improvements within a time, and under such conditions, as may be stipulated by the city commission. 
(2)  The subdivider may choose to guarantee and insure the completion of such improvements by depositing with the city clerk a cash deposit, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city to insure construction of such improvements. The amount of such cash, check, letter of credit or surety bond shall be established by the city commission based on an estimate of the cost of such improvements by the city engineer. 
a.  If the required improvements are not constructed within one (1) year of the date of the city approval of the final plat, the city commission may direct the use of such guarantee deposit to the completion of the required improvements. 
b.  As work progresses on the completion of improvements, portions of the guarantee deposit shall be rebated to the subdivider in proportion to the work completed and approved as to standards by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-62. - Streets. 
    Streets shall be constructed to proper grade with adequate provisions for drainage and surface and improved in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. A right-of-way in accordance with section 23-5(2)a, unless a larger right-of-way is required by the state department of transportation or the board of county road commissioners for roads under those jurisdictions; with pavements and improvements as determined by the city commission, department of transportation or board of county road commissioners. 
(2)  Secondary thoroughfares. An eighty-six-foot right-of-way, with thirty-six-foot concrete pavement outside of curb, with curb and gutter each side of pavement, an eighteen-foot separation strip and six-foot concrete sidewalks on each side of roadway, and a one-foot space between the sidewalk and the right-of-way line on each side. 
a.  In the case of secondary thoroughfares determined to be of primarily rural or industrial use by the city commission, the sidewalk requirements shall be waived. 
b.  A surface of other than concrete pavement may be accepted if such surface is equally satisfactory to, and approved by, the city engineer. 
(3)  Minors streets. A sixty-foot right-of-way, with twenty-seven-foot concrete pavement outside of curb to outside of curb, with curb and gutter each side of pavement, a ten-and-one-half-foot separation strip and five-foot concrete sidewalk on each side of the roadway and one-foot of space between sidewalk and right-of-way line on each side. 
a.  In the case of plats with lots having a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and lot widths of at least one hundred (100) feet, sidewalk requirements shall be waived. 
b.  A surface of other than concrete pavement may be acceptable if such surface is equally satisfactory to, and approved by, the city engineer. 
(4)  Marginal-access streets. A thirty-four-foot right-of-way with twenty-foot pavement outside of curb to outside of curb, concrete curb and gutter each side of pavement with a four-foot separation strip measured from the right-of-way line of the adjacent street to the marginal-access street and a three-foot separation strip and a five-foot sidewalk on the opposite side with a one-foot space between the sidewalk and the right-of-way line. 
a.  In the case of plats with lots having a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and lot widths of at least one hundred (100) feet, sidewalk requirements shall be waived. 
b.  A surface of other than concrete pavement may be acceptable if such surface is equally satisfactory to, and approved by, the city engineer. 
(5)  Engineering standards. All grading and center line gradients, curbs and gutters, and roadway pavements shall be in accordance with plans, profiles, standards and specifications as determined by the city engineer and approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 279-87, 8-3-87) 
Sec. 23-63. - Storm drainage. 
    Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications as determined by the city engineer and approved by the city commission. Where drainage systems involve the use of either county or state drainage systems, a letter or document of approval from the county or state must be submitted by the subdivider. Where the proper drainage of the subdivision requires the construction of drainage improvements outside of the subdivided property, the city commission may require the construction of such external drainage improvements as a condition of approval of final plat. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-64. - Sewage disposal. 
    The sewage disposal system for a subdivision shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications as required by the county health department. Those systems which will become part of the municipal system shall be constructed in accordance with such engineering standards and specifications as determined by the city engineer and approved by the city commission, and shall include house and building connections to beyond the curb location. Subdivisions which will dispose of sewage by means of on-site systems on an individual lot basis need not construct such systems at the time of subdividing if the proposed system is approved by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-65. - Water supply. 
    The water supply system for a subdivision shall be in accordance with the regulations of the state and county health departments. Those systems which will become part of the municipal system shall be constructed in accordance with such engineering standards and specifications as determined by the city engineer and approved by the city commission, and shall include house and building connections to beyond the curb location. Subdivisions which will provide water supply on an individual lot-by-lot basis need not construct such system at the time of subdividing if the proposed system is approved by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-66. - Street trees. 
    Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the subdivider. Street trees shall be provided on the basis of at least one (1) per lot in the street right-of-way between sidewalk and curbs. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-67. - Street name signs. 
    Street name signs of a type approved by the city engineer shall be placed at all street intersections and shall be of a permanent weather-resistant construction, visible from two (2) directions. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 20. 
Sec. 23-68. - Other improvements. 
    When required by the city commission, public walkways shall be constructed with a width of five (5) feet of concrete or asphalt in accordance with standards specified by the city engineer. Green belt buffers, fences or other improvements required by the city commission shall be constructed in accordance with standards specified by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-69. - Common areas. 
    When a subdivider proposes the development of areas to be reserved for the common use of the residents of the subdivision, the city commission will require copies of agreements, covenants or other documents which show the manner in which these common areas are to be maintained and apportioned as to property taxation. The commission may require, as a condition of final plat approval, the creation of such escrow funds or other financial mechanisms as will ensure that such common area does not become a maintenance liability to the city. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
ARTICLE VIII. - LOT SPLITS 

Sec. 23-70. - General requirements. 
    A parcel of land, whose boundaries are fixed in a recorded plat, may be subdivided into not more than four (4) lots or tracts in accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-71. - Filing. 
    An application, together with three (3) copies of a plan of the proposed lot split and the filing fee, shall be submitted to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to the regular planning and development commission meeting. The following information shall be included in the application and on the plan: 
(1)  Legal description of the property; 
(2)  Name and address of the owner; 
(3)  The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet, shall be dated, and shall show the north point. 
(4)  Boundary lines and the areas of the lots or tract as they exist and as they are proposed to be split, fully dimensioned. 
(5)  Names, right-of-way widths and roadway widths of all existing and proposed streets which are adjacent to the parcel to be split. 
(6)  Location width and purpose of any easements. 
The city clerk shall receive the lot split application and check for completeness and if complete, cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the next planning and development commission meeting. The clerk shall transmit a copy of the lot split to the city engineer and city planner for their technical review. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-72. - Filing fee. 
    A fee payable to the city shall accompany an application for a lot split. The fee amount shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 283-87, § 1, 9-14-87; Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 23-73. - Review by the planning and development commission. 
(a)  The planning and development commission shall review a lot split at a public meeting, notice of such meeting to be sent to the applicant and to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed tract as their names appear on the tax records of the city, and to all utility companies serving the city; such notice to be sent not less than seven (7) days prior to such meeting. 
(b)  The planning and development commission shall review the proposed lot split within the framework of the master plan and the zoning ordinance standards, and in view of other data as may be provided. 
(c)  The planning and development commission shall, within thirty (30) days of the date it first appears on a regular meeting agenda, act on the lot split, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing. The commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or reject the proposed lot split, with reasons for the action recorded in the minutes. Any conditions, modifications or requirements which bear on the approval or rejection of the proposed lot split shall be specified. 
(d)  The commission's recommendations shall be forwarded to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Sec. 23-74. - City commission action. 
    On receipt of the planning and development commission's recommendation, the city commission shall consider the proposed lot split. If the city commission approves the lot split, it shall adopt a resolution implementing the lot split and shall transmit such resolution to the city clerk for recording. 
(Ord. No. 234-83, 4-18-83) 
Chapter 23.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23.5-1-23.5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1E., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed art. II, §§ 23.5-11-23.5-27, which pertained to basic cable television rate regulations, and derived from the Ord. No. 377-93, §§ 1-17, adopted September 13, 1993. 

Secs. 23.5-11-23.5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 23.5-40. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-41. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-42. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
    City commission means the city commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie Michigan or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight authority created pursuant to section 3 of the act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this ordinance only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-43. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the act. A telecommunications provider shall file one (1) copy of the application with the city clerk, one (1) copy with the city manager, and one (1) copy with the city engineer. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make copies of the application and distribute a copy to the director of public works. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act, within one hundred eighty (180) days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the five hundred dollars ($500.00) application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the act. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-44. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 23.5-43(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-45. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter 22 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-46. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-47. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act, a telecommunications provider shall, within ninety (90) days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper and electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the act. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-48. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-49. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 23.5-43(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-50. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-51. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act, if section 8 of the act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 23.5-50 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-52. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-53. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-54. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-55. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-56. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 23.5-43(c) of this article; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 23.5-43(f) of this article; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred dollars ($500.00) application fee, in accordance with section 23.5-43(g) of this article; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 23.5-44(a) of this article; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 23.5-44(a) of this article; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 23.5-44(a) of this article; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 23.5-44(b) of this article; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 23.5-44(c) of this article; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 23.5-44(d) of this article; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with 23.5-45 of this article; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 23.5-50 of this article; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 23.5-53 of this article; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 23.5-54 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-57. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-58. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Sec. 23.5-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 23.5-60. - Penalty for violations. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalties stated in section 1-6 of the City Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 463-02, § 1, 11-4-02) 
Secs. 23.5-61-23.5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 23.5-70. - Franchise agreement. 
(1)  The city commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie hereby authorizes the granting of a nonexclusive cable television franchise to CC VIII Operating, LLC, doing business as Charter Communications pursuant to the terms set forth in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, Nonexclusive 2004 Cable Television Franchise with CC VIII Operating LLC d/b/a Charter Communications. 
(2)  The city manager, city clerk, city attorney, special counsel and other city officials are hereby authorized and directed to take all actions necessary to effect and implement the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan Nonexclusive 2004 Cable Television Franchise with CC VIII Operating LLC. 
(Ord. No. 483-05, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-05) 
Secs. 23.5-71-23.5-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 23.5-90. - Purpose. 
    The regulations of this article are intended to conform with federal laws and administrative rules that govern facilities needed to operate wireless communications systems and to set forth procedures and standards for review and approval for the locations of such facilities within the city. It is the city's intent to reasonably regulate the location and design of such facilities to safeguard the integrity, character, property values, and aesthetic quality of neighborhoods and the city and minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 23.5-91. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The construction or expansion of wireless telecommunications facilities falling within the parameters set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Section MCL 125.3514(1), as amended. 
(2)  Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves, and public utility TV transmitting towers as allowed by Section 10-1.1707(2). 
(3)  To any tower or antenna owned or operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 23.5-92. - General standards. 
(a)  To accommodate wireless communications facilities, each petitioner for installation of a communications facility shall provide an inventory of its existing and planned wireless communications facilities located within the city and within one (1) mile of the city's boundaries, including the location, height and design of each facility. The petition shall be filed with the planning commission for site plan approval. The city may share such information with a third party, but the city does not in any way represent or warrant that such information is accurate. 
(b)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall at all times comply with applicable federal standards for non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation, as they may from time to time be amended. Documentation shall be submitted to the building department upon request verifying compliance with the FCC standards prior to the issuance of any permit and annually if requested by the city. 
(c)  Each petitioner shall exercise due diligence to determine the availability of a location for its antenna on all existing towers, approved towers, and other suitable structures within a half-mile radius of the proposed site. Due diligence shall consist of documented evidence that owners of all existing or approved towers or other suitable structures were contacted by certified mail or overnight courier, and that these sites cannot accommodate the requested antennas for reasons other than economic reasons. Where no suitable structures exist within a half-mile radius of the proposed site, the petitioner shall provide to the city an affidavit stating the same. Petitioners shall provide detailed radio frequency (RF) coverage and capacity maps for all proposed wireless service providers for the proposed site, showing coverage and capacity of the carriers' surrounding network with both existing and planned sites. The planning commission may deny a proposed wireless communication facility if it determines that another existing or approved site can reasonably accommodate the proposed facility and provide generally equivalent service. 
(d)  Certification from the city official with assigned responsibility for management of the city airport that the height of a proposed tower will not be such that it would interfere with airport operations is required from petitioner at the time of site plan submission. 
(e)  Unless otherwise specifically approved by the planning commission, all wireless communications towers shall be monopoles, designed for co-location, which is the provision of more than one (1) antenna array, usually belonging to more than one (1) licensed carrier, on a single monopole. 
(1)  Towers one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in height or less shall be designed for co-location of at least two (2) antenna arrays or carriers. 
(2)  Towers greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or less than or equal to one hundred fifty-five (155) feet in height shall be designed for co-location of at least three (3) antenna arrays or carriers. 
(3)  Towers greater than one hundred fifty-five (155) feet in height shall require a height modification to be approved by the city commission as specified elsewhere in this chapter and shall be designed for co-location of at least four (4) antenna arrays or carriers. 
(f)  Sites proposed for towers shall not have a separate access curb cut proposed for the towers unless no reasonable alternative exists. Such on-site driveways need not be paved, but must have a stable, improved surface adequate to support occasional maintenance vehicles. 
(g)  Vinyl-coated security fencing at a height of six (6) feet, and landscaping around all sides of the compound containing the tower and all associated building and equipment cabinets is required. A petitioner may alternately provide an opaque decorative security wall with a height of six (6) feet. Chain-link fences with slats shall not be considered to fulfill the requirements of this paragraph. Barbed wire or razor wire is not permitted. Landscaping shall consist of materials that meet the screening materials standards in [Section] 10-1.1709, however, where deemed necessary to minimize visual impact of the compound from adjacent properties or right-of-ways, the planning commission shall have the authority to require the use of specific plant species, plant spacing, and/or plant heights. 
(h)  Signs, except for information needed for emergency notification of: the owner of the land; owner and operator of the tower; are not permitted on wireless communications facilities. 
(i)  Artificial illumination of towers is not permitted unless required by federal or state regulations or to protect public safety, as determined by the planning commission. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to surrounding properties. 
(j)  Towers shall be a low or no maintenance non-contrasting blue or gray in order to be as unobtrusive as possible, unless another color or design is deemed by the planning commission to be less obtrusive. 
(k)  All utility lines serving a wireless communications facility shall be placed underground. Transmission lines installed between ground-based equipment and antennas shall be routed through the interior portion of the monopole tower and may not be attached to its exterior. 
(l)  Wireless communications facilities may be placed in any zone or on sites with legally nonconforming structures or uses without being considered to be expansions of such non-conformities. 
(m)  Where a wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building, the installation of all equipment, enclosures, and antennas, shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to be architecturally compatible by being made to appear an integral part of the building upon which it is to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 23.5-93. - Placement standards. 
(a)  Towers shall not be located in any required front, side, or rear setback or a required front open space. 
(b)  Setbacks shall be measured from property lines to the base of the tower. Tower height includes the antenna. 
(c)  The minimum required front setback shall be that front setback specified for that zoning district plus one (1) foot for each three (3) feet, or fraction thereof, of tower height. 
(d)  The minimum required side setback shall be that side setback specified for that zoning district plus one (1) foot for each five (5) feet, or fraction thereof, of tower height. 
(e)  The minimum required rear setback shall be that rear setback specified of that zoning district plus one (1) foot for each ten (10) feet, or fraction thereof, of tower height. 
(f)  On any site where side or rear property lines border residentially zoned property, the side or rear setback shall be equal to the tower height and a landscape buffer consisting of materials that meet the screening materials standards in [Section] 10-1.1709, shall be required adjacent to the residential property line along its full adjacent length. 
(g)  Accessory structure and equipment, if any, shall meet setbacks for accessory structure in the district or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 23.5-94 - Compliance standards. 
(a)  Towers shall meet the city building code and other applicable structural standards. Prior to construction, a licensed professional structural engineer's certificate certifying that the tower meets all applicable building code and other structural standards shall be provided to the building official. 
(b)  A cash bond or certified check in an amount established by resolution of city commission upon recommendation of the city manager shall be posted at the time of building permit application to cover the cost of removal and shall be maintained for the life of the tower. 
(c)  Abandoned wireless communications towers must be removed by the owner of the land, the owner of the tower and the operator of the tower. Any wireless communications tower that does not have at least one (1) antenna operating for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be deemed abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the city manager or designee, who shall have the right to request documentation or affidavits from the owner of the land, tower owner, or operator of the tower regarding tower usage and other pertinent information. Failure or refusal for any reason by the owner of the land, tower owner, or operator of the tower to respond within thirty (30) days to such a request shall constitute prima facie evidence that the tower has been abandoned. Upon determination of abandonment and the appropriate notice thereof to the owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator of the tower, the owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator of the tower shall have one hundred twenty (120) days within which to either reactivate the use of the tower, or dismantle and remove the tower and footings to five (5) feet below grade. The owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator of the tower shall restore the property to the condition which existed prior to the construction of the tower. 
    If the owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator of the tower fails to remove the tower within the appropriate time period, the city shall have the right to remove the tower and collect on the cash bond or certified check on file with the city. The city shall bill the owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator of the tower all the costs and/or expenses associated with the removal of the tower in excess of the cash bond and/or certified check. If the owner of the land, tower owner and/or operator fails to pay the costs and/or expenses associated with the tower removal which are in excess of the cash bond and/or certified check within thirty (30) days from the date of the bill, then, in addition to any other remedy in law or in equity, the city shall have the right to place a lien on the property for all costs and expenses associated with the removal of the tower, less the amount of the cash bond or certified check which is on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Sec. 23.5-95 - Violations as misdemeanor. 
    Any person who violates any section of this article or the terms or conditions of any permit issued under this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties stated in Section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 545-14, § 1, 1-20-14) 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicles hauling garbage and rubbish, § 13-24; throwing litter from vehicles prohibited, § 13-43; spilling of litter from vehicle loads, § 13-44; miscellaneous offenses and provisions, Ch. 16; noise of horn or signal devices constituting a nuisance, § 18-7(a)(1); noise of engine exhaust constituting a nuisance, § 18-7(a)(7); streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; obstructions and encroachments on streets and sidewalks, § 22-34 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL § 257.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Uniform interpretation with state law. 
    It is the dominating purpose of this chapter that its provisions shall make applicable to this city the presently existing laws of the state relating to the subjects for which provision is made herein, in order that uniformity of application and interpretation may be attained. No application or interpretation of this chapter, regardless of the wording of any section of this chapter, shall deviate from uniformity of application and interpretation with comparable provisions of the laws of the state except where such deviation is required by differing jurisdictional or administrative requirements. 
(Code 1957, § 5-1.102) 
Sec. 24-2. - Penalty for conviction of violations. 
    Every person convicted of a violation or any provision of this chapter, including the "Uniform Traffic Code" and "Motor Vehicle Code," shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6 of the City Code. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are not adopted by reference, and the City may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than ninety (90) days. 
(Code 1957, § 5-1.101; Ord. No. 468-03, § 2, 5-19-03) 
Secs. 24-3-24-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MOTOR VEHICLE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 468-03, § 1, adopted May 19, 2003, changed the title of art. II to reflect inclusion of the Motor Vehicle Code in the article. 

Sec. 24-16. - Adopted. 
(a)  The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, P.A. 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(b)  The sections of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 P.A. 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.82, MCL 257.601 to 257.616, MCL 257.627 to 257.750, MCL 257.941 to 257.961 and all future amendments and revisions to these sections of the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 197, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 236-83, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 468-03, § 2, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 24-17. - References to governmental unit. 
    References in either the Uniform Traffic Code or Motor Vehicle Code as adopted by section 24-16 to "governmental unit" or "local authorities" shall mean the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(Ord. No. 468-03, § 2, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 24-18. - Traffic-control orders. 
    All traffic-control orders, devices and signs, including parking signs, speed-limit signs, one-way signs, other directional signs, and all other traffic-control devices in existence or posted within the city prior to the effective date of this Code of Ordinances, shall and do hereby constitute the original traffic-control orders in conformance with the Uniform Traffic Code or Motor Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 468-03, § 2, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 24-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 481-04, § 1, repealed § 24-19, which pertained to section 8.25 added for all-night winter parking and derived from Code 1957, § 5-1.59. 
Secs. 24-20-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- P-1 vehicular parking districts, App. A, § 10-1.15. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL § 257.606(a)1., MCA § 9.2306(a)1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-31. - Unlawful use of parking meter; reward for information leading to conviction. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established. 
(2)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a United States coin. 
(3)  Remove, deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(b)  For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating provision (3) of subsection (a), a reward of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the city treasurer, upon the order of the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 5-1.60) 
Sec. 24-32. - Annual meter parking permits. 
    Annual meter parking permits may be issued in the following manner: 
    Any person may pay to the city treasurer an annual fee to be determined by the city commission for the privilege of parking one (1) motor vehicle at any metered parking space in which parking permits are honored. The city manager shall designate which parking areas will not accept parking permits, and shall prominently sign said areas indicating the prohibition of parking permits. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the first day of July in any year, which payment shall be in lieu of the meter deposits otherwise required by the city; provided, that such person displays in the front window of such person's motor vehicle the hanger/sticker furnished by the city treasurer upon payment of such fee. The city manager shall adopt a form of hanger/sticker suitable for such purpose and a record shall be kept of the issuance thereof. Duplicate hangers/stickers to replace the original sticker will be issued at the fee presently established by or as changed from time to time by the city commission when sufficient evidence has been presented that the original sticker has been misplaced or mutilated. Stickers for city-wide parking issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferable. Hangers for restricted parking areas issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable. Permits may be issued for the unexpired portion of any year on a prorated basis, but all permits shall expire on June 30th of each year. Any person may purchase as many annual permits as desired, upon payment of the annual fee for each annual permit. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 1 (5-1.60), 6-7-71; Res. of 12-19-77; Ord. No. 204, 5-21-80; Ord. No. 427-98, § 1, 1-5-98) 
Sec. 24-33. - Exiting from parked vehicles. 
    When a vehicle is parked or stopped parallel with the curb, so far as practicable, the driver or any other occupant of the vehicle shall exit by the door or doors on the right-hand or curb side of the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 5-1.48) 
Sec. 24-34. - Designation of a residential parking permit area. 
(a)  Requirements and procedures for establishing. 
(1)  A citizen or citizen group in a residential district may petition the city for relief from traffic and parking problems by requesting that a specific area be designated as a residential parking permit (RPP) area. The petition shall be circulated by a citizen or citizen group to ascertain the degree of area sentiment in favor of such a parking permit designation. The petition shall be accompanied by the rules governing designation as an RPP area. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days after receipt by the city of petitions signed by residents representing sixty (60) percent of dwelling units in the area and on each block face who favor designation, the city clerk shall verify the authenticity of petition signatures received and the city engineer and city police chief shall analyze the traffic and parking conditions in the petitioning area. No residential district or part thereof shall be recommended for designation as an RPP area unless the parking analysis reveals that the area is unreasonably impacted by vehicles of nonresidents. 
(3)  If the results of the parking analysis do not substantiate the need for an RPP area, the city shall notify the citizen or citizen's group in writing of the results of the parking analysis and the denial of the request for an RPP area. Should the citizen or citizen's group desire to appeal the decision to deny the request for an RPP area, a letter of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The citizen or representatives of the citizen's group will be notified of a meeting date to hear the appeal. The appeal sequence will be as follows: 
a.  The city manager; 
b.  The city commission. 
(4)  If the result of the parking analysis substantiates the need for an RPP area, the city engineer shall transmit the findings to the city manager for review. If approved by the city manager, the city clerk shall, within thirty (30) days, notify the residents of the area, by mail to each address, of the following information: The results of the parking analysis; the boundaries of the proposed RPP area under consideration; application procedures and fees to be charged; and the parking regulations recommended to be posted. The residents so notified shall have a fifteen-day period during which time comments may be filed with the city clerk's office. Not later than fifteen (15) days after passage of the comment period, the city manager shall make his recommendation to the city commission based on the findings of the parking analysis and consideration of the comments received from the residents of the affected area. 
(b)  Implementation. 
(1)  Upon city commission approval by resolution of a residential parking permit (RPP) area designation, residents of the area shall be notified by the city clerk, by mail to each address, of the city commission action and be informed of procedures for implementation of the approved RPP area. 
(2)  Signage of the designated RPP area will be installed by the city street department within thirty (30) days from the time residents representing sixty (60) percent of the dwelling units in the designated area complete an application as required by city procedures, and obtain/purchase a residential parking permit. 
(3)  Residential parking permits shall be issued for a twelve-month period, said permits to expire on May 31 of each year. The annual fee, if any, for an RPP shall be determined by the city commission. 
(4)  Not more than two (2) residential parking permits will be issued to each residence located within the designated RPP area. Should special circumstances be present, this number may be exceeded only with the approval of the city traffic engineer. 
(c)  Administration of the program. The city manager shall administer the residential parking permit (RPP) program and establish procedures for the implementation of the RPP program. 
(d)  Required levels of resident participation. The participation of residents representing sixty (60) percent of dwelling units in the designated area shall be required to achieve a posted residential parking permit area. In the event the number of residences participating in the residential parking permit program within a designated RPP area does not achieve the required sixty (60) percent level or falls below a level of sixty (60) percent of the occupied dwelling units, the designation may be revoked by the city manager. Notices of such minimal level of participation shall be mailed to each address in the RPP area. Residents will then have thirty (30) days to bring the area into compliance with the sixty-percent participation requirement. 
(e)  Improper parking within a designated area. 
(1)  No person shall: 
a.  Park or allow their vehicle to be parked in a residential parking permit area without a validly issued and unexpired residential parking permit properly displayed upon such vehicle; 
b.  Fail to surrender such permit to the city manager on its demand if such permits are used in violation of this section; 
c.  Make a false statement to obtain such permit. 
(2)  A person who violates this section shall: 
a.  Be subject to penalty under section 24-2 and section 24-56; and 
b.  Be liable for the penalty above plus towing charges incurred by the city in removing such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 297-88, § 1, 11-21-88) 
Sec. 24-35. - Winter parking from December 1 to April 1 each year. 
(a)  No person except physicians, ambulance drivers, or undertakers on emergency calls shall park a motor vehicle on any street or alley between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1 each winter. 
(b)  No person shall park at any time on the odd-numbered-address side of any street or alley from December 1 to April 1 each winter unless the prohibited side is designated for metered parking spaces, designated for permit parking, or where one side of the street is already designated as no parking. This subsection shall not apply to Ashmun Street between Easterday Avenue and Portage Avenue nor to Portage Avenue between Gov. Osborn Boulevard and Ashmun Street nor to Bingham Avenue between E. 6th Avenue and E. Easterday Avenue nor to Peck Street between Meridian Street and Fort Street nor to Ridge Street between Magazine Street and Gov. Osborn Boulevard nor to E. Portage Avenue between Bingham Avenue and Mission Street. This subsection shall not be in effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays where parking is otherwise allowed. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine as established annually by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 481-04, § 2, 12-20-04) 
Sec. 24-36. - Parking of recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle/trailer, personal trailer, and semi-truck restrictions. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Recreational vehicle means any of the following: 
Camping trailer (pop-up camper) means a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for recreation, camping, travel, and vacation use and does not require a special highway movement permit to be towed on a street or highway. 
Motor home means a vehicle that has its own motive power that is used to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, vacation, or seasonal use and does not require a special highway movement permit to be driven on a street or highway. 
Sport trailer means a vehicle drawn by another motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting a watercraft, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or other sport vehicle over a street or highway and does not require a special highway movement permit to be towed on a street or highway. 
Travel trailer means a vehicle used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel purposes; drawn by another motor vehicle; and does not require a special highway movement permit to be towed on a street or highway. The term includes, but is not limited to, trailer coaches and fifth wheels. 
    Commercial equipment means any machinery, parts, accessories, construction equipment or other equipment used primarily in the course of conducting a trade or business. 
    Commercial vehicle/trailer means any self-propelled vehicle or towed trailer used for the purpose of delivering goods or services, wares or merchandise, or carrying commercial equipment. 
    Personal trailer means any trailer, other than a commercial vehicle/trailer, used for the purpose of carrying personal items or possessions. 
    Semi-trailer means a freight trailer that, when attached, is supported at its forward end by the fifth-wheel device of the semi-truck. 
    Semi-truck (semi) means the motorized truck that tows a semi-trailer. 
(b)  Parking of recreational vehicles and personal trailers restricted. Recreational vehicles and personal trailers shall not be parked on a public alley or parking lot. Recreational vehicles and personal trailers may be parked on a street or highway within the city when all the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  A recreational vehicle or personal trailer must be parked on the street or highway in an area legal for parking of vehicles. 
(2)  A recreational vehicle or personal trailer may not be parked on a street or highway longer than forty-eight (48) hours in total per calendar year without a permit. 
Parking permits may be applied for at the city clerk's office. The application shall include such information as is requested by the city clerk. Permit fees shall be set by resolution of the city commission. No permit will be authorized for parking within an alley. 
Permits shall not be issued consecutively. A minimum of three (3) full days must fall between authorized permits. No issued permit may allow a vehicle to be parked in violation of parking restrictions in state laws, city ordinances or the rules set forth in this section. 
If approved, the permit shall allow a recreational vehicle or personal trailer to be parked on a street or highway in the city for a maximum of seventy-two (72) continuous hours. A total of four (4) 72-hour permits may be issued per recreational vehicle or personal trailer per calendar year. 
The permit shall include the date and time it was authorized by the city clerk's office. The permit shall expire seventy-two (72) hours after it has been issued. A copy of the permit shall be filed by the clerk with the police department. 
The permit shall be displayed so that it is visible from outside the vehicle on the street side. 
(3)  At no time shall any "slide-out" component of a recreational vehicle or personal trailer be extended while parked. 
(4)  At no time shall any generator, compressor, or other motors be operating while the recreational vehicle or personal trailer is parked. 
(5)  At no time shall a recreational vehicle or personal trailer be parked in a manner that would encroach upon a sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(6)  At no time shall a recreational vehicle or personal trailer be parked within ten (10) feet of the entrance of any driveway not belonging to the registered owner of the recreational vehicle or personal trailer. 
(7)  At no time shall any hose, cable or other attachment be extended to or from a recreational vehicle over or upon any public sidewalk. 
(c)  Parking of commercial equipment, commercial vehicle/trailer, semi-trailer, or semi-truck restricted: 
No person shall park any Commercial equipment, commercial vehicle/trailer, semi-trailer, or semi-truck on any public alley, parking lot, street, or highway, within the city, except that the parking of a commercial vehicle, trailer, or equipment shall be allowed during the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property. The exception is permitted only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. during the time when the actual service is being performed, or if the vehicle, trailer or equipment is necessary during other hours for warning of conditions for motor vehicle safety. 
(d)  This section does not apply to parking authorized by special order of the city. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the registered owner of a recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or trailer, personal trailer, or a semi-truck or trailer parked in violation of this section is presumed to be the responsible party for any violation. All offenses and fines for parking shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by resolution of the city commission as set forth in section 24-56. Each day that the violation occurs shall be considered a separate incident. The vehicle will be subject to impoundment at the owner's expense. 
(f)  This section does not replace or modify winter parking restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 569-17, § 1, 1-16-17) 
Secs. 24-37-4-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 24-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 486-05, adopted Nov. 7, 2005, deleted § 24-40, which pertained to creation; duties and derived from Ord. No. 89, § 3-12.01, adopted June 21, 1971; and Ord. No. 180, adopted Feb. 21, 1977. 
Sec. 24-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 486-05, adopted Nov. 7, 2005, deleted § 24-41, which pertained to composition; appointment and derived from Ord. No. 89, § 13-12.02, adopted June 21, 1971; Ord. No. 180, adopted Feb. 21, 1977; Ord. No. 255-86, adopted April 7, 1986; and Ord. No. 469-03, § 1, adopted June 2, 2003. 
Sec. 24-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 486-05, adopted Nov. 7, 2005, deleted § 24-42, which pertained to compensation; removal from office; filling of vacancies and derived from Ord. No. 89, § 3-12.02, adopted June 21, 1971; and Ord. No. 180, adopted Feb. 21, 1977. 
Sec. 24-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 486-05, adopted Nov. 7, 2005, deleted § 24-43, 2hich pertained to meetings and derived from Ord. No. 89, § 3-12.04, adopted June 21, 1971; and Ord. No. 180, adopted Feb. 21, 1977. 
Sec. 24-44. - Parking meter fund. 
    A separate fund shall be established in the city budget which shall be known as the parking meter fund, and any money appropriated and expended thereunder shall be under the direction of the city manager and city commission. 
(Ord. No. 89, § 3-12.03, 6-21-71; Ord. No. 180, 2-21-77) 
Secs. 24-45-24-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 24-51. - Created; supervised by city manager. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 [MCL § 600.8395] of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Public Act 154 of 1968, a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city, is hereby established. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.01, 12-3-68) 
Sec. 24-52. - Duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the city commission, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.02, 12-3-68) 
Sec. 24-53. - Disposition of scheduled offenses only; rights of violator. 
    No violation not scheduled in section 24-56 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau and in any case the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.03, 12-3-68) 
Sec. 24-54. - Disposition of offense at request of violator only. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such an alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice such person or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to such person by law. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.04, 12-3-68) 
Sec. 24-55. - Issuance of parking violations. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by either a: (i) police officer, (ii) any person appointed by the city manager to the parking violations bureau, (iii) city director of public works, or (iv) city street superintendent shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such a person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.05, 12-3-68; Ord. No. 477-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 24-56. - Schedule of offenses and fines. 
    All offenses and fines for parking shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2-6.06, 12-3-68; Ord. No. 114, 1-8-73; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 10-20-80; Ord. No. 251-85, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 299-88, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 386-94, § 1, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 422-97, §§ 1, 2, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 24-57. - Prohibition of illegal parking on private property. 
(a)  No person shall leave or park any motor vehicle on any public or private property not his own without the permission of the owner of any public or private property if there is in plain view on such property a "no parking" sign, or a sign indicating limited or restricted parking. 
(b)  Owners of private or public property or their designated agents, may prohibit parking, may restrict or limit parking, and may permit parking by certain persons and prohibit it or limit it as to other persons. 
(Ord. No. 202, 4-7-80; Ord. No. 433-98, § 1, 5-18-98) 
Secs. 24-58-24-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING LOTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of off-road vehicles in city parking lots prohibited, § 24-159. 

Sec. 24-63. - Laying out parking spaces; correct parking. 
    The traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city commission, shall have authority to lay out and designate the use of parking spaces on publicly owned or operated parking lots. Every person parking any vehicle therein shall park the same within designated limit lines and spaces. No person shall park any vehicle in any driveway or other portion of such lot where parking is forbidden by signs duly posted. 
(Code 1957, § 7-5.01) 
Sec. 24-64. - Duration of parking. 
    The traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city commission, shall have authority to limit the period during which vehicles may be parked in any publicly owned or operated parking lot. No person shall park or leave any vehicle therein for a period longer than that established by the traffic engineer and posted in such parking lot by signs giving notice of such limited parking regulations. 
(Code 1957, § 7-5.02) 
Sec. 24-65. - Installation of parking meters. 
    The traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city commission, shall have authority to install or use parking meters in any publicly owned or operated parking lot. The use of such parking meters shall be governed by the provisions of this Code relevant to parking meters. 
(Code 1957, § 7-5.03) 
Sec. 24-66. - Rules governing use. 
(a)  All parking shall be at the owner's risk. The city shall not be responsible for theft or damage to any vehicle or the loss of any articles left in any vehicle while parked in any publicly owned or operated parking lot. 
(b)  No vehicle exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length shall be parked in any public parking lot. 
(c)  Public parking lots are hereby declared to be for the accommodation of the general public and not for the purpose of furnishing private garage space. No person shall use any parking lot for the purpose of selling or repairing vehicles, or carrying on any trade or business therein. 
(d)  Whenever a vehicle enters or leaves a public parking lot equipped with a coin-or token-operated gate or barrier, the operator of the vehicle shall, if such gate or barrier be at the entrance thereto, upon entering such lot immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin or coins of the United States of a denomination mentioned on the gate or barrier or an official token issued by the city for that purpose. If such gate or barrier shall be at the exit of such lot, the operator of the vehicle shall, before leaving such lot, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin or coins of the United States of a denomination mentioned on the gate or barrier or an official token issued by the city for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to use such parking lot without depositing such coin or coins, or official tokens, upon entering or leaving, as the case may require, and it shall be unlawful to continuously park on such lot for a period of time longer than the time as shown by a sign or signs posted on such lot. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle using such lot to violate any of the conditions or regulations as posted and shown by signs on such lot regulating the use thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle to drive such vehicle into the exit gate of such lot or to drive said motor vehicle out of the entrance gate of such lot. 
(Code 1957, § 7-5.04; Ord. No. 18, § 7-5.05, 10-15-62) 
Secs. 24-67-24-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 459, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, repealed §§ 24-84-24-90, which pertained to bicycle licenses, derived from the 1957 Code, §§ 5-1.77-5-1.82, and 5-1.84. Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 459 enacted new provisions which pertained to operation of skateboards and rollerskates designated as Art. IV, §§ 24-91, 24-93, 24-95, and 24-97 herein set out. 

Sec. 24-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words [and terms] when used in this article shall mean: 
    Operate means the use, putting into action or causing to function of a skateboard or roller skates by a person mounted thereon. 
    Parking area means and public or private parking space, lot, or parking structure for parking automobiles. 
    Pedestrian means a person on foot. 
    Plaza means that open space area between the main entrance to a building and the street. 
    Roller skates shall include and shoe-like device with wheels attached including, but not limited to, roller skates, in-line roller skates and roller blades. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street, road, or highway designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
    Skateboard means a single platform mounted on wheels which is propelled by human power, motor or wind and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the movement or direction of the platform. 
(Ord. No. 459-02, § 2, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 24-92. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-93. - Operation upon certain public places and restricted areas. 
(a)  No person shall operate or in any manner use a skateboard, or roller skates upon any area where such activity is prohibited by resolution adopted from time to time by the city commission. 
(b)  Skateboards and roller skates shall be prohibited on ramps, steps, retention walls, handrails, planters, curb or gutter edges, barriers and barricades, benches and picnic tables, monument or sculpture surfaces located on all public property any where in the city. 
(c)  Yield of right-of-way and careless operation. 
(1)  Notwithstanding their own status as pedestrians, roller skaters and skate boarders operating on permissible sidewalk areas shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic (including bicycles) and to all other pedestrian traffic upon the sidewalk. 
(2)  Any person roller skating or skateboarding on any sidewalk, street, or other place not prohibited by this article and which is open to the general public (including any area designated for the parking of vehicles), in a careless or negligent manner likely to endanger any person or property shall be in violation of this article. 
(d)  No person shall ride on or in any manner use a skateboard or roller skates with a wind powered sail. 
(e)  No person shall ride on or in any manner use a skateboard or roller skates which is being towed by any person, device, vehicle, or animal. 
(f)  Skateboarding and roller skating is prohibited in a parking structure. 
(g)  Operation prohibited at certain times. 
(1)  No skateboarding is permitted on any sidewalk or other public property within the city between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The city may post a later time in certain areas it considers appropriate. 
(2)  No skateboarding or roller skating is permitted on private property if clearly posted: "NO SKATEBOARDS OR ROLLER SKATING". 
(Ord. No. 459-02, § 2, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 24-94. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-95. - Seizure of property. 
    Any police officer upon probable cause to believe that a violation of this article has been committed may confiscate the skateboard or roller skates used in the commission of such violation and obtain the alleged violators name, address, telephone number and age. The confiscated property will be held at the police department for at least ninety-six (96) hours and in the case of a minor will be released only to a responsible parent or legal guardian. The skateboard may be held until any adjudication of penalty is completed and any penalty imposed satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 459-02, § 2, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 24-96. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-97. - Penalties for violations. 
    A violation of this article IV shall be considered a civil infraction which is punishable by fine in an amount established by resolution of the city commission from time to time upon recommendation of the city manager together with costs and fines assessed by the court of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 459-02, § 2, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 24-98-24-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 558-15, § 1, adopted April 20, 2015, repealed art. V, §§ 24-102-24-105, in its entirety. Former art. V, pertained to "Motorcycles," and was derived from Ord. No. 42, §§ 5-1.111, 5-1.114, 5-1.115, 5-1.119, Adopted June 6, 1966. 

Secs. 24-102-24-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOWMOBILES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, MCL § 257.1501 et seq., MSA § 9.3200(1) et seq.; authority to regulate snowmobiles, MCL § 257.1514, MSA § 9.3200(14). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-117. - Definitions. 
    The definitions used herein shall be the same as those defined in Section 1 of Act 74 of the Public Acts of Michigan for 1968 [MCL § 257.1501, MSA § 9.3200(1)]. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.20, 11-16-70) 
Sec. 24-118. - State registration required. 
    Snowmobiles must be properly registered with the state as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.21, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Registration of snowmobiles, MCL § 257.1503 et seq., MSA § 9.3200(3) et seq. 
Sec. 24-119. - Report of accidents. 
    The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in injuries to or death of any person, or property damage in an estimated amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, notify the police department. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.24, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1516, MSA § 9.3200(16). 
Sec. 24-120. - Leaving unattended. 
    A snowmobile shall not be left unattended with the engine running or the key in the ignition. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.27, 11-16-70) 
Sec. 24-121. - Responsibility of owner for operation in violation of article. 
    No person shall knowingly authorize or permit a snowmobile owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven by any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.31, 11-16-70) 
Secs. 24-122-24-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION 

Sec. 24-128. - Lights and brakes. 
    No snowmobile shall be operated within the city limits unless it has at least one headlight, taillight and adequate brakes capable of one of the following while the snowmobile travels on packed snow and carries an operator who weighs one hundred seventy-five (175) pounds or more: 
(1)  Stopping the snowmobile in not more than forty (40) feet from an initial steady speed of twenty (20) miles per hour; or 
(2)  Locking the snowmobile's traction belt or belts. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.22, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1513, MSA § 9.3200(13). 
Sec. 24-129. - Muffler required. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation from which noise emission at fifty (50) feet at right angles from vehicle path under full throttle does not exceed eighty-six (86) DBA (decibels on the "a" scale) on a sound meter having characteristics defined by American Standards Association 51, 4-1966 "general purpose sound meter." All snowmobiles manufactured after February 1, 1972, and sold or offered for sale in this city shall not exceed eighty-two (82) DBA of the 1970 Society of Automotive Engineers Code J-192. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(f), MSA § 9.3200(15)(f). 
Sec. 24-130. - Speed. 
(a)  No person shall operate a snowmobile at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to persons and property and conditions then existing. 
(b)  No person shall operate a snowmobile at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour nor in excess of any lower posted speed that is posted as allowed upon any city streets, alleys, or rights-of-way that have been designated by resolution of the city commission as being opened for such use. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 387-94, § 1, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 504-08, § 1, 9-2-08) 
Sec. 24-131. - Operation while under influence of intoxicating drugs prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicants, liquor or narcotic drugs, barbital, or any derivative of barbital. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(b), MSA § 9.3200(15)(b). 
Sec. 24-132. - Display of lights during nighttime operation required. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile during the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and lighted taillight. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(c), MSA § 9.3200(15)(c). 
Sec. 24-133. - Operation on frozen public waters. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on the frozen surface of public waters within one hundred (100) feet of a person, or within one hundred (100) feet of a fishing shanty or shelter except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on an area which has been cleared of snow for skating purposes. 
(Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(e), MSA § 9.3200(15)(e). 
Sec. 24-134. - Operation at night; curfew. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile anywhere within the city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 480-04, § 1, 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(g), MSA § 9.3200(15)(g). 
Sec. 24-135. - Transporting of bows or firearms. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile while transporting thereon a bow, unless unstrung, or a firearm unless securely encased or equipped with and made inoperative by a manufactured key-locked trigger housing mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1515(j), MSA § 9.3200(15)(j). 
Sec. 24-136. - Yielding to pedestrians and motor vehicles while on streets and alleys required. 
    Operators of snowmobiles, when allowed to operate on city streets and alleys, shall adhere to all speed limits and traffic regulations, and shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.25, 11-16-70) 
Sec. 24-137. - Reckless operation prohibited. 
    Snowmobiles shall not be operated in a reckless, careless or negligent manner or at a speed so as to be likely to endanger persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.28, 11-16-70) 
Sec. 24-138. - Operation by certain minors. 
(a)  A parent or legal guardian shall not permit their child who is under the age of twelve (12) to operate a snowmobile without the direct supervision of an adult except on land owned or under the control of the parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  A person who is at least twelve (12) but less than sixteen (16) years of age may operate a snowmobile if: 
(1)  Such person is under the direct supervision of a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older; or 
(2)  Such person has in such person's immediate possession a snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to state law; or 
(3)  Such person is on land owned or under the control of their parent or legal guardian. A person who is operating a snowmobile pursuant to subsection (2) shall present the snowmobile safety certificate to any peace officer upon demand. 
(c)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, an operator who is under twelve (12) years of age shall not operate upon or cross a highway or street. An operator who is at least twelve (12) years of age but less than sixteen (16) years of age may cross a highway or street only if such operator has a valid snowmobile safety certificate in such operator's immediate possession. 
(d)  All operators of snowmobiles on public rights-of-way, streets, or alleys that have been authorized by resolution of the city commission as open for snowmobile use shall be over the age of sixteen (16) years, or if they are less than sixteen (16) years of age and at least twelve (12) years of age they must be under the direct supervision of a person over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(e)  All operators of snowmobiles on public rights-of-way, streets, or alleys that have been authorized by resolution of the city commission as open for snowmobile use who are under the age of eighteen (18) years shall carry and possess a valid State of Michigan or other state-issued safety training certificate at all times. Upon the request of any law enforcement personnel the operator shall display for examination the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.30, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 504-08, § 1, 9-2-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1512a., MSA § 9.3200(12a). 
Sec. 24-139. - Curfew at other times. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any streets, alleys, or rights-of-way, that have been designated by resolution of the city commission as being open for such use, at a time during which such route has been posted as closed to snowmobiles, or at any time prohibited by section 24-134. 
(Ord. No. 387-94, § 2, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95) 
Secs. 24-140-24-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AREAS OF OPERATION RESTRICTED 

Secs. 24-145-24-147. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1995, deleted §§ 24-145-24-147, 24-150-24-152, which pertained to operation of snowmobiles on streets and alleys, street crossings, and in forest reproduction areas. Such sections were derived from Ord. No. 84, §§ 5-1.21, 5-1.23, adopted Nov. 16, 1970; and Ord. No. 360-91, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1991. 
Sec. 24-148. - Operation on streets and alleys in emergencies. 
    Snowmobiles may be operated on a street, highway or alley during a period of emergency, when so declared by a police agency having jurisdiction, and when travel by conventional automotive equipment is not possible. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.21, 11-16-70) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 24-149. - Operation on streets and alleys for special events. 
    Snowmobiles may be operated on a street, alley or highway for a special event of limited duration which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule under permit from the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.21, 11-16-70) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL § 257.1512(g), MSA § 9.3200(12)(g). 
Secs. 24-150-24-152. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note following §§ 24-145-24-147. 
Sec. 24-153. - Operation on private or public property. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on the private property of another person, or upon any publicly owned property unless the property is posted "open to snowmobiles" by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.23, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95) 
Sec. 24-154. - Operation on public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Unless specifically authorized by resolution of the city commission, no person shall operate a snowmobile on any street, alley, or right-of-way. 
(b)  When a street, alley, or right-of-way has been authorized for snowmobile use by resolution of the city commission snowmobile operation on such authorized public rights-of-way shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Operation is restricted to only the far-right hand portion of the authorized public right-of-way that has been plowed. 
(2)  Operation is prohibited on any unplowed portion of the authorized public right-of-way including but not limited to any snow banks, sidewalks, or bicycle paths. 
(3)  The operator shall cause the snowmobile come to a complete stop at each and every intersection with such authorized public right-of-way even if the intersection is not posted for a required stop. 
(4)  The operator shall hand signal all turns and stops. 
(5)  The operator shall not pass any vehicle which is ahead and moving in the same direction as the snowmobile upon the right-of-way. 
(6)  The operator shall not tow any passengers with the snowmobile unless the passengers are contained in a commercially manufactured trailer designed for the conveyance of passengers and such trailer is affixed to the snowmobile by a ball or pin hitch attached to a rigid tow bar. 
(Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 504-08, § 1, 9-2-08) 
Sec. 24-155. - Operation at airports restricted. 
    Snowmobiles shall not be operated on any airport within the city limits except upon designated snowmobile trails or other permitted areas. The crossing of runways and taxiways are prohibited at all times. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.26, 11-16-70) 
Cross reference- Airport, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 24-156. - Operation in cemeteries. 
    Snowmobiles shall not be operated in cemeteries except by cemetery officials. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5-1.29, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 398-95, § 1, 10-16-95) 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-157. - Definitions. 
    The definitions herein shall be the same as those defined in Act No. 319 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, being Section 257.1601 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws, the definitions used therein shall be deemed to apply to the words and phrases used in this chapter. These definitions are as follows: 
(a)  City: The City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(b)  Dealer: A person engaged in the sale, lease or rental of an ORV as a regular business. 
(c)  Decal: A pressure sensitive adhesive backed label, of size and color to be determined by the department of state, to indicate the certificate of registration number awarded the ORV and is valid until the expiration date shown thereon. 
(d)  Department: Department of state. 
(e)  Forest road: A hard-surfaced road, gravel or dirt road, fire lane, abandoned railroad right-of-way, logging road, or a way capable of travel by a four-wheel vehicle except on interstate, state, county or city highway. 
(f)  Highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of a way or alley publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(g)  Operate: To ride in or on and be in actual physical control of the operation of an ORV. 
(h)  Operator: A person who operates or is in actual physical control of the operation of an ORV. 
(i)  ORV or vehicle: A motor driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel or three-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. ORV or vehicle does not include a registered snowmobile, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in the performance of its common function or a registered aircraft. 
(j)  Owner: Any of the following: 
(1)  A vendee or lessee of an ORV which is the subject of an agreement for the purpose of conditional sale or lease thereof; 
(2)  A person renting an ORV or having the exclusive use of an ORV for more than thirty (30) days; 
(3)  A person who holds legal ownership of the vehicle. 
(k)  Roadway: That portion of a highway unpaved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular travel including city alleys. 
(l)  Public property: Property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city, including parks, parking lots and recreational areas. 
(m)  Private property open to the public: Property which is privately owned but is open to public access. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-158. - Conditions under which operation allowed-Generally. 
    Off-road vehicles may be operated within the city limits as follows: 
(a)  An ORV operated exclusively on land owned by or under the control of the vehicle owner; 
(b)  An ORV which is operated exclusively in a special event of limited duration which is conducted according to a pre-arranged schedule under a permit from the city; 
(c)  An ORV which is operated exclusively in an approved DNR safety and training program; 
(d)  An ORV operated on approved DNR trails in the city provided the ORV operator and vehicle are being operated in full compliance of state and local ORV laws; 
(e)  An ORV operated on city property so designated for ORV use by the city commission. 
(f)  An ORV operated on a street or right-of-way, or section thereof, so designated for ORV use by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 555-15, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Sec. 24-159. - Same-Additional conditions and prohibitions. 
    No off-road vehicles shall be operated within the city limits of the City of Sault Ste. Marie except as follows: 
(a)  A person shall not operate an ORV in the city limits of Sault Ste. Marie except as provided in section 24-158. 
(b)  No person shall operate an ORV during the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and lighted taillight. 
(c)  No person shall operate an ORV on any city alley, city park, or city parking lot, except those so designated by resolution of the city commission. 
(d)  No person shall operate an ORV on any city street or sidewalk, except as so designated by resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  No person shall operate an ORV on property owned or leased by the Sault Area Public Schools. 
(f)  No person shall operate an ORV on private land open to public access. 
(g)  The owner of an ORV shall not allow the ORV to be operated in the city except as provided. 
(h)  The operation of an ORV on private land under the control of the ORV owner in the city shall not be allowed if the ORV is not equipped with a spark arrester type muffler in good working order and in constant operation. Maximum permissive noise levels are as follows: 90db(A) for ORV made before Jan. 1, 1973; 88db(A) for ORV made after Jan. 1, 1973; and 86db(A) for ORV made after Jan. 1, 1975. Noise levels are for full throttle operation at fifty (50) feet at right angles. 
(i)  ORV operators ages twelve (12) through sixteen (16) must possess valid DNR certificates and decals and produce same at the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(j)  No ORV may be operated on public property or private property open to the public at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper having due regard for existing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 555-15, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Cross reference- Parking lots, § 24-63 et seq. 
Sec. 24-160. - Reckless operation, operation in cemeteries prohibited. 
(a)  An ORV shall not be operated in a reckless, careless or negligent manner or at a speed so as to be likely to endanger persons or property. 
(b)  Off-road vehicles shall not be operated in cemeteries, except by cemetery officials, and no person under the age of twelve (12) years shall operate an off-road vehicle in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, unless the operator is accompanied by an adult. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-161. - Responsibility of owner for violation. 
    In a proceeding for a violation of this article involving prohibited operation or conduct, the decal number displayed on the ORV constitutes prima facie evidence that the owner of the ORV was the person operating the ORV at the time of this offense. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-162. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to those penalties as set forth in section 1-6 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-163. - Owner not to allow unlawful operation. 
    No person shall knowingly authorize or permit an off-road vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-164. - Operators to obey uniformed police officers. 
    The operator of an ORV who is given by hand, voice, emergency light or siren a visual or audible signal by a uniformed police officer, acting in the lawful performance of his duty, directing the operator to bring his/her ORV to a stop, shall do so. An operator shall not willfully fail to obey the direction by increasing his speed or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-165. - Operation while under influence of intoxicating drugs prohibited. 
    No person shall operate an ORV in the city or any approved ORV area while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug, barbital or other prohibited controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-166. - Operation upon the property of another. 
    No person shall operate an ORV upon the property of another without the permission of the owner. The operator of an ORV is liable for damage to private property including but not limited to damage to trees, shrubs, injury to living creatures or erosive or other ecological damage to the private or public property. Failure to post or otherwise fence any public or private property or to personally communicate against trespass shall not imply consent for ORV use. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78) 
Sec. 24-167. - Operation near dwellings. 
    No person shall operate an ORV within one hundred (100) feet of any dwelling or house in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, except where such operation is on an ORV trail designated by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 194, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 555-15, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Chapter 25 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; preservation of trees in subdivisions, § 23-55; operation of snowmobiles in nurseries, planting areas, etc., prohibited, § 24-152; zoning requirements for planting materials, App. A, § 10-1.17(1709). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Removal of noxious weeds required; notice. 
(a)  No person shall fail to cut down, remove, destroy or otherwise obliterate all Canadian thistles, milkweed, ragweed, wild carrot, burdock, oxeye daisies, or other noxious weeds or grasses growing on property owned by such person or under their possession or control. 
(b)  The city manager shall determine a date after which any noxious weeds or grasses found growing will be destroyed by the city. Notice of this date shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks so that the second notice appears at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date so set. 
(c)  Noxious weeds are considered a public nuisance and thus subject to the provisions of chapter 18. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.09) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 18. 
Secs. 25-2-25-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS 

Sec. 25-16. - Planting or removing in public places. 
    No person, except the city, shall plant, remove or destroy any ornamental shade trees or shrubs in any public place unless authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.06) 
Sec. 25-17. - Attaching articles to trees in street areas prohibited. 
    No person shall attach any guy rope, wire, cable or other contrivance whatsoever, to any tree in any public place or use the same for any banner, sign or purpose whatever. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.06) 
Sec. 25-18. - Permit required to cut, trim, etc., trees in public places. 
    No person shall cut, trim, saw or otherwise mutilate any tree in any public place to make room for telephone, telegraph or electric line wires, moving of buildings or machinery, building a sidewalk, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.06; Ord. No. 516-10, § 2, 5-3-10) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 25-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 516-10, § 1, adopted May 3, 2010, repealed § 25-19, which pertained to location of trees and shrubs near sidewalks restricted and derived from Code 1957, § 7-1.06. 
Sec. 25-20. - Removal when roots are causing damage to public property. 
    When in the judgment of the city manager, the roots of any tree or bush are causing damage to any sewer, sidewalk, pavement or other public property the same may be declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 18. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1.10) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 25-21. - Permit required to plant certain species on private property. 
    No person shall plant any poplar, box elder, basswood, willow, soft maple, common catalpa, horse chestnut tree, or "ailanthus glandulosa" on any private property without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city manager. 
(Code 1957, §§ 6-1.10, 7-1.06) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 25-22. - Trimming of trees and shrubs near streets and alleys required by property owners or occupants. 
(a)  The person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a public street or alley shall trim any limbs or branches of trees or shrubs growing on such premises in such a manner that a clear space of eight (8) feet shall be found between such branches and the ground surface of the public street or alley. 
(b)  The person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a public street or alley shall trim any hedge or bush on said premises in such a manner that no part encroaches upon the public street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 7-1.06) 
Sec. 25-23(1). - Definitions. 
    Street trees : "Street trees" are defined as trees and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, alleys, or rights-of-way within the city. 
    Park trees : "Park trees" are herein defined as trees and all other woody vegetation in public parks which have individual names, and all other areas owned by the city upon which the public has free access as a park. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(2). - Creation and establishment of a city tree commission. 
    There is hereby created and established a City Tree Commission for the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, which shall consist of seven (7) members, each of who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the commission. The city commission may appoint one (1) of its members as a nonvoting liaison to the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(3). - Terms of office. 
    The term of the seven (7) persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be four (4) years, except that the first members appointed shall have staggered terms. Two (2) of the members appointed to the first commission shall be for a one-year term, two (2) of the members appointed to the first commission shall be for a two year term, two (2) of the members appointed to the first commission shall be for a three-year term, one (1) member appointed to the first commission shall be a four-year term. Two (2) members of the commission shall possess a professional background relating to landscaping, tree care, or agriculture. Members appointed to the commission must be at all times registered voters of the city, except for the two (2) members appointed to the commission possessing a background related to landscaping, tree care, or agriculture. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be re-appointed without regard to the terms limits prescribed in section 2-31 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(4). - Compensation. 
    Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(5). - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the commission: 
(a)  To study, investigate, develop, amend, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the city commission and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. The tree commission, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(b)  To review plans for tree maintenance for all utility companies planning on conducting tree maintenance within the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  To recommend an annual budget to the city manager for various tree activities within the city including anticipated revenues and expenses relating to providing trimming, removal, planting and professional services needed to maintain city trees. 
(d)  To pursue fund raising activities including obtaining public or private grants or gifts, memorials, honorary tree planting, and the creation of an endowment fund for maintaining trees within the city. 
(e)  To advise the city manager, city administration, and other boards and commissions on various land use standards relating to tree and landscaping requirements for public and private developments. 
(f)  To advise the city manager on methods to purchase and produce public trees for street and park planting. 
(g)  To educate city employees, utility companies and private citizens on proper tree planting and renovation activities. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(6). - Operation. 
    The tree commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-23(7). - Street tree species to be planted. 
    The tree commission shall include in the City Tree Plan for the City of Sault Ste. Marie a comprehensive listing of acceptable street trees that can be planted in the street right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this article. The listing of tree species should include small trees with mature height of fifteen (15) to twenty (20) feet (which could include such trees as flowering crab-apple and serviceberry) medium trees with a mature height of thirty (30) to fifty (50) feet (honey locust and linden), and large trees with a mature height of fifty (50) feet or more (bur oak and sugar maple). Species of trees included in this list shall have an appropriate branching structure to minimize interference with vehicles and pedestrians utilizing adjacent streets and sidewalks. The root structure of selected tree species shall minimize interference with underground utilities, sidewalks, and streets. Furthermore, the tree commission shall include in the city tree plan the minimum trunk size for trees to be planted in the public right-of-way. 
    This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners provided that the selection of the tree is in accordance with all sections of chapter 25 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-24(1). - Spacing. 
    No trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, thirty (30) feet; medium trees, forty (40) feet; and large trees, fifty (50) feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-24(2). - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs, curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in section 25-23(7), and no trees may be planted closer to any curb, curb line, or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two (2) feet; medium trees, three (3) feet; and large trees, four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-24(3). - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-24(4). - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 25-23(7) may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-25(1). - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, and maintain trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-25(2). - Public tree removal. 
    The city tree commission shall review and determine whether street trees should be removed as requested by any city departments or utility companies operating within the right-of-way or the general public after property owners owning property adjacent to, or within fifty (50) feet of the street tree proposed for removal have been provided a minimum seven (7) days' written notice and have been given an opportunity to comment at a city tree commission meeting. If three (3) or more street trees are to be removed from a single block, then all property owners on the block should be notified of this proposal and given an opportunity to appear before the city tree commission. If a street tree in the sole opinion of the city manager poses an immediate danger, then authorization of the tree commission and related notices are note required. 
    The city tree commission may order removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-25(3). - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-26(1). - Pruning, corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-26(2). - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree commission will direct notification in writing to the owners of such trees in the same manner as prescribed in article III. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense as prescribed in article III. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax as prescribed in article III. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-26(3). - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-28. - Interference with city tree commission. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree commission, any of its agents, city employees, or city contractors while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in Ordinance No. 516-10. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-29. - Arborist's license and insurance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a city license from the city clerk. The license fee shall be in the amount set annually by resolution of the city commission as stated in the city fee schedule; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-30. - Review by city commission. 
    The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree commission to the city commission who may hear the matter and make a final decision. A request for an appeal may only be made by filing a written request with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the action of the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-31. - Penalty. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to penalties as outlined in section 1-6 of the City of Sault Ste. Marie Code. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-32. - Designate Arbor Day. 
    Arbor Day will be celebrated on the last Friday in April each year. 
(Ord. No. 516-10, § 3, 5-13-10) 
Sec. 25-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 18. 

Sec. 25-34. - Public nuisance declared. 
(a)  All species and varieties of elm trees, trees of the genus Ulmus, infected with the fungus known as the Dutch elm disease ( Certostomella ulmi ) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead and all dead elmwood to which the bark is still attached, which, because of their condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle ( Scolytus multiariatus ), or Native Elm Bark Beetle ( Hylurgopinus rufis ), are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 61, §§ 1, 2 (6-5.01), (6-5.02), 9-9-68) 
Sec. 25-35. - Removal of nuisance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any elm tree or dead elmwood which, as provided in section 25-34, is a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove and burn any such elm tree or dead elmwood under the supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(b)  Any elm tree or dead elmwood on property owned by the city which is a public nuisance shall promptly be removed and burned under the supervision of the city manager at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 61, §§ 3, 8 (6-5.03), (6-5.08), 9-9-68) 
Sec. 25-36. - Access to lands for inspection; interference prohibited. 
    In order to carry out the purposes of this article and to implement the enforcement thereof, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or land in the city at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any elm trees or dead elmwood situated thereon and the city manager may remove such specimens from any such tree as are required to determine whether such tree because it is dead or substantially dead may serve as a breeding place for the Elm Bark Beetle. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the city manager from entering on any lot or land in the city for the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with the city manager or such representative in the performance of any duties provided for under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 61, § 4 (6-5.04), 9-9-68) 
Sec. 25-37. - Notice to abate; service of notice; abatement. 
(a)  If, on analysis of specimens removed from any elm tree, it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance as provided by section 25-34, the city manager shall serve or cause to be served upon the person who is owner of the lot or land on which such tree or dead elmwood is located, a written notice requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Service of notice shall be by personal service if the owner of the lot or land on which an infected elm tree, as aforesaid, is located is a resident of the city, or, if a nonresident of the city, written notice shall be served by certified mail, addressed to such owner at the last-known address of such owner. 
(c)  If the person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to remove and destroy by burning such elm tree or dead elmwood within ten (10) days after service of such notice, the city manager may proceed to remove and burn such tree or dead elmwood and assess the cost thereof against the owner of such lot or land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the city. 
(Ord. No. 61, §§ 5, 6 (6-5.05), (6-5.06), 9-9-68) 
Sec. 25-38. - Assessment to be in addition to penalties. 
    If the city removes any infected elm tree which is a public nuisance or any dead or substantially dead elm tree or dead elmwood, the assessment of the cost of the work done by the city against the owner of the lot or land involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for any violation or noncompliance with any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 61, § 7 (6-5.07), 9-9-68) 
Cross reference- Single lot procedure for special assessments, Ch. 21, Art. V. 
Sec. 25-39. - Violation of article provisions. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article by failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided for, within ten (10) days after the service thereof, or who shall resist or obstruct the city manager in carrying out the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 61, § 9 (6-5.09), 9-9-68) 
Chapter 26 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, Ch. 9; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584-18, § 1E., adopted November 19, 2018, repealed art. II, §§ 26-16-26-19, 26-26-26-31, and 26-38-26-41, which pertained to taxicabs, and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 9-7.01-9-7.14; Ord. No. 17, § 9-7.12, adopted February 19, 1962; Ord. No. 137, § 1(9-7.13), adopted February 18, 1974; Ord. No. 183, § 1, adopted September 7, 1977; Ord. No. 196-A, § 1, adopted August 6, 1979; Ord. No. 203, § 1, adopted April 21, 1980; Ord. No. 218-81, § 1, adopted October 5, 1981; Ord. No. 340-90, § 1, adopted August 20, 1990; Ord. No. 381-94, § 1, adopted April 4, 1994; and Ord. No. 418-96, § 1, adopted December 2, 1996. 

Secs. 26-16-26-41. - Reserved. 
Chapter 27 - WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, Ch. 13. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; drain laying, Ch. 8, Art. IV; garbage, rubbish, litter and junk, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivision regulations, Ch. 23; sewage disposal improvements in subdivisions, § 23-53; water supply improvements in subdivisions, § 23-54; zoning ordinance, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Combined system. 
    The water supply and sewage disposal system of the city shall be operated and maintained as one system on a combined-rate basis and such system shall include all wells, pumps, pumphouses, water mains and laterals, water and sewer pumping stations, water storage and treatment facilities, sewers, force main and lift stations, sewage treatment facilities and all attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and maintenance of the water supply and sewage disposal system, now in existence or hereafter acquired. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 2, 2-26-68) 
Sec. 27-2. - Operation. 
    The operation, repair and management of the water supply and sewage disposal system, and the acquiring of the authorized public improvements shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager, subject to overall control by the city commission. The city commission may make such rules, orders and regulations and appoint such personnel as it may deem necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 9, 2-26-68) 
Sec. 27-3. - Fiscal year. 
    The water supply and sewage disposal system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing July first and ending on the last day of the following June. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 14, 2-26-68) 
Sec. 27-4. - Records; annual statement by city manager. 
    The city manager shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record and account, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the water supply and sewage disposal system. Such books of record and account shall be audited annually by a certified public accountant, to be designated by the city commission, and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1 (7-3.10), 10-19-59; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-5. - Right to prohibit use of system. 
    If the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewers of the water supply and sewage disposal system, then an additional charge may be made over and above the regular rates, or it may be required that such sewage be treated by the person responsible therefor before being emptied into the sewer, or the right to empty such sewage may be denied if necessary for the protection of the sewer and sewage disposal facilities of the system or the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 12, 2-26-68) 
Sec. 27-6. - Free service prohibited. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the water supply and sewage disposal system to any person. The city shall pay for all services furnished to it or to any of its departments at the established rates, fees and charges, or any revision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1 (7-3.08), 10-19-59; Ord. No. 55, § 11, 2-26-68) 
Sec. 27-7. - Rules, regulations, fees and charges promulgated by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall make such rules and regulations as such manager finds necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any rule or regulation made by the city manager shall be in writing. A copy of each such rule or regulation shall be filed with the city clerk before the same is put into effect. The clerk shall present such rule or regulation to the city commission for its consideration not later than the next regular meeting of the commission after the filing of same. No such rule or regulation shall remain in effect if disapproved by the city commission. 
(c)  No person shall violate any such rule or regulation promulgated in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.09; Ord. No. 10, § 1 (7-3.08), 10-19-59; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-8. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  The rates, charges and deposits to be charged for water and sewer service furnished by the water supply and sewage disposal system shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The city commission may also establish, upon recommendation of the city manager, by resolution rates, fees and charges for supplying water and sewage disposal service to premises located outside the corporate limits of the city, which rates, fees and charges shall be not less than the rates, fees and charges provided for service furnished to premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1 (7-3.08), 10-19-59; Ord. No. 55, § 10, 2-26-68; Ord. No. 56, § 1, 2-26-68; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-9. - Collection of rates and charges; lien upon premises; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies possessed by the city for the collection of water and sewage disposal rates, assessments, charges or rentals for the use of the water supply and sewage disposal system by any house or building or any premises, lot, or lots, or parcel, or parcels of land, the city shall have as security for the collection thereof a lien upon such house or other building, and upon the premises or lot, or lots, or parcel, or parcels of land, upon which such house or other building shall be situated, or to which such water has been supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon service to the premises or property, and the official records of the city shall constitute notice of the pendency of such lien. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens, except taxes and special assessments, whether or not such liens have accrued or were recorded, prior to the lien herein created. 
(b)  All water supply and sewage disposal charges which have been due and unpaid for thirty (30) days or more shall be reported by the city manager to the city commission at the time single lot special assessments are normally requested. All unpaid water rates or charges which are reported by the city manager to the city commission as having been due and unpaid shall be transferred to the city's tax roll and assessed against the property to which service was supplied or furnished. Such unpaid rates or charges shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes are collected. If the same shall remain delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer to be collected in the same manner as city taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply in any instance where a written lease has been or is legally executed, containing a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for payment of water supply and sewage disposal bills; provided an affidavit with respect to the execution of such lease shall be filed with the officer in charge of accounting in the city, and twenty (20) days' notice shall be given to the city by the lessor of any cancellation, change in or termination of the lease. 
(d)  In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises, pursuant to section 27-26, for the nonpayment of water supply and sewage disposal rates, fees and charges when due. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.10; Ord. No. 10, § 1 (7-3.08), 10-19-59; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Secs. 27-10-27-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 27-21. - Application for service; deposit. 
(a)  When installation of service pipe is desired from the water distribution system, an application in writing shall first be made to the water department. Such application shall set forth the true legal description of the premises to be served, the size of the service desired, and such other pertinent data as may be required. The applicant shall answer truthfully all questions regarding such application which may be put to such applicant by an officer or employee of the water department. 
(b)  Connection to the distribution mains shall be installed only by the city and then only upon the prepayment of fees established under section 27-8. The fee established, which shall be known as the connection fee, may include and be based upon the following: the meter service size, the cost of paving, excavation and backfill, making the tap, furnishing and installing service pipe from the main to a point between the curb and the sidewalk, and furnishing and installing the service box and curb stop. 
(c)  After the service pipes have been installed to the premises, application may be made for the use of water provided such application is made in writing at the office of the water department on such forms as shall be prescribed, and provided further, that the applicant agrees to be bound by all legally established rules and regulations of the water department. The use of water shall thereupon be granted. 
(d)  Tenants of persons complying with the provisions of subsection 27-9(c) with respect to execution of leases and filing of affidavits shall not be granted the use of water until they have paid the deposit required by the water department. The amount of the deposit so required shall be equal to such amounts as have been set by resolution of the city commission. Such deposit shall bear no interest and shall, except as hereinafter provided, be retained by the water department until service has been discontinued, all rates and charges paid, and the meter found to be in good condition. The water department shall have the right to use such portion of such deposit as necessary to repair any meter damaged by reason of neglect, carelessness or misuse of such meter by the owner or customer and to pay any unpaid rates or charges for which the consumer may be liable. The person making the deposit shall be required to pay such additional sums as shall be necessary from time to time so that the amount on deposit at all times shall be the amount of the original deposit. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.0; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-101) 
Sec. 27-22. - Installation of service. 
(a)  The water department will not be required to grant connection permits at any time when in the judgment of the city the making of connections will endanger the mains from frost or other damage. 
(b)  All service pipe hereafter laid shall have a minimum internal diameter of three-quarters (3/4) of an inch and shall be of copper or approved equivalent, and shall conform to the specifications of the American Water Works Association. The minimum depth of cover for service lines shall be seven feet below the surface of the ground or the established street grade whichever is lower. The city may grant exceptions to this depth requirement or increase the depth at it deems appropriate. No service shall be laid along the outside wall of any building or in any position where there is danger of freezing. Every service shall be furnished with a valve on the influent side and effluent side of the meter below the action of frost. Service pipe laid in the same trench with a sewer shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches distant from the sewer horizontally, and if the sewer is laid at a greater depth, the water service pipe shall be shelved into the bank and placed on a compacted base. 
(c)  Every building shall have a separate connection with the street main. 
(d)  No person shall make any attachment or connection with the water distribution system or make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any fixtures connected with the system unless such connection, repairs, additions, extensions or alterations are in accord with the code approved by the state, and with any additional rules and regulations regulating the installation of plumbing which the commission may from time to time adopt. All work performed in making additions, connections, repairs, extensions or alterations of any fixtures connected with the distribution system shall be subject to inspection by a representative of the water department, who shall have authority, hereby granted, to order any part of such work discontinued or changed in order that the same shall comply with the rules and regulations of the department. 
(e)  For services under four (4) inches in diameter all right, title and ownership to the street portion of the service, including the corporation stop, curb stop and box, and service pipe, shall be vested in the city. For services four (4) inches and larger in diameter the portion of service lines outside of the tapping valve (including the corporation stop, curb stop and box, and service pipe) shall belong to the owner of the property served by the lateral line notwithstanding location of any portion of the service under a street. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.02; Ord. No. 440-99, § 1, 3-1-99; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-23. - Adoption of water supply cross connection rules of the state. 
    The city does hereby adopt by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the State Department of Public Health, the same being R 325.431 through 325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code; such rules being recorded in supplement no. 71 to the 1954 Michigan Administrative Code. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties serviced by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city water department, and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(2)  The representative of the city water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(3)  The city water department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: "Water Unsafe For Drinking" 
(5)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing code. 
(6)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any other written order of the city water department, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished under section 1-6 of the City Code. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 7-2.02, 5-7-73; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-24. - Maintenance of service. 
    For services under four (4) inches in diameter every person having service from the city water distribution system shall at such person's own cost and expense keep in repair that portion of the service between the service box and the meter. In case such service be permitted to remain out of repair, the water department may shut off the water from the premises served. For services four (4) inches and larger in diameter every person having service from the city water distribution system shall at such person's own cost and expense keep in repair that portion of the service lines outside of the tapping valve. In case such service be permitted to remain out of repair, the water department may shut off the water from the premises served. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.03; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-25. - Regulations concerning meters. 
(a)  All connections hereafter made with the water mains with the exception of fire hydrant and fire protection sprinkler systems shall be through a meter, and no water shall be supplied to any inhabitant of the city unless such water shall be measured by a water meter of a design approved and installed by the water department. The department will not be required to furnish meters of a larger size than in the judgment of the city appears to be necessary. 
(b)  Water for automatic sprinkler systems will be furnished at the rates provided under section 27-8. No person shall use any water from the sprinkler system except in case of fire. 
(c)  All meters must be set in a clean, dry, freeze-free and sanitary place which is easily accessible. The location of the meter must be approved by the city. The location must be such that it is not subjected to freezing temperatures. They shall not be set in closets or other places that are locked, in coal bins, or in other places difficult of access. Where practical, meters shall be installed within the building served. Where this is impractical, meter pits shall be built in accordance with plans and specifications furnished by the water department. The cost of construction of meter pits or areas together with installation of remote sensor wiring shall be borne by the consumer. All determinations of the suitability, accessibility, and compliance with this section's conditions shall be made in the final judgment of the city water department. 
(d)  Actual placing of the meter shall be done by the water department after the property owner has provided a suitable place, at such property owner's own expense, for setting the meter. If an application for water service is filed and no provision is made for the meter, the water department shall not be required to set the meter until a suitable place has been provided. 
(e)  Meters shall be furnished by the water department without cost to the consumer. All right, title and ownership of the meter shall remain in the city. The consumer shall pay for the placement of all required wires needed for remote meter reading devices required by the city. The city shall determine the location of the remote meter read devices. 
(f)  The city shall maintain all meters and make all necessary replacements caused by wear through normal usage but the consumer shall be held responsible for care and protection of the meter and for injury to the same by any person. Any damage which may occur to any water meter while in the care of the tenant, owner or agent of the property on which such water meter is placed shall be paid for by such person upon representation of a statement of damages. 
(g)  The accuracy of the meter on any premises will be tested by the water department upon written request of the owner accompanied by a fee established in accordance with section 27-8. If on such test the meter shall be found to register over four (4) percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter shall be substituted therefor, the fee refunded to the owner and the water bill adjusted in such manner as may be fair and just. If on such test the meter shall be found to register less than four (4) percent more water than actually passes through it, the fee shall not be refunded, and no adjustment in the water bill shall be made. 
(h)  In case a meter reading does not appear to be consistent or in case the meter has ceased to register, the amount of water charged for shall be the amount established by the water department. In making such estimates, previous quantities of water used by the same consumer shall be used as a basis for estimates, but special conditions found, such as leaking fixtures or abnormal demand for water may also be considered. When it appears that abnormal use of water has resulted from leakage or carelessness on the part of the consumer no deduction or adjustment shall be made. 
(i)  All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a meter from any service connection. No person shall break, remove, tamper with, damage, or remove any seal which is placed on any meter or service box by an employee of the water department. No person shall place or cause or suffer to be placed any device which shall serve to allow any water to be used which does not pass through and register upon the meter. 
(j)  It shall be the duty of the water department to read all meters periodically and to render statements for the amounts due as shown by such reading. Statements shall be payable as determined by this article but in no event shall failure to receive a statement excuse any consumer for nonpayment thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.04; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-26. - Discontinuance of service, service transfer and final billing. 
(a)  Termination of service for nonpayment. If payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been made by the due date on the bill, a shutoff notice will be sent by first class mail to inform the user that failure to respond will result in termination of utility service. If payment is not received, or satisfactory arrangements have not been made within ten (10) days after the shutoff notice is sent to the user, the utility service shall be terminated. No utility service that has been discontinued due to nonpayment shall be restored until all past due bills and applicable fees are paid or satisfactory arrangements for such payment are made. 
(b)  [Restoration of service.] When the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall have been shut off or stopped by, or under the direction of, the water department in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a), the water shall not again be supplied to such building, structure or premises until a fee established in accordance with section 27-8 has been paid by the consumer nor until a deposit has been made. 
(c)  [Transfer of service.] Prior to transferring service to a new customer a final reading of the meter shall occur and a new water sewer application shall be made by the new customer. After the final meter reading a final billing which shall include any past due or unpaid charges shall be prepared and provided to the terminating customer. This final billing shall be paid within twenty-four (24) hours. If the billing is not paid within the twenty-four (24) hours the water service shall be disconnected. Service shall not be resumed to the property until the final billing and all appropriate fees are paid. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.05; Ord. No. 264-87, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-27. - Access to property. 
(a)  The water department through its authorized representative shall have access to the meter and all water plumbing fixtures at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting the meter or any other plumbing used in connection with the water supply system, and no such meter or auxiliary equipment shall be covered or fenced in such a way as to be inaccessible. 
(b)  When the water department determines in its sole judgment that access to the meter is required, and the water department has not been granted access, then the water department shall terminate the water supply to the premises after following the notification procedures in subsection (c). 
(c)  The notification procedures for termination of water supply under this section are as follows: 
(1)  A notification shall be sent regular first class mail to the address listed upon the water billing account advising the customer to contact the water department to grant access to the meter. 
(2)  If the customer does not grant access within 10 days of the mailing date of the notice in subsection (1) above, then the water department shall send regular first class mail and post upon the premises a notice indicating the water supply will be terminated. 
(3)  If the customer does not grant access within the days stated in the shutoff notice, then the water supply shall be terminated until access is granted and all the fees mentioned in subsection 27-26(b) shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.06; Ord. No. 423-97, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-28. - Use of hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall, without written authority, draw water from any public hydrant or any other public connection with the water supply system except in emergency cases for the purpose of extinguishing fire, or fire practice by the City fire department. Permits to use hydrants shall be approved only for specific hydrants at specific times for a specific purpose. 
(b)  Any person holding permission from the city to use fire hydrants shall keep a written permit at the place of use and such permit shall be displayed to any city official upon request. 
(c)  Persons desiring service from a fire hydrant shall place on deposit such a sum of money as required by the city, which sum shall be held until all charges incurred have been fully paid and all water department equipment returned in good condition. The department shall have the right to use any portion of such sum to repair or replace any equipment damaged through carelessness, neglect or misuse by the consumer or by reason of its use thereof. 
(d)  Before use of water from a hydrant is allowed, the discharge port shall first be fitted with a valve and meter under the direction of the water department. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.07; Ord. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-29. - Tampering with property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tap any pipe, open or close any hydrant, valve or stopcock, or interfere in any manner or tamper with any part of the city system of waterworks, or to use water which does not pass through a meter except as provided herein, and any damage resulting from such unlawful interference, or tampering with such system of waterworks, may be collected by the city in appropriate legal action. 
(Code 1957, § 7-2.08) 
Sec. 27-30. - Provision of second meter to measure water not entering the sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  [Installation of second water meter.] The owner of any premises using metered water may upon application, preinspection, signing an agreement as provided for herein, and obtaining a permit, and paying such fees as required by a resolution of the city commission install a separate water meter for metering the use of water which does not enter the sanitary sewers. 
(b)  Cost. The cost of the second meter shall be one-half (1/2) the purchase cost of the second meter, and one hundred (100) percent of the plumbing costs associated with installation thereof shall be the responsibility of the property owners. No readiness to serve fees shall be assessed. 
(c)  Connections . The second meter shall be connected on the water line coming into the building from the public water supply immediately after the regular meter for the premises. Only lines approved by the city water department shall be connected to the second meter. There shall be no connections, or use of water directly from the second meter, for other than approved installations. 
(d)  Right of entry . The water department and/or building department shall, at any reasonable hour, have the right to enter any building wherein there is a second meter to inspect the meter and piping system to see that there are not violations respecting the second meter. The refusal of entry, upon request, shall be deemed evidence of a violation. 
(e)  Agreement . An owner shall enter into an agreement with the city, before receiving a permit for a second meter, that the owner shall not himself nor shall he allow anyone else to make any illegal use of the second meter. 
(f)  Violation options . Upon there appearing to be a violation of the provisions for a second meter, the city shall, at its option: 
(1)  Disconnect/suspend water service . Disconnect or cause the disconnection of the second meter; the city may suspend water service to the premises until the disconnection has occurred. 
(2)  Sewer charges . Charge the owner for whatever sewer charges should have been charged. 
(Ord. No. 257-86, § 1, 8-18-86; Ord.. No. 522-10, § 1, 10-4-10) 
Sec. 27-31. - Private water connection. 
(a)  At such time as a public water supply system becomes available to a property served by a private water supply system as provided for in subsection (b) below, then in that event a direct connection shall be made to the public water supply in compliance with this article, and any wells or similar private water supplies shall be abandoned and disconnected completely from the piping which is connected or cross connected to the public water supply. 
(b)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located a public water supply system, is hereby required at the owners expense to install suitable water facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water supply in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after the date notice to do so is mailed to the owner at the address of the affected premises or within ninety (90) days after a notice to do so is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. All questions of the practicability of such connections shall be decided by the city manager. 
(c)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other agency having legal jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 440-99, § 2, 3-1-99) 
Secs. 27-32-27-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 250-85, adopted Sept, 3, 1985, repealed §§ 27-41-27-44, being Art, III, Sewage Disposal, as derived from the 1957 Code, §§ 7-3.01-7-3.04. Such ordinance further provided than provisions designated as §§ 27-1-27-19, be substituted for those repealed under Article III. In order to conform to the numbering system of the Code, such provisions have been redesignated as §§ 27-41-27-58, with the exception of § 27-19, which provided an effective date of ten days after publication of the ordinance (publication date shown as Oct. 15, 1985). 

Sec. 27-41. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article regulates private and public sewers, sewer connections, industrial waste pretreatment facilities and discharge of industrial waste into the City of Sault Ste. Marie publicly operated treatment works and provides for pollutant limitations, data collection, monitoring and sampling, and provides penalties for the violation thereof. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the waste water system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the waste water system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim waste water and sludge from the system. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-42. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33, U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
    Applicable county health department. The Chippewa County Health Department. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives discharge from drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
    City. The City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or waste water. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively. 
    Combined sewer. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Commercial waste. A liquid or water-carried waste material from a commercial business engaged in buying, selling, exchanging goods or engaging in said goods or services. 
    Compatible pollutant. A substance amenable to treatment in the waste water treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Composite sample. A series of samples taken over a specific time period whose volume is proportional to the flow in the waste stream, which are combined into one sample. 
    Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Debt service charge. Charges levied to customers of the waste water system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the waste water system. 
    Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated waste water directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director. The city manager, or his authorized representative. 
    Environmental protection agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutants. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial wastes. The waste water discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or waste water discharge from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employee's domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit or reduces the efficiency of the POTW. The term also includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW. 
    Laboratory determination. The measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test, or analysis of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water," a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in accordance with any other method prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
    Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of this article [September 3, 1985]. 
    Normal domestic sewage (NDS). Waste water which, when analyzed, shows a daily average concentration of not more than three hundred (300) mg/l of BOD; nor [more] than three hundred fifty (350) mg/l of suspended solids; nor more than ten (10) mg/l of phosphorus. 
    Operation and maintenance. All work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the waste water transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of waste water to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Owner. Owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant. Any of various chemicals, substances, and refuse materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radio-active materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity of the water and soil. 
    Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to waste water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes [by] other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR, Section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to inclusion in the POTW. 
    Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey waste water to the POTW treatment plant. For purposes of this article "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey waste waters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and in controlled by public authority. 
    Replacement. The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment, appurtenances and accessories in the waste water transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of waste water in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewage. A liquid or water-carried waste discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings including but not limited to residential homes, apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, commercial businesses or industrial plants. 
    Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant or waste water treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charge. The sum of the applicable user charge, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    Shall or may. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's waste water disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day; or 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five (5) per cent of the flow in the city's waste water treatment system; or 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the act, state statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, Michigan Department of Natural Resources, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the waste water treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Slug load. Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Officer of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    State. State of Michigan. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works, who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge. As part of the service charge, any customer discharging waste water having strength in excess of limits set forth by the city may be required to pay an additional charge to cover the cost of treatment of such excess strength waste water. 
    Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, waste water or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to public health or environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    Uncontaminated industrial waste. Waste water which has not come into contact with any substance used in or incidental to industrial processing operations and to which no chemical or other substance has been added. 
    User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of waste water into the POTW. 
    User charge. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement. 
    User class. The kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including but not limited to residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental: 
(1)  Residential user. A user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one (1) or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multifamily dwellings (transit lodging is not included, it is considered commercial). 
(2)  Industrial user. A user of the treatment works which discharges waste water from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes or from any structure with these characteristics, or distinct from their employee's domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(3)  Commercial user. An establishment listed in the Office of the Management and Budget's "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (SICM), involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
(4)  Institutional user. Any establishment listed in the SICM involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(5)  Governmental user. Any federal, state or local government user of the waste water treatment works. 
    Waste water. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously on intermittently. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-43. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
    BOD -Biochemical oxygen demand 
    CFR -Code of Federal Regulations 
    COD -Chemical oxygen demand 
    EPA -Environmental Protection Agency 
    l -liter 
    mg -milligrams 
    mg/l -milligrams per liter 
    NDS -Normal domestic sewage 
    NPDES -National pollutant discharge elimination system 
    P -Phosphorus 
    POTW -Publicly owned treatment works 
    SIC -Standard industrial classification 
    SICM -Standard Industrial Classification Manual 
    SS -Suspended solids 
    SWDA -Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. 
    O&M -Operation and maintenance 
    CWA -Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-44. - Unsanitary deposits, discharge to natural outlets prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, when sewage and/or treatment facilities are available, to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, unless specifically permitted by the applicable county health department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, unless specifically permitted by the applicable county health department or as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-45. - Process waste water. 
(a)  Waste water contribution information. Any industry or structure discharging process flow to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream shall file the material listed below with the director. Any industry which does not normally discharge to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream, but has the potential to do so from accidental spills or similar circumstances, shall also file the material listed below. The director may require each person who applies for or receives sewer service, or through the nature of the enterprise creates a potential environmental problem, to file the material listed below on a disclosure form prescribed by the city: 
(1)  Name, address and location (if different from the address); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Waste water constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in 27-42 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in: 
a.  "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," American Public Health Association, current edition; 
b.  "Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," United States Environmental Protection Agency, current edition; 
c.  "Annual Book of Standards, Part 131, Water, Atmospheric Analysis," American Society of Testing Materials, current edition. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Industries identified as significant industries or subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or those required by the city must submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment; the completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection a. above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day; 
(12)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the ROTW; 
(14)  The disclosure form shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the user and a qualified engineer; 
(15)  The city will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city shall notify the user of the acceptance thereof. 
(b)  Discharge modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation or revision of a national categorical pretreatment standard, all affected users must submit to the city the information required by paragraphs (a)(8) and (a)(9) of this section. 
(c)  Discharge conditions. Waste water discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. The city may: 
(1)  Set unit charges or a schedule of user charges and fees for the waste water to be discharged to the POTW; 
(2)  Limit the average and maximum waste water constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Establish compliance schedules; 
(7)  Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to waste water discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto, and copying thereof; 
(9)  Require notification of the city for any new introduction of waste water constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the waste water constituents being introduced into the waste water treatment system; 
(10)  Require notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article; 
(12)  Require waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams, or other potential waste problems to be placed under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities; 
(13)  Require records and file reports to be maintained on the final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, soils, radio-active materials, solvents, or other wastes. 
(d)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of waste water into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement will be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified representative. 
(e)  Periodic compliance reports: 
(1)  Any user or new source discharging into the POTW, shall submit to the director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in pretreatment standard or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards or this article. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection (c)(3) of this section. At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted; 
(2)  The director may also impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (e)(1) above shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(f)  Monitoring facilities. The city may require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(g)  Inspection and sampling. The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where waste water is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, Michigan Department of Natural Resources and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, Michigan Department of Natural Resources and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(h)  Pretreatment. Industrial users shall provide necessary waste water treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the city. Any facilities required to pretreat waste water to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
The city shall annually publish in the major local newspaper a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or Michigan Department of Natural Resources upon request. 
(i)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state of any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Waste water constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-46. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of section 27-44(d), the building sewer shall be connected to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 27-44(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use and filled with a suitable material. 
(c)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(d)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other agency having legal jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-47. - Building sewer and connections. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the director. No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected and approved by the director. 
(b)  All cost and expense incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer to the public sewer connection shall be borne by the owner. 
(c)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior (lot) and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building. 
(d)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(e)  The building sewer shall be constructed of vitrified clay sewer pipe or cast iron soil pipe including PVC, schedule 40 sewer pipe, as approved by the director. The city reserves the right to specify and require the encasement of any sewer pipe with concrete, or the installation of the sewer pipe in concrete cradle if foundation and construction are such as to warrant such protection in the opinion of the director. 
(f)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to approval by the director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not less than one-quarter-inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. The slope of pipe, the diameter of which is six (6) inches or more, shall be not less than one-eighth-inch per foot unless otherwise permitted. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade. The line shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes in direction greater than forty-five (45) degrees shall be provided with cleanouts accessible for cleaning. 
(h)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the director, and discharges to the building sewer. 
(i)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All joints shall be approved by the director. 
(j)  No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids. 
(k)  Every connection with the public sewer system shall be made by a licensed drain layer, a licensed master plumber, or by a licensed journeyman plumber working under the supervision of a licensed master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-48. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  General discharge prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or waste water which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature and quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the waste water treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: Grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissue, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any waste water having a pH less than six point zero (6.0) or greater than nine point five (9.5), or waste water having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any waste water containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any waste water treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. This prohibition of toxic pollutants will conform to Section 304(a) of the act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any waste water with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any waste water having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case waste water with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds forty (40) degrees centigrade (104°F). 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. 
(11)  Any waste water containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any waste water which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to storm water, groundwater, roof water, or noncontact cooling water. 
(14)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or any constituent of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(15)  Any waste from individual sewage disposal systems except at the POTW treatment plant as provided in section 27-49 except that waste from any individual sewage disposal system may be disposed of directly into a sanitary sewer upon entering into an agreement with the city, which agreement shall specify the site of disposal, sewage disposal charge and such other conditions as may be required to satisfy the sanitation and health requirements of the city. For the purpose of this subsection, "individual sewage disposal system" is defined to include every means of disposing of industrial, commercial, household, domestic or other water-carried sanitary waste or sewage other than a public sanitary sewer. 
(16)  Any sludge, precipitate or congealed substances resulting from an industrial or commercial process, or resulting from the pretreatment of waste water or air pollutants. 
(b)  National categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards for a particular subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. The director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(c)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(d)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the waste water disposal system of deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 27-41 of this article. 
(e)  Prohibited waters. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, or roof water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection. Any premises connected to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state and federal requirements as well as those of the city. 
Downspouts and roof leaders shall be disconnected from sanitary sewers within six (6) months of the date of this article. If this is not done, the city shall perform this work and bill the user. 
Storm water, groundwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm sewers. Discharge of cooling water or unpolluted process water to a natural outlet shall be approved only by the Michigan Water Resources Commission. 
(f)  Installation of interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the director they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable cover, which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(g)  Maintenance of interceptors. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(h)  Review and approval required, when. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes: 
(1)  Containing a five-day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing more than ten (10) parts per million by weight of phosphorus; or 
(4)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection 27-48(a); or 
(5)  Having an average daily flow greater than two (2) per cent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, or having a rate of flow (gallons per day) greater than ten (10) per cent of the average daily city flow for a period of one (1) hour or more; 
shall be subject to review and approval of the director. Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the five-day BOD, suspended solids, and phosphorus to the concentrations given in (1), (2), and (3) above; or to reduce objectionable characteristics of constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection 27-48(a), or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(i)  Discharge of sewage of excessive strength. Where the strength of sewage from an industrial, commercial or institutional establishment exceeds: 
(1)  Three hundred (300) parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand; or 
(2)  Three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Ten (10) parts per million by weight of phosphorus; 
and where such wastes are permitted to be discharged to the sewer system by the director, an added charge, as noted below, will be made against such establishment according to the strength of such wastes when so required by the city. The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to ensure a representative sample. The cost of taking and making the first of these samples shall be borne by the city. The cost of any subsequent sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by an independent laboratory or at the city caste water treatment plant. 
Added charges shall be determined by the city. These charges shall be based on the rest of operation, maintenance, and equipment replacement for the sewage works. 
(j)  Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water to which reference is made in subsections (a) and (h) of this section, shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition at the time of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Sewage," and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 27-45(f), or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(k)  Methods for determining flow. To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the director may use one of the following methods: 
(1)  The amount of water supplied to the premises by the city or a private water company as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered; or 
(2)  If such premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources as estimated by the director from the water, gas or electric supply; or 
(3)  If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the director from the water, gas or electric supply; or 
(4)  The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his own expense in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the director pursuant to section 27-47; or 
(5)  A figure determined by the director by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method. 
(l)  Excessive discharges. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in section 27-48(a), upon prior written approval of the director. 
(m)  Accidental discharge. Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete such a plan within one hundred eighty (180) days of the adoption of this sewer use ordinance by the city commission. If required by the city, a user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(1)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(n)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person, firm or corporation whereby waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city, subject to payment therefor by the person, firm or corporation, provided such waste will not damage the sanitary sewer or storm sewer or sewage treatment plant or the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-49. - Disposal at POTW treatment plant. 
(a)  Waste from individual sewage systems may be accepted with permission of the superintendent at the POTW treatment plant. No waters or wastes described in section 27-48(a)(15) of this article shall be disposed of at the POTW treatment plant. 
(b)  Rates for disposal at the POTW treatment plant shall be determined by the superintendent at the time of acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-50. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW for the implementation of the program established in this article. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)  Charges and fees. [Charges and fees shall include the following assessments:] 
(1)  For reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program; 
(2)  For monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  For reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  For filing appeals; 
(5)  For consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; 
(6)  And such others as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein; 
(7)  Additional surcharges may be made by the city to compensate the city for the cost of treatment of pollutant loadings not normally treated at or in excess of those treated by the POTW; 
(8)  There shall be additional charges for laboratory testing of waste water. The laboratory charge shall be for the cost thereof and will be determined for each industrial user. 
The charges and fees for the services provided by the system shall be levied upon any user which may have any sewer connections with the POTW and which discharges industrial waste to the POTW or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity and quality of industrial waste water used thereon or therein. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Cross reference- Rates and charges for city services, § 27-58. 
Sec. 27-51. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-52. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city acting as his duly authorized agent, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon such properties as may be necessary for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Waste water discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state within the City of Sault Ste. Marie or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, and/or to the POTW any waste water except as authorized by the director in accordance with the provisions of this article except as provided by an NPDES permit. 
(b)  Harmful contributions. The city may suspend the waste water treatment service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
The city may seek to terminate the waste water treatment services to any user which; 
(1)  Fails to factually report the waste water constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(2)  Fails to report significant changes in waste water constituents or characteristics; 
(3)  Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises by representatives of the city for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violates the conditions of this article or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto. 
Any person notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the waste water treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(c)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(d)  Show cause hearing: 
(1)  Any user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of this article may request a hearing before the director within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of proposed enforcement action. A hearing is to be held by the director concerning the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the director why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(2)  The director may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any officer or employee to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the director notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence; 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
(4)  After the director has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and than said devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(5)  The director shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the city for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the waste water treatment works due to the violations of this article. 
(6)  Any action by the director may be appealed to the city council. 
(7)  Any user for any reason can use this same appeals procedure. 
(e)  Legal action. If any user discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's waste water disposal system, or violates any other provision of this article contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the court of this county. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-54. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and in addition to making restitution as provided in subsection (b) below, shall be punished under section 1-6 of the City Code. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused the city by reason of such violation. 
(c)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 420-96, § 1, 1-6-97) 
Sec. 27-55. - Records retention. 
    All users subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereto, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-56. - Variances. 
    Any person, upon written application to the city manager's office within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the article, as amended, who shows, in the case of the activity being conducted or operated, that compliance with section 27-48 would either be impossible or constitute an undue hardship because of time limitations, may be granted a variance by the city manager for a reasonable time, not to extend beyond two (2) years from the effective date of this article, as amended, at which date all variances shall terminate and after which date no new variances will be granted. Any variance granted by the city manager within six (6) months from the date of the granting of the variance shall make reports to the city manager periodically as to the progress being made toward compliance with section 27-48. A variance shall not be granted under the provisions of this section where a person applying therefor is causing a public nuisance or other injury to the general public, or is subject to a national categorical standard, and any such variances shown to have been granted under these circumstances shall be immediately terminated. Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall not be construed to relieve the person who shall receive it from any liability or penalties imposed by other law for the commission or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-57. - Validity, severability, conflict. 
(a)  The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of the provisions, words, phrases, clauses or terms, or the application thereof to any person, firm or corporation, or to any circumstances, shall be held invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision or findings shall not in any way affect the validity, legality or constitutionality of any other provision, word, phrase, clause or term, and they shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  All laws and parts of laws, all ordinances, codes and regulations which are inconsistent with or in conflict with or repugnant to any provisions of this article, shall be deemed not to apply; provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance, code or regulation which is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85) 
Sec. 27-58. - Rates and charges for city services.[3] 
(a)  Established; to whom applicable; basis for computations. Rates and charges for the use of the waste water system of the city are hereby established. The rates for total sewer service charges are to be established by resolution of the city council, which may be enacted apart from the published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting operation, maintenance and replacement costs, as well as debt service. Such charges and rates shall be made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have any sewer connections with the sewer system of the city, or which may otherwise discharge sewage or industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into such system or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein. 
(b)  Amounts, billings, sewer service charges. The rates and charges for service furnished by such system shall be levied upon each lot or parcel of land, building or premises, having any sewer connection with such system, on the basis of the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is measured therein used, or in the absence thereof, by such equitable method as shall be determined by the city, and shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner as provided for the payment of charges for water used, except in cases where the character of the sewage from a manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable additional burden is placed upon the system, greater than that imposed by the normal domestic sewage delivered to the system plant, the additional cost of treatment created thereby shall be an additional charge over the regular rates hereinafter set forth; or the city may, if it deems it advisable, compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises, to treat such sewage in such manner as shall be specified by the city before discharging such sewage into the sewage disposal system. Rates for all users obtaining all or part of their water supply from sources other than the city's water system shall be determined by gauging or metering the actual sewage entering the system or by metering the water used by them, in a manner acceptable to the city. The rate to be billed for use of the system shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  Annual audit. The rates to be established are to be sufficient to provide for the expenses of operation, maintenance and replacement of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. An annual audit shall be prepared. Based on said audit, rates for sewage services shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary to meet system expenses and ensure that all user classes pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement cost. 
(d)  No free service. No free service shall be allowed for any user of the city's waste water system. 
(e)  Billing. Billing for waste water service shall be the city's responsibility. All water meters shall be read quarterly and bills rendered quarterly. 
(f)  Termination of service for nonpayment. If payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been made within thirty (30) days of due date on the bill, a shut-off notice will be sent by first class mail to inform the user that failure to respond will result in termination of utility service. If payment is not received, or satisfactory arrangements have not been made within fifteen (15) days after the shut-off notice is sent to the user, the utility service shall be terminated. No utility service that has been discontinued due to nonpayment shall be restored until all past due bills and applicable fees are paid or satisfactory arrangements for such payments are made. 
(g)  Collection of delinquent accounts. Charges for sewage disposal service furnished to any premises within the city shall be a lien against the premises. Enforcement of this lien shall be made pursuant to City Code and/or statute. This lien remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided by law. Those premises outside the city that are served by the city's waste water system that have delinquent bills will be certified to their governmental unit for collection as provided in the contract between the city and the governmental unit. 
(h)  Annual notification. All customers of the city's waste water system will receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the sewer bill into its components for operation, maintenance and replacement and for debt retirement. 
(Ord. No. 250-85, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 265-87, § 1, 5-4-87) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fees, § 27-50; water and sewage service rates, fees, and charges generally, § 27-6 et seq. 

APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
CHIPPEWA COUNTY 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 30 
TITLE 
AN ORDINANCE enacted under Act 207, Public Acts of 1921 [MCL § 125.581 et seq., MSA § 5.2931 et seq.], as amended, governing the incorporated portions of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Chippewa County, Michigan, to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and semi-public or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said purpose to divide the City into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement; establishing a Board of Appeals; and imposing penalties for the violation of this Ordinance; being an Ordinance to repeal Sections 10-1.01 to 10-1.20 inclusive of Article 1, Chapter X of the Sault Ste. Marie Code, and to amend the Code of the City of Sault Ste. Marie by adding new Sections, which new Sections shall be designated as Sections 10-1.01 to 10-1.27 inclusive of Article 1 of Chapter X of the Sault Ste. Marie [1957] Code. 
PREAMBLE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Sault Ste. Marie by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other public requirements and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
ENACTING CLAUSE 
    The City of Sault Ste. Marie Ordains: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A contains the zoning ordinance of the City, ordinance number 30 adopted March 15, 1965, as amended. The original arrangement, including headings, catchlines and section numbers have been retained as originally adopted or amended. Additions made by the editor for clarity are enclosed by brackets []. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without comment. Amendments have been inserted in their proper places with the ordinance number and date of adoption of each amendment enclosed within parentheses () immediately following the amended section or subsection. If no history note follows a section or subsection, it remains unchanged from the original zoning ordinance. The zoning map and zoning changes of specific property have been omitted and are on file in the City clerk's office. 
Charter reference- Authority for zoning, § 2.3(n). 
Cross reference- Planning Commission, Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; storage of explosives restricted, § 12-66; location of signs restricted, § 20-57; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivision regulations, Ch. 23; water supply and sewage disposal system, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL § 125.581 et seq. 

SECTION 10-1.01. - SHORT TITLE 
100.   [Short title.]
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Sault Ste. Marie Zoning Ordinance. 
SECTION 10-1.02. - DEFINITIONS 
200.   [Definitions.]
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms, or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(a)  All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all words in the singular number include the plural number and all words in the plural number include the singular number; and the word "building" includes the word "structure," and "dwelling" includes "residence"; the word "person" includes "corporation," "co-partnership," "association," as well as an "individual"; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive; the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel"; the words "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used or occupied." 
(b)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(c)  Alley: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(d)  Alterations: Any change, addition or modification to a structure or type of occupancy, and change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
(e)  Apartments: The dwelling units in a multiple dwelling as defined herein: 
(1)  Efficiency apartment: Is a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one (1) room in addition to kitchen and sanitary facilities. 
(2)  One bedroom unit: Is a dwelling unit consisting of not more than three (3) rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Two bedroom unit: Is a dwelling unit consisting of not more than four (4) rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Three or more bedroom unit: Is a dwelling unit consisting of more than four (4) rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(f)  Auto repair garage: Is a place where the following activities may be carried out: General auto repair, vehicle body repair, engine rebuilding or repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, upholstery work, and auto glass work. 
(g)  Basement: Is that portion of a building which is partly, or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. If the vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling is over five (5) feet, such basement shall be rated as a first story. 

Basement & Story 
(h)  Billboard: A billboard shall mean any structure or portion thereof designed or intended to be used for posting, painting, or otherwise affixing any advertising sign, which advertising sign does not pertain to the premises or to the use of premises on which the billboard is located or to goods sold or services rendered or activities conducted on such premises. 
(i)  Building: Is any structure, mobile home, vehicle, tent, awning, or similar enclosure designed and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
(j)  Building, accessory: Is a subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land. 
(k)  Building, main: Is a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
(l)  Building height: Is the vertical distance measured from the established grade of the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs; and the average height between the lowest point and the highest point on a shed roof. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 

Building Height 
(m)  Building line: Is a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this Ordinance, a building line is the same as a front setback line. 

Building Line 
(n)  Court: Is an open unoccupied space, other than a yard, and bounded on at least two sides by a building. A court extending to the front yard or front lot line or to the rear yard or rear lot line is an Outer Court. Any other court is an Inner Court. 
(o)  Club: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, literature, politics or the like, but not for profit. 
(p)  District: Is a portion of the incorporated area of the City within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(q)  Drive-in restaurant: A business establishment, for the serving of food and/or beverages, so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure; or to permit patron self-service. 
(r)  Dwelling unit: Is a building, or a portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
(s)  Dwelling, one-family: Is a building containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit and which complies with the following standards: 
(1)  It is connected to public sewer and water supply systems in accordance with the City Code, or to such private on-site facilities approved by the health department where the City Code so permits. 
(2)  The dwelling must be placed on a permanent foundation constructed on the site which meets building code requirements and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. If the dwelling is a mobile home, it must be installed to manufacturer's set-up requirements, be secured by an anchoring system that meets the Michigan Mobile Home Commission requirements, have its wheels removed and its towing mechanism and undercarriage must not be exposed, and shall have a perimeter wall as required above. 
(3)  The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
(4)  The dwelling contains no additions or rooms, or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required therein. 
(5)  There is provided, at the time of construction or placement of any dwelling, internal or external storage space equal to ten (10) per cent of the square footage of the dwelling. 
(6)  The dwelling has a minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation of twenty (20) feet and complies in all respects with the building code. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards are different than those imposed by the City building code, such federal or state standards or regulations shall apply. 
(7)  There shall be a minimum of a double pitched roof of not less than three (3) feet of rise for each twelve (12) feet of run. 
(8)  The dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) exterior doors with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling, and each door shall be accessed by steps connected to said exterior door areas, or to porches or patios connected to said door areas, where a difference in elevation so requires. 
(9)  The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard designed homes, subject to review and approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(t)  Dwelling, two-family: Is a building containing two (2) dwelling units and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth in the definition of "Dwelling, one-family". 
(u)  Dwelling, multiple-family: Is a building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. (Refer to "Apartments" definition for dwelling unit types). 
(v)  Erected: Includes built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, installation of utilities, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
(w)  Essential services: Means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general public health, safety or welfare. 
(x)  Family: Is one or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof), together with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of dwelling unit comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
(y)  Fence: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an enclosure in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(z)  Fence, obscuring: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(aa)  Floor area: For the purposes of computing the floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
(ab)  Floor areas, usable: (For the purposes of computing parking) Is that area used for, or intended to be used for, the sale of merchandise or services or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, or for utilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "Usable Floor Area." Measurements of floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. For the purposes of computing parking for those uses not enclosed within a building, the area used for the sale of merchandise, display of merchandise, and/or area used to serve patrons or clients shall be measured to determine necessary parking spaces. 

Usable Floor Area 
(ac)  Gasoline service station: Is a place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and the servicing of and minor repair of automobiles. Prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, the following: Vehicle body repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstery work, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external physical effects could extend beyond the property line. 
(ad)  Garage, private: An accessory building not over one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height used for parking or storage of motor vehicles, but not for commercial servicing or repair. 
(ae)  Grade: The level of the street curb at the front of the building. Where a building abuts on two or more streets the grade shall be taken as a mean of grades calculated from the different streets. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall set such curb level for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
(af)  Greenbelt: A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees. Referred to as a landscape buffer when used to meet the screening requirements of this appendix. 
(ag)  Home-based business: A gainful occupation or profession carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and is not in conflict with the overall residential character of the dwelling and the neighborhood. 
    Home-based businesses may include but are not limited to services such as those provided by architects, artists, engineers, lawyers, accountants, state licensed cosmetologists, music teachers, dance instructors, dressmakers, computer training specialists, small appliance repair shops, watch/jewelry repair shops, and locksmith/gunsmith shops. 
    Home-based businesses shall not include medical offices, clinics, hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels, animal grooming services, tourist homes, restaurants, engine or motorized vehicle repair services, large appliance repair services or similar uses. 
(ah)  Junk yard: Is an open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
(ai)  Kennel, commercial: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs or cats are either permanently or temporarily boarded. 
(aj)  Loading space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
(ak)  Lot: Is a parcel of land occupied, or which could be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
(al)  Lot of record: Is a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds or in common use by City or County Officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
(am)  Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
(an)  Lot, corner: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of the two streets is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(ao)  Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
(ap)  Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
(1)  Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot, the line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line is that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in the application for a building permit or zoning compliance permit. In the case of a double frontage lot or a lot fronting on both a street and the St. Mary's River, both lot lines abutting on streets or on a street and the river shall be treated as front lot lines. 
(2)  Rear lot line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line: Any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
(aq)  Lot coverage: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings. 
(ar)  Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between side lot lines. 
(as)  Lot, double frontage: Is any interior lot having frontages on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required. 
(at)  Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the two points where the building line, or setback intersects the side lot lines. 

Double Frontage, Interior & Corner Lots 

Lots & Areas 
(au)  Master plan: Is the comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the City and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the Planning Commission and/or the City Commission. 
(av)  Major thorofare: Is an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate City area and the region beyond, and may be designated as a major thorofare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. For purposes of this Ordinance, major thorofares shall be considered to be streets so designated on the City of Sault Ste. Marie Master Plan. 
(aw)  Secondary thorofare: Is an arterial street which is intended to serve as a trafficway serving primarily the immediate City area and serving to connect with major thorofares. For the purposes of this Ordinance, secondary thorofares shall be considered to be those streets so designated in the Master plan of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(ax)  Motel: A series of attached, semi-attached, or detached rental units containing bedroom, bathroom, and closet space. Units shall provide overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicles. 
(ay)  Nonconforming building: A building or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of the Ordinance nor to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(az)  Nonconforming use: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, became effective, that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 

Nonconforming Building 

Nonconforming Use 

Basic Structural Terms 
(ba)  Nursing or convalescent home: Is a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire. 
(bb)  Occupied: Includes the meaning of intent, design, or arranged for occupancy. 
(bc)  Off-street parking lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of automobiles. 
(bd)  Open front store: A business establishment, other than a drive-in restaurant or gasoline station or bank, so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the building, not requiring the patron to enter said building. 
(be)  Parking space: Is hereby determined to be an area of definite length and width and shall be exclusive of drives, driveways, aisles or entrances giving access thereto and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
(bf)  Public utility: Is any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or municipal regulations to the public: Gas, steam, electriCity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water. 
(bg)  Setback: The distance required to obtain front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this Ordinance. 
(bh)  Sign: Is the use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by which anything is made known (other than billboards) such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession or business, and are visible to the general public. 
(bi)  Story: Is that part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. 
(bj)  Street: Is a public thorofare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and for the purposes of this Ordinance includes the entire street right of way. 
(bk)  Structures: Is anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground except driveways and pavement. 
(bl)  Temporary building or use: Is a structure or use permitted by the Board of Appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use, or for special events. 
(bm)  Trailer coach (mobile home): Any vehicle designed, used, or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. Such trailer coach shall include units with or without wheels attached. 
(bn)  Trailer court: Any plot of ground upon which three or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are or may be located. 
(bo)  Travel trailer: A vehicle designed as a travel unit for occupancy as a temporary or seasonal vacation living unit. 
(bp)  Use: Is the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended to be used, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
(bq)  Use, accessory: Is a use subordinate to the main use of a lot and used for purposes clearly incidental to those of the main use. 
(br)  Use, main: Is the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
(bs)  Wall: A completely obscuring masonry structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(bt)  Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building or main use, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, and as defined herein: 
(1)  Front yard: Is an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard: Is an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
(3)  Side yard: Is an open space between a main building and side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, with width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 

Yards 
(bu)  Zoning exceptions and variances: 
    Exception: An exception is a use permitted only after review by the Planning Commission of an application; such review being necessary because the provisions of this ordinance covering conditions, precedent or subsequent, are not precise enough to all applications without interpretation, and such review is required by this ordinance. 
    Variance: Is a modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance granted by the Board of Appeals when in its judgment the strict enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
    The crucial points of variance are undue hardship, and unique circumstances, applied to property. A variance is not justified unless all of these elements are present in the case. 
The "exception" differs from the "variance" in several respects. An exception does not require "undue hardship" in order to be allowed. The exceptions that are found in this ordinance appear as conditional uses authorized by special permit on review by the Planning Commission. These land uses could not be conveniently allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be definitely foreseen as of a given time. The general characteristics of these uses include one or more of the following: 
(1)  They require large areas 
(2)  They are infrequent 
(3)  They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic 
(4)  They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous 
(5)  They are required for public safety and convenience. 
(bv)  Accessory residential boat docking facilities: Boat docking facilities constructed for the exclusive use of the residential property owner, occupants or their transient guests. 
(bw)  Fraternity, sorority or cooperative housing: A building used for the housing of unrelated individuals, living together as a single housekeeping unit, and comprising the principal place of residence for the members of a fraternity, sorority or similar housing cooperative. The restrictions of family composition and membership do not apply to this type of housing. 
(bx)  Adjacent property: All parcels of property that an applicant's property comes in contact with at one (1) or more points, except for parcels that are legally adjacent but are in fact separated from the applicant's property by a public or private street, or alley. 
(ca)  [ Adult uses: The following definitions pertain to adult uses for the purposes of this appendix]: 
A.  Adult uses: Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. 
1.  Specified anatomical areas: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
2.  Specified sexual activities: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, beastiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexually relationship, and any of the following sexual-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation. 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast. 
e.  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons. 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being. 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
B.  Adult use-Accessory: A use, business, or establishment having ten (10) percent or less of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or twenty (20) percent or less of its gross receipts derived from movie rentals or magazine sales. 
C.  Adult use-Principal: A use, business, or establishment having more than ten (10) percent of its stock in trade or floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basement or any portion of the business not open to the public) allocated to, or more than twenty (20) percent of its gross receipts derived from, any adult use. 
D.  Adult body painting studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or non-transparent to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas." 
E.  Adult bookstore: A business engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes or motion picture film, if such shop is not open to the public generally but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
F.  Adult cabaret: An establishment which provides dancing or other live entertainment, if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, dedication or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
G.  Adult companionship establishment: A companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
H.  Adult hotel: Adult hotel means a hotel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
I.  Adult massage parlor, health club: A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
J.  Adult mini-motion picture theater: A business premises within an enclosed building with a capaCity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting visual media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
K.  Adult modeling studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical area while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
L.  Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
M.  Adult motion picture theater: A business premises within an enclosed building with a capaCity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting visual media material if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
N.  Adult novelty business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
O.  Adult sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
(cb)  [The following definitions pertain to accessory small wind energy turbines for the purpose of this appendix.] 
A.  Accessory small wind energy turbine: A wind energy system that converts wind energy into electriCity primarily for on-site use through the use of specialized equipment or structures with a maximum output no greater than twenty (20) kilowatts. Such systems may be tower-mounted or structure-mounted. 
B.  Decommissioning: The process of terminating the operation of a wind energy turbine by completely removing the entire wind energy turbine and all related structures, foundations, supports, and equipment. 
C.  End of useful life: The point in time when a wind turbine is no longer annually documented to be fully operating in good working order by a certified manufacturer or installer's representative or other qualified technician. 
D.  Height: For tower-mounted wind energy turbines, the height is the vertical distance measured from grade as determined according to the definition in Section 200(ae) to the uppermost vertical extension of a rotor blade or the maximum height reached by any part of the wind energy turbine. For structure-mounted wind energy turbines, the height is the distance measured from the highest point of the adjoining roof or structure, not including chimneys, antennae or similar structures, to the uppermost vertical extension of a rotor blade or the maximum height reached by any part of the wind energy turbine. 
E.  Net-metering: A special metering and billing agreement between utility companies and their customers which facilitates the connection of sustainable energy generating systems to the power grid. 
F.  Rotor: The rotating element of a wind energy turbine that acts as a multibladed airfoil assembly to extract kinetic energy directly from the wind. 
G.  Site: The parcel of land or zoning lot occupied by the main use to which the wind energy turbine is accessory. 
H.  Structure-mounted accessory small wind energy turbine: A structure-mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into electriCity primarily for on-site use with a maximum output no greater than 10 kilowatts per turbine. 
I.  Tower: A freestanding monopole that supports a tower-mounted wind energy turbine. 
J.  Tower-mounted accessory small wind energy turbine: A tower-mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into electriCity primarily for on-site use with a maximum output no greater than twenty (20) kilowatts. 
K.  Useful life: The period of time during which a wind turbine, through inspection, maintenance, and needed repair, is annually documented to be fully operating in good working order by a certified manufacturer or installer's representative or other qualified technician. 
(cc)  [The following definitions pertain to medical marihuana for the purpose of this appendix.] 
A.  Marihuana (also known as "marijuana" and "cannabis"): The term shall have the meaning given to it in Section 7106 of the Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106, as referred to in section 3(d) of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26423(d). 
B.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business: The cultivation, processing and distribution of marihuana for a registered qualifying patient or patients by an individual operating as a registered primary caregiver, as defined by and in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules, and the requirements of this Ordinance. 
C.  Medical marihuana cultivation facility: A building or part of a building or enclosed, locked facility used for the cultivation and processing of marihuana plants for medical use, other than that used by a registered primary caregiver operating with a home-based business permit in compliance with this Ordinance or that used by a registered qualifying patient cultivating no more than twelve (12) plants for his/her own use. 
D.  Medical marihuana dispensary: A building or part of a building where one (1) or more registered primary caregivers or registered qualifying patients operate with the intent to transfer marihuana between primary caregivers and/or qualifying patients, not including the delivery of medical marihuana by a registered primary caregiver to his/her patient's primary place of residence as provided under the conditions for operation of a medical marihuana caregiver home-based business. 
E.  Registered primary caregiver: A person who is at least twenty-one (21) years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs and who holds a valid Michigan Medical Marihuana Registry card identifying him/her as a registered caregiver for at least one (1) but not more than five (5) registered qualifying patients. 
F.  Registered qualifying patient: A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition and who holds a valid Michigan Medical Marihuana Registry card or a valid registry card or its equivalent from another state, district, commonwealth, or insular possession of the United States identifying him/her as a registered qualifying patient. 
(cd)  Mixed use building: A building that contains at least one floor devoted to nonresidential uses and at least one floor devoted to residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 270-87, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 308-89, § 1, 7-17-89; Ord. No. 342-90, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 355-91, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 447-01, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 450-01, § 1, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 520-10, 8-23-10; Ord. No. 532-12, 1-16-12; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 537-13, § 1, 8-19-13) 
SECTION 10-1.03. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
300.   Districts.
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Sault Ste. Marie is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 One-Family Residential District 
[RS-1 One-Family Residential District] 
[RS-2 One-Family Residential District] 
[R-1A One-Family Residential District] 
R-2 Two-Family Residential District 
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District 
RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District 
RSV Residential Reserve District 
O-S Office Service District 
B-1 Local Business District 
B-2 Central Business District 
B-3 General Business District 
T Tourist Service District 
I-1 Industrial District 
I-2 Industrial District 
P-1 Vehicular Parking District 
Editor's note- The districts appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor as such new districts were incorporated into the text of App. A by ordinance. 
301.   Boundaries.
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map, City of Sault Ste. Marie Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this Ordinance, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described herein. 
1.  Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts are lot lines, the centerlines of streets, alleys, roads, or such lines extended, and the corporate limits of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
2.  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the Zoning Map accompanying this Ordinance, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or confliction as to the intended location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written application, or upon its own motion, by the Board of Appeals. 
3.  Where the Board of Appeals finds that an error, omission, or similar likely unintended action has resulted in a district boundary dividing a lot of record in single ownership at the time of adoption of this ordinance amendment, the Board may adjust the boundary of said district. 
(Ord. No. 587-18, § 1, 11-19-18) 
Editor's note- The zoning map is on file in the office of the City clerk. 
302.   Zoning of vacated areas.
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the City of Sault Ste. Marie shall have been vacated by official governmental action, and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of the land adjoining such street, alley or other public way, such lands formerly within such vacated street, alley or public way shall automatically, and without further governmental action, thenceforth acquire and be subject to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to the lands to which same shall attach and the same shall be used for that same use as is permitted under this Ordinance for such adjoining lands. 
303.   Zoning of annexed areas.
    Any areas annexed to the City of Sault Ste. Marie shall immediately upon such annexation, be automatically classified as an "R-1" District until a Zoning Map for said area has been adopted by the City Commission. The Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate zoning for such area within three (3) months after the matter is referred to it by the City Commission. 
304.   District requirements.
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of, [Section 10-1.17] "GENERAL PROVISIONS" and [Section 10-1.18] "GENERAL EXCEPTIONS". 
305.   [Office space of a service nature.]
    Office space or offices used for professional, executive, administrative, and sales offices of a service nature shall be permitted in any Zoning District except R-1, R-1A, RS-1, RS-2, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, and RSV Districts; providing, however, that home-based business offices permitted under this Zoning Ordinance in the above excepted Districts may continue pursuant to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 10-1.03 (305), 3-16-70; Ord. No. 515-09, § 1, 3-8-10) 
SECTION 10-1.04. - R-1, RS-1, AND RS-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    These residential districts are designed to provide for one-family dwelling sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the master plan of the residential development in the City of Sault Ste. Marie. The preservation of natural terrain and wooded areas is reflected in the controls set forth in this Article (Section). 
400.   Principal uses permitted.
    In the One-family Residential Districts (R-1, RS-1 and RS-2) no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1.  One-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, and recreational facilities. 
4.  Municipal buildings and uses. 
5.  Churches which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
6.  Public, parochial and other private pre-school, and/or elementary schools offering courses in general education. 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 271-87, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 441-99, § 1, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 552-14, § 1, 10-6-14) 
401.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed for each use. 
1.  Utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
2.  Colleges, universities and other institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on-sites of at least ten (10) acres in area. 
b.  All ingress and egress from said site shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare. 
c.  No building other than a structure for residential purposes shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any property line. 
3.  Golf courses, not including driving range or miniature courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following: 
a.  Major accessory uses to a golf course which are generally of a commercial nature such as a restaurant and bar shall be housed in a single building with the club house. Minor accessory uses which are strictly related to the operation of the golf course itself, such as maintenance garage and pro shop or golf shop may be located in separate structures. 
b.  Any golf course requiring a structure shall have said structure so located on the site as not to be closer than seventy-five (75) feet from the lot line of any adjacent residential land and from any public right-of-way. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate at least one-half the member families if the golf course is a private club or one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area if it is operated for profit. Bylaws of the private club shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing parking requirements. 
d.  Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
e.  All parking areas shall be surfaced as required in Section 10-1.17, General Provisions for off-street parking. 
f.  Whenever a swimming pool is involved, said pool shall be provided with a protective fence, six (6) feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate or turnstile. 
g.  All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare. 
h.  All lighting of building areas and parking facilities shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from abutting residential areas. 
4.  Public, parochial and other private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit, subject to the following condition: The site has frontage or direct access to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare. 
5.  Churches, subject to the following condition: The site has frontage or direct access to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare. 
6.  Home-based businesses as defined in Section 200(ag), subject to issuance of a temporary one-year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written 30-day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Operators may appeals any decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a home-based business: 
a.  The home-based business shall be operated entirely within the dwelling unit or a garage or shed belonging to the dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the liveable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that is inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use, except as required by State Law for Cosmetologists. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display other than one (1) non-illuminated sign no more than four (4) square feet in area and attached flat to the building. 
e.  No display of products shall be visible from the street and no commodity other than that produced or processed on the premises shall be sold on the premises. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) paid assistant shall be employed on the premises other than those residing in the dwelling unit. 
h.  Class size shall be limited to no more than three (3) students at one (1) time. The building official may approve a maximum of up to six (6) students at one (1) time if the applicant can demonstrate that adequate parking as required in item (f) above is available to accommodate all students. 
i.  Customers, clients, and/or students shall be accommodated on an appointment basis only; no regular hours when the premises are generally open to customers shall be maintained or advertised. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  No vehicle requiring a commercial operator license or having a nominal rating of more than one (1) ton shall be parked on the premises. 
l.  No home-based business by its nature or conduct shall generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
m.  A home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
n.  Home occupation permits valid at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance may continue to be renewed annually as long as both the resident business operator and location remain the same and there is no expansion of the existing operation. 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
8.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)B., subject to issuance of a temporary one (1) year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A medical marihuana home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written thirty (30) day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home-based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Applicants may appeal any decision of the building official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a medical marihuana caregiver home-based business: 
a.  The medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall be operated entirely within a single-family detached dwelling unit which is the primary residence of the primary registered caregiver or within a garage or shed belonging to the single-family detached dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for medical marihuana home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the livable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that are inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display or signage and no display of plants or products shall be visible from the street 
e.  Medical marihuana may be grown, processed, and stored on the premises in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. No products shall be sold or distributed on the premises. No patient consultations shall take place on the premises. Processed medical marihuana shall be distributed to patients at the patient's primary residence. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) registered primary caregiver shall operate in the dwelling unit or associated garage or shed. 
h.  The registered primary caregiver may not care for more than five (5) patients. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
l.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
m.  Marihuana plants shall be contained within an enclosed, locked area of the dwelling or garage or shed with devices which limit access to only the registered primary caregiver. There shall be no more than twelve (12) plants per registered qualifying patient. 
n.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business operations may be subject to periodic inspections by the building official. 
All information obtained through the medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permitting process that would be deemed confidential pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., shall be confidential and disclosed to authorized City employees only as necessary to perform official duties and shall not be subject to disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. 
Nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision, adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana not in strict compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. Also, since federal law is not affected by said act or the administrative rules, nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution or property seizure under federal law. 
The operation of medical marihuana cultivation facilities or medical marihuana dispensaries as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)C. and D. is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 10-1.04, 6-5-72; Ord. No. 242-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 441-99, § 1, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 447-01, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 532-12, 1-16-12) 
402.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
(Ord. No. 441-99, § 1, 3-15-99) 
403.   Reserved.
Editor's note- Ord. No. 441-99, § 1, adopted Mar. 15, 1999, repealed § 403, Platting required for issuance of building permit, derived from Ord. No. 53, § 1, adopted 11-6-67) 
[SECTION 10-1.045.] - R-1A ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
450.   Preamble.
    The R-1A One-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide sites for one-family dwellings and for mobile homes or trailers used as permanent one-family dwellings, and residentially related uses in keeping with the master plan in the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-19-85) 
451.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a R-1A One-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1.  One-family detached dwellings in keeping with the building code. 
2.  Mobile homes or trailers complying with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
5.  Municipal buildings and uses. 
6.  Churches. 
7.  Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and.or high schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 
8.  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-10-85; Ord. No. 552-14, § 1, 10-6-14) 
452.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed for each use: 
1.  Utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
2.  Home-based businesses as defined in Section 200(ag), subject to issuance of a temporary one-year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written 30-day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Operators may appeals any decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a home-based business: 
a.  The home-based business shall be operated entirely within the dwelling unit or a garage or shed belonging to the dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the liveable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that is inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use, except as required by State Law for Cosmetologists. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display other than one (1) non-illuminated sign no more than four (4) square feet in area and attached flat to the building. 
e.  No display of products shall be visible from the street and no commodity other than that produced or processed on the premises shall be sold on the premises. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) paid assistant shall be employed on the premises other than those residing in the dwelling unit. 
h.  Class size shall be limited to no more than three (3) students at one (1) time. The building official may approve a maximum of up to six (6) students at one (1) time if the applicant can demonstrate that adequate parking as required in item (f) above is available to accommodate all students. 
i.  Customers, clients, and/or students shall be accommodated on an appointment basis only; no regular hours when the premises are generally open to customers shall be maintained or advertised. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  No vehicle requiring a commercial operator license or having a nominal rating of more than one (1) ton shall be parked on the premises. 
l.  No home-based business by its nature or conduct shall generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
m.  A home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
n.  Home occupation permits valid at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance may continue to be renewed annually as long as both the resident business operator and location remain the same and there is no expansion of the existing operation. 
3.  Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers (not including dormitories); provided that for each child so cared for there is provided and maintained a minimum on one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet, shall be fenced or screened from any adjoining land with planting. Any use permitted herein shall not be permitted in the interior of any residential block, and shall be located adjacent to a business district. 
4.  Mobile homes or trailers not complying with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, provided that the mobile home or trailer is modified to meet minimum plumbing, electrical, mechanical and fire code standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for mobile homes. 
5.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
6.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)B., subject to issuance of a temporary one (1) year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A medical marihuana home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written thirty (30) day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home-based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Applicants may appeal any decision of the building official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a medical marihuana caregiver home-based business: 
a.  The medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall be operated entirely within a single-family detached dwelling unit which is the primary residence of the primary registered caregiver or within a garage or shed belonging to the single-family detached dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for medical marihuana home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the livable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that are inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display or signage and no display of plants or products shall be visible from the street 
e.  Medical marihuana may be grown, processed, and stored on the premises in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. No products shall be sold or distributed on the premises. No patient consultations shall take place on the premises. Processed medical marihuana shall be distributed to patients at the patient's primary residence. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) registered primary caregiver shall operate in the dwelling unit or associated garage or shed. 
h.  The registered primary caregiver may not care for more than five (5) patients. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
l.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
m.  Marihuana plants shall be contained within an enclosed, locked area of the dwelling or garage or shed with devices which limit access to only the registered primary caregiver. There shall be no more than twelve (12) plants per registered qualifying patient. 
n.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business operations may be subject to periodic inspections by the building official. 
All information obtained through the medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permitting process that would be deemed confidential pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., shall be confidential and disclosed to authorized City employees only as necessary to perform official duties and shall not be subject to disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. 
Nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision, adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana not in strict compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. Also, since federal law is not affected by said act or the administrative rules, nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution or property seizure under federal law. 
The operation of medical marihuana cultivation facilities or medical marihuana dispensaries as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)C. and D. is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 447-01, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 532-12, 1-16-12) 
453.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See Section 10-1.16, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the maximum density permitted. 
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-19-85) 
454.   Required conditions.
1.  No building permit shall be issued for any construction in an R-1A One-Family Residential District unless the property upon which the building is to be constructed is subdivided and platted; providing, however, that the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to alter or vary this requirement and to authorize a variance upon an appeal for good cause shown to the satisfaction of said Zoning Board of Appeals. 
2.  Every dwelling unit must be properly connected to City water and sewer systems. 
3.  Every dwelling unit must be placed on a permanent foundation constructed on the site which meets building code requirements. If the dwelling is a mobile home, it must additionally be installed to manufacturers set up requirements, be secured by an anchoring system that meets Mobile Home Commission requirements, have its wheels removed and its towing mechanism and undercarriage must not be exposed. 
4.  Every dwelling must comply with pertinent building and fire codes and meet or exceed snow load and strength requirements, and contain no additions or rooms not of the same or better workmanship than the original structure. 
5.  There shall be provided, at the time of construction or placement of any dwelling, internal or external storage space equal to ten (10) percent of the square footage of the dwelling. 
6.  A building permit will be required for all construction, including placement and removal of mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-19-85) 
SECTION 10-1.05. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS are designed to provide for two-family dwellings in those areas where housing accommodation of this nature have established a development pattern. 
500.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Two-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  All principal uses permitted and as regulated in the R-1 One-Family Residential Districts. The standards of the [Section 10-1.16] SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS applicable to the R-1 One-Family Residential District, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 272-87, § 1, 6-1-87) 
501.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
1.  Uses permitted subject to special conditions and as regulated in the R-1 Districts. 
2.  Tourist homes and tourist rooms as a part of a dwelling. 
a.  Such use shall be permitted only within a dwelling occupied by the proprietor and shall be incidental to the use as a year around residential dwelling. 
b.  Off-street parking as required under [Section 10-1.17] GENERAL PROVISIONS shall be provided. 
c.  Such use shall display not more than a total of four (4) square feet of sign area. When such sign is illuminated such illumination shall be of a non-flashing type and shall be screened from abutting residences. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
502.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS," limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.06. - RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS are designed to provide sites for multiple dwelling structures which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family districts. The multiple dwelling is further provided to serve the needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise single-family residential community convenient to facilities which will service such dwellings. 
600.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Multiple-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  All principal uses permitted and all uses subject to special conditions in R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts with the lot area, yards, and coverage requirements equal to the requirements of the R-1 and R-2 Districts. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings. 
a.  Row Houses 
b.  Terraces 
c.  Apartments 
4.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
Editor's note- There was no paragraph 3, in the original ordinance. 
601.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed for each use. 
1.  General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have contagious disease, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least two (2) acres in area. 
b.  The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare or a secondary thoroughfare. 
c.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least fifty (50) feet for front, rear, and side yards for all two (2) story structures. For every story above two (2) the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least ten (10) feet. 
d.  Ambulance and delivery areas shall be screened from all residential view with a wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer five (5) feet in height constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709. Ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from a major or secondary thoroughfare. 
e.  All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be from a major or secondary thoroughfare. 
2.  Convalescent homes, not to exceed a height of two (2) stories when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage shall not exceed fifty (50) percent for all buildings including principal structures and those incident to the principal structure. 
b.  The maximum extent of development shall not exceed thirty (30) patient units per acre. 
3.  Funeral homes, not to exceed two (2) stories in height when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare. 
b.  The service entrances to such facility shall be completely screened from view of adjacent residential properties with a wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer five (5) feet in height constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709. 
4.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses. 
5.  Museums, art galleries, playhouses, and other similar cultural facilities subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major or secondary thoroughfare; and 
b.  All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area shall be from a major or a secondary thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 213-81, 3-16-81; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
602.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS," limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.065. - RM-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[2] 
Preamble. 
    The RM-3 Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide sites for the housing of fraternities, sororities and other forms of cooperative housing as well as apartment structures that cater to the housing needs of students. 
650.   Principal uses permitted.
    In an RM-3 Multiple-Family District, no buildings or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  All principal uses permitted and uses subject to special conditions in the RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts, subject to the conditions, yards, lot area and coverage requirements as specified in the RM-1 District. 
2.  Fraternities, sororities and cooperative housing. 
3.  Other uses similar to the above permitted use. 
4.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. (Ord. No. 354-91, § 1, 6-17-91) 
651.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See (section 10-1.16) "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and maximum density permitted for the RM-1 Multiple-Family District. 
(Ord. No. 354-91, § 1, 6-17-91) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 354-91, § 1, adopted June 17, 1991, added Appendix A, § 10-1.065, subsections 600, 601. As there were already subsections 600, 601 in § 10-1.06, the added subsections were renumbered as subsections 650, 651 at the editor's discretion. 

SECTION 10-1.07. - RSV RESIDENTIAL RESERVE DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    These districts are designed to preserve the natural features of areas lying outside the immediate concentrated growth pattern of the City and to provide adequate lot areas to assure safe living conditions for areas not serviceable by municipal utilities. This district will serve as the future area for growth of the City in keeping with the long range Master Plan of the City. 
700.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Residential Reserve District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1.  One family detached dwellings. 
2.  Farms. 
3.  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
4.  Municipal buildings and uses. 
5.  Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
6.  Public utility service facilities without storage yards. 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
701.   Uses subject to special conditions.
1.  Churches. 
a.  A site of not less than two (2) acres shall be provided. 
b.  Such site shall have direct access to an improved major or secondary thorofare. 
2.  Golf courses provided all conditions of the R-1 district, Section 401, paragraph 3 are complied with. 
3.  Private and institutional recreation areas. 
a.  A site of not less than two (2) acres shall be provided. 
b.  Front, side, and rear yards of not less than eighty (80) feet shall be provided. 
c.  All drainage, water supply and sewage disposal areas shall be approved by the City Engineer and the appropriate health authority. 
d.  Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed one (1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height. 
4.  Airports and Related Uses. Airports, landing fields and platforms, hangars, masts and other facilities for the operation of aircraft subject to the following: 
a.  No permit for the erection of a structure of a height exceeding fifty (50) feet shall be issued within five hundred (500) feet of an actively used runway of an airport. 
b.  No permit for the erection of a structure of a height exceeding one hundred (100) feet shall be issued within one thousand (1000) feet of an actively used runway of an airport. 
c.  Accessory uses shall be allowed such as motels, restaurants, private hangars and other uses necessary to serve the needs of passengers or freight handling incident to the operation of an airport. 
5.  Home-based businesses as defined in Section 200(ag), subject to issuance of a temporary one-year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written 30-day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Operators may appeals any decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a home-based business: 
a.  The home-based business shall be operated entirely within the dwelling unit or a garage or shed belonging to the dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the liveable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that is inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use, except as required by State Law for Cosmetologists. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display other than one (1) non-illuminated sign no more than four (4) square feet in area and attached flat to the building. 
e.  No display of products shall be visible from the street and no commodity other than that produced or processed on the premises shall be sold on the premises. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) paid assistant shall be employed on the premises other than those residing in the dwelling unit. 
h.  Class size shall be limited to no more than three (3) students at one (1) time. The building official may approve a maximum of up to six (6) students at one (1) time if the applicant can demonstrate that adequate parking as required in item (f) above is available to accommodate all students. 
i.  Customers, clients, and/or students shall be accommodated on an appointment basis only; no regular hours when the premises are generally open to customers shall be maintained or advertised. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  No vehicle requiring a commercial operator license or having a nominal rating of more than one (1) ton shall be parked on the premises. 
l.  No home-based business by its nature or conduct shall generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
m.  A home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
n.  Home occupation permits valid at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance may continue to be renewed annually as long as both the resident business operator and location remain the same and There is no expansion of the existing operation. 
6.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)B., subject to issuance of a temporary one (1) year permit, renewable annually, to operate a home-based business. Applications for medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permits shall be made in writing to the City building official on forms provided by the City. A permit fee may be established by the City Commission. A medical marihuana home-based business permit may be rescinded at any time during its effective annual period upon written thirty (30) day notice to the operator if it is determined that the home-based business is not operating according to the following conditions. Applicants may appeal any decision of the building official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Conditions for operating a medical marihuana caregiver home-based business: 
a.  The medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall be operated entirely within a single-family detached dwelling unit which is the primary residence of the primary registered caregiver or within a garage or shed belonging to the single-family detached dwelling unit. 
b.  The maximum total area of the dwelling and any garage or shed used for medical marihuana home-based business purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the livable floor area of the dwelling not including the floor area of the basement. 
c.  No internal or external building alterations shall be made that are inconsistent with what is generally recognized for residential use. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display or signage and no display of plants or products shall be visible from the street 
e.  Medical marihuana may be grown, processed, and stored on the premises in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. No products shall be sold or distributed on the premises. No patient consultations shall take place on the premises. Processed medical marihuana shall be distributed to patients at the patient's primary residence. 
f.  Parking shall be accommodated in the improved home driveway, which shall be gravel or other hard surface, and/or, as may be permitted by law or ordinance, on the street within the area adjoining the subject property line. 
g.  Not more than one (1) registered primary caregiver shall operate in the dwelling unit or associated garage or shed. 
h.  The registered primary caregiver may not care for more than five (5) patients. 
j.  No food or beverage shall be sold to be consumed on the premises. 
k.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent with the existing character of the residential neighborhood. 
l.  A medical marihuana caregiver home-based business shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference with telecommunications reception or other objectionable emissions, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations. 
m.  Marihuana plants shall be contained within an enclosed, locked area of the dwelling or garage or shed with devices which limit access to only the registered primary caregiver. There shall be no more than twelve (12) plants per registered qualifying patient. 
n.  Medical marihuana caregiver home-based business operations may be subject to periodic inspections by the building official. 
All information obtained through the medical marihuana caregiver home-based business permitting process that would be deemed confidential pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., shall be confidential and disclosed to authorized City employees only as necessary to perform official duties and shall not be subject to disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. 
Nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision, adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana not in strict compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq., and the Michigan Department of Community Health Michigan Medical Marihuana Administrative Rules. Also, since federal law is not affected by said act or the administrative rules, nothing in this Ordinance or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this Code is intended to grant, nor shall it be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution or property seizure under federal law. 
The operation of medical marihuana cultivation facilities or medical marihuana dispensaries as defined in section 10-1.02(200)(cc)C. and D. is prohibited. 
It is the intention that this Section shall not be construed to be an exercise on the part of the City, of the power of eminent domain; but that it is strictly to be construed as an exercise of the police power to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community under and by virtue of state law. 
(Ord. No. 302-89, § 1, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 447-01, § 1, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 532-12, 1-16-12) 
702.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS," limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.08. - O-S OFFICE-SERVICE DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The O-S Office-Service Districts are designed to accommodate office buildings and uses necessary to the servicing of the office district. Only those limited business activities of a retail nature necessary to the servicing of the Office Districts are allowed within these districts. 
800.   Principal uses permitted.
1.  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: 
    Executive, administrative, professional and sales offices. 
2.  Medical and dental offices, including clinics. 
3.  Banks. 
4.  Funeral homes (mortuaries). 
5.  Churches. 
6.  Municipal buildings, utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
7.  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
8.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including an accessory dwelling. 
9.  One-, two-and multiple-family dwelling subject to the Schedule of Regulations requirements of the R-1, R-2 and RM-1 Districts, respectively, as set forth in Section 1600 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 148, § 1 (10-1.08), 11-4-75; Ord. No. 220-81, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 321-89, § 1, 11-20-89) 
801.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to special conditions herein imposed. 
1.  Business service uses provided: 
a.  Businesses shall be clearly necessary as service uses to the office uses of the district or for the servicing of the work day needs of the personnel employed in the Office-Service District. These uses may include such business uses as drug stores, pharmacies, restaurants (not including drive-in restaurants), office supply stores, barber and beauty shops and other similar types of retail services. 
b.  Business uses shall meet all requirements for off-street parking and loading as required under the [Section 10-1.17] GENERAL PROVISIONS of this Ordinance. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Private clubs and lodge halls provided: 
a.  Where such use abuts a side yard of a residence or a residential district a side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided on the side yard abutting the residence or residential district. Such side yard shall not be utilized for parking and shall be planted to provide an effective buffer to abutting residences. 
b.  All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 321-89, § 1, 8-21-89) 
802.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.09. - B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The B-1 Local Business Districts are designed solely for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy those limited basic day to day shopping and/or service needs. 
900.   Principal uses permitted.
    In the B-1 Local Business District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1.  All Principal Uses Permitted and all uses subject to special conditions of the Office-Service District and subject to all regulations and requirements of the O-S District except as hereinafter modified. 
2.  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: Groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions, or hardware. 
3.  Restaurants but not including bars or drive-in restaurants. 
4.  Any personal service establishment which performs services, on the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: Shoe repair, tailor shops, beauty parlors, or barber shops. 
5.  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
6.  All uses shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including an accessory dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 145, § 1 (10-1.09), 11-4-74; Ord. No. 220-81, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 322-89, § 1, 11-20-89) 
901.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses may be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
1.  Gasoline service station for sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories and subject to all codes and ordinances governing gasoline service stations of the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
a.  The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. 
b.  The development shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
2.  Publicly owned buildings, utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses normally incidental to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
902.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS," limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.10. - B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The B-2 Central Business District is designed to provide for office buildings and the great variety of large retail stores and related activities which occupy the prime retail frontage by serving the comparison, convenience and service needs of the entire City are as well as substantial area beyond the City Limits. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive related services and non-retail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
1000.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises such as, but not limited to: Foods, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions, gifts or hardware. 
2.  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises such as, but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.) Tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and dry cleaners. 
3.  Hotels and motels. 
4.  Restaurants and taverns wherein said establishment does not extend as an integral part of or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in restaurant. 
5.  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
6.  Theaters. 
7.  Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or professional nature. 
8.  Banks with drive-in facilities permitted when said drive-in facilities are incidental to the principal function. 
9.  Municipal buildings and post office. 
10.  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, in connection with which not more than twenty-five (25) per cent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by said establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing, or refinishing its products or merchandise, and provided that: The ground floor premises facing upon, and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, or display. All storage or materials on any land shall be within the confines of a building or part thereof occupied by said establishment. 
11.  Business schools, or private schools operated for profit. Examples of private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, the following: Dance studios, music and voice schools, and art studios. 
12.  Newspaper offices and printing plants. 
13.  Warehouse and storage facilities when incident to any principal use permitted, provided that such facility be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by said establishment. 
14.  Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions. 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail from premises where produced. 
b.  Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. Commodities available for sale may be displayed outdoors during business hours. 
15.  Publicly owned buildings, utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
16.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including an accessory dwelling. 
17.  Apartment complexes of four (4) or more dwelling units. 
18.  Bus passenger station. 
19.  One-, two- and multiple-family dwellings provided that the dwelling units shall not be located below the second floor. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 1 (10-1.10), 11-4-74; Ord. No. 220-81, §, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 277-87, § 1, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 313-89, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 478-04, § 1, 9-20-04) 
1001.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and the minimum size of lot permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.11. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The B-3 General Business Districts are designed to furnish areas served typically by the Central Business District with a variety of automotive services and goods incompatible with the uses and with the pedestrian movement in such Central Business District. The General Business Districts are characterized by more diversified business types and are often located so as to serve the passer-by traffic. 
1100.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a General Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  All principal uses permitted in the B-2 Central Business District subject to all requirements of the B-2 District, provided the maximum height controls of the B-3 District are complied with. All uses permitted and as regulated in T Tourist Service District. 
2.  Wholesale and retail activities. 
3.  New automobile sales or showroom. 
4.  Auto repair garage. 
5.  Funeral homes. 
6.  Automobile car wash, when completely enclosed in building. 
7.  Bus passenger stations. 
8.  Bottling works and food packaging. 
9.  Private clubs or lodge halls. 
10.  Governmental offices or other governmental uses; public utility offices, exchanges, transformer stations, pump stations, and service yards, but not including outdoor storage. 
11.  Clinics. 
12.  Retail cold storage establishments. 
13.  Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
14.  Other uses which are similar to the above uses. 
15.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including an accessory dwelling. 
16.  Apartment complexes of four (4) or more dwelling units, subject to the Schedule of Regulations requirements of the RM-1 District as set forth in Section 1600 [10-1.16] of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1 (10-1.11), 11-4-74; Ord. No. 220-81, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 314-89, § 1, 8-21-89) 
1101.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed. 
1.  Outdoor sales space for sale or retail of automobiles or house trailers or camp trailers subject to the following: 
a.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
b.  Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least twenty (20) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 
c.  Outdoor sale space areas shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
d.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
2.  Self-storage facilities used to provide temporary storage needs for businesses, apartment dwellers, mobile home dwellers and other individuals on a self-service basis subject to the following: 
a.  The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only and shall not be used for operating any other business or activity other than the storage of personal and business items. 
b.  No storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive materials as defined in the fire codes, or toxic materials, shall be permitted within the self-storage facilities. 
c.  No storage outside of the self-storage buildings shall be permitted. 
d.  Maximum building height of any structure shall be twenty (20) feet. 
e.  No building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line, provided that where the property line of the site abuts a residential district, then no building shall be located closer than forty (40) feet to the contiguous residential-zoned property. 
f.  The facility shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
g.  All maneuvering and parking areas shall have a surfacing of dust-free material or shall be treated to be dust free at all times. Such areas shall be so drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the maneuvering areas. 
h.  All lighting used to illuminate the site shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and shall be installed so as to be confined and directed on the site only. 
i.  Maximum lot coverage may not exceed forty (40) percent. 
3.  Adult use-principal, subject to the provisions set forth in section 1707.1, subsection 1. 
4.  Other uses which are similar to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 301-89, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 450-01, § 1, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 501-08, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1102.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.12. - T TOURIST SERVICE DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The T Tourist Service Districts are designed to accommodate those activities necessary to service tourist needs including retail activities, tourist accommodations, parks and public uses of interest to the tourist. 
1200.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Tourist Service District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  All principal uses permitted in the B-2 Central Business District subject to all requirements of the B-2 District, provided the area and bulk requirements of the T-Tourist Service District are complied with. 
2.  Tourist residence facilities including but not limited to: Rooming houses, motels, hotels, camping sites and travel trailer sites. 
3.  Gift and souvenir shops. 
4.  Restaurants, taverns and bars. 
5.  Bowling alleys and pool or billiard parlors. 
6.  Private clubs or lodge halls. 
7.  Marina and boat livery facilities including boat sales and service facilities. 
8.  Churches. 
9.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, including an accessory dwelling. 
10.  Other uses of a character similar to the above uses. 
11.  Museums, art galleries, theaters and other similar cultural facilities. 
12.  Tourist services and attractions, including land or water-based tour or transportation facilities, convention centers, public arenas or auditoriums, historic displays and parks and recreational facilities. 
13.  Nonrecreational ship and boat docking and tie-up facilities, including public ports, together with their normal and customary accessory uses. 
14.  Apartment complexes of four (4) or more dwelling units, subject to the Schedule of Regulations requirements of the RM-1 District as set forth in Section 1600 [10-1.16] of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 286-87, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 312-89, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 315-89, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 408-96, § 1, 5-26-96) 
1201.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed. 
1.  Business in the character of a drive-in restaurant subject to the following: 
a.  A setback of at least sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way line of any existing street must be maintained. 
b.  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
2.  Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, carnivals, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
a.  Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709. 
b.  Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot, six-inch (4'-6") wall or obscuring fence where adjacent to the recreation facility. 
3.  Gasoline service station for sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories and subject to all codes and ordinances governing gasoline service stations of the City of Sault Ste. Marie and subject further to the following: 
a.  The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than twenty (20) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.  The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. 
c.  The development shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
d.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
e.  Major engine and body repair, steam cleaning and undercoating when conducted on the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The storage of wrecked automobiles on the site shall be obscured from public view. No automobile or vehicle of any kind, shall be stored in the open for a period exceeding one (1) week. 
4.  Rebound tumbling facilities (trampoline) and similar devices may be located in the "T" District subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Fencing shall be provided on all sides of the area used for trampoline activity. Said fence shall be no less than six (6) feet high and shall be constructed to discourage climbing on such fence during hours when the trampoline facility is not open for business. The facility property shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
b.  Trampolines shall be located on the lot to provide the following minimum distances measured from the outside of frames. 
(1)  At least six (6) feet at ends to nearest obstacle. 
(2)  At least four (4) feet on exposed sides to nearest obstacle. 
(3)  At least four (4) feet between rows of trampolines. 
(4)  In any row, at least three (3) feet between frames or three (3) feet of approved padding between trampoline beds. 
c.  Pits shall not exceed four (4) feet in depth, without special permission, and shall be adequately drained. The construction of the pits, the framing and the padding shall be according to manufacturers plans and specifications. 
d.  The ground area surrounding the trampolines shall have a level surface of sod, or of pea gravel or equivalent type of material to prevent a dust nuisance. 
e.  All trampolines shall be equipped with protective padding. 
f.  Automobile entrance and exit points shall not be provided from residential streets and such entrance and exit points shall not conflict with adjacent business uses. 
g.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space per trampoline to service those using trampolines and for spectators at the trampoline facility. 
h.  Outdoor lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from residential districts. 
i.  No loud speaker or public address system shall be used. 
j.  In the event the trampoline facility is discontinued, all excavations shall be filled to the grade of the property prior to its use as a trampoline facility. 
5.  Publicly owned buildings, utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
6.  Temporary or intermittent research facilities, including automobile, tire and related testing facilities, subject to the following: 
a.  All activities relating to the facility shall take place within a completely enclosed building. 
b.  No such facility shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district. 
(Ord. No. 312-89, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 478-04, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1202.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the maximum density permitted. 
SECTION 10-1.13. - I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The I-1 Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
1300.   Principal uses permitted.
1.  Uses permitted in B-3 General Business District subject to the regulations applicable to such uses. 
2.  Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, or within a designated area enclosed on all sides with a six-foot fence. Said fence shall be obscuring and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709 on those sides which abut upon or are adjacent to districts zoned for residential use. 
a.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities. 
b.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge, and machine shops. 
c.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: Bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wood (excluding rough saw and rough planing mills), and yarns. 
d.  The manufacture of articles or merchandise from sheet metal (including stampings of metals of seven (7) gauge or lighter) hot or cold forging of products made from wire of no greater diameter than five-sixteenths ( 5/16 ) inch. 
e.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electriCity or gas. 
f.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products. 
g.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
h.  Laboratories-Experimental, film or testing. 
i.  Manufacture and repair of electronic or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
j.  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards, excluding gas treatment and gas pumping stations, railroad transfer and storage yards. Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tanks and holders. 
k.  Building contractor's storage yards for equipment and materials. 
l.  Building material storage and sales. 
m.  Utility and public service facilities and uses including storage yards. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
4.  Other uses of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 561-15, § 1, 8-17-15) 
1301. - Uses subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
1.  Automobile or other machinery assembly plants subject to adequate control of noise and/or other nuisances. 
2.  Painting, varnishing and undercoating shops when set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from any adjacent residential district and provided further that such operation be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
3.  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
4.  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character, and which will not be injurious or have an adverse affect on adjacent areas, and may therefore be permitted subject to such conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. 
5.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses. 
1302.   Required conditions.
    Any use established in the I-1 District shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth in the [Section 10-1.17] "GENERAL PROVISIONS" of this Ordinance. 
1303.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting height and bulk of a building. 
SECTION 10-1.14. - I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The I-2 Industrial District is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. 
1400.   Principal uses permitted.
1.  Any principal use first permitted in an "I-1" District. 
2.  Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods, or products which shall conform with the performance standards set forth in Section 10-1.17, General Provisions," and which shall not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, or glare or heat. 
3.  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards. Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders. Railroad transfer and storage tracks. Heating and electric power generating plants, and all necessary uses. Railroad rights-of-way. 
4.  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, open storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential, business or office districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The fence or wall shall meet or exceed the height of the materials being stored, provided, however, that such fence or wall shall not be less than five (5) feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight (8) feet in height. The wall or obscuring fence shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709. 
5.  Any of the following uses provided they are located not less than three hundred (300) feet distant from any residential district. 
a.  Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill. 
b.  Petroleum or other flammable liquids, production or refining. 
c.  Smelting or refining of metals or ores. 
6.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1401.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
1.  Junk yards and places for the dismantling, wrecking and disposing or salvaging of the junk and/or refuse material of agricultural and automotive vehicles, paper, glass and other materials of a similar nature provided: 
a.  All ordinances of the City as applied to these activities are complied with. 
b.  The location for such facilities shall be allowed only where property abuts railroad tracks or yards. 
c.  No such use shall be allowed within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district. 
d.  Burning of materials or the burning of junk cars shall be prohibited. 
2.  Incinerators for the disposal or burning of garbage and/or refuse, provided all requirements of this Ordinance are complied with, and provided all other ordinances of the City are complied with. No incinerator shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to a residential district. 
3.  Activities involving storage, utilization or manufacturing of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall not be permitted within the City, except such as are approved by the Fire Marshall and subject further to all other laws and ordinances of the State of Michigan and the City of Sault Ste. Marie. 
4.  Mining operations, including sand, gravel, or deposits of ore and similar materials provided such operations where open pits or strip mining are conducted are adequately fenced to protect the public and shall be so operated as to allow for the reclamation of lands to a usable purpose in keeping with this ordinance. 
5.  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84) 
1402.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS," limiting the height and bulk of buildings. 
SECTION 10-1.15. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS[3] 
Preamble. 
    The P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are designed to accommodate the off-street parking for those uses which are not able to provide adequate space within their own district boundaries. 
1500.   Uses permitted.
    Premises in such district shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area, except as otherwise provided, and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 537-13, § 1, 8-19-13) 
1501.   Limitation of use.
1.  The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more business, research or industrial establishments, or in connection with one or more existing mixed use, professional or institutional office buildings, or institutions. 
2.  Parking areas associated with non-residential uses shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than 24 hours. 
3.  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
4.  Except as otherwise provided, no building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon premises and they shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
5.  Applications for P-1 District use shall be made to the Planning Commission by submitting a layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plan. 
6.  Residential uses which were legally established on a parcel of land prior to that parcel being rezoned to P-1, shall be continue to be considered conforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 537-13, § 1, 8-19-13) 
1502.   Parking layout, entrance and exit.
1.  Such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 1705. 
1503.   Minimum distances and setbacks.
1.  Side yards -Where the P-1 District is contiguous to side lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, a four-foot wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709 regarding off-street parking. 
2.  Front yards -Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said residential district, or a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, or whichever is the greater. That land falling between the setback line and the street shall be planted in lawn and shrubs and trees including a greenbelt area meeting the minimum requirements of Section 1709, Greenbelt and landscaping requirements. All such planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1504.   Surface of parking area.
1.  The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, shall have a surfacing of concrete, bituminous paving, bituminous sealcoat, brick pavers or similar paving units or other dust-free material as approved by the City engineer. Such facilities shall be so drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area. 
2.  The parking area shall be surfaced or treated within one (1) year of the date of rezoning for P-1 Vehicular Parking use if the parking area is to serve an existing use or uses. 
(Ord. No. 349-91, § 1, 4-15-91) 
1505.   Lighting.
    All lighting used to illuminate any P-1 District off-street parking area shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in over-all height above ground level and shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed on the parking area only. 
1506.   Approval and modification.
1.  The Board of Appeals, upon application by the property owner of the parking area, may modify the yard and wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this Article [Section]. 
2.  In all cases where a wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall, fence or buffer not more than ten (10) feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
3.  In addition to the above requirements, such parking area shall comply with such further requirements or conditions as may be prescribed by the Board of Appeals for the protection of the residence district abutting such parcel or parcels in which the parking area is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing generally, Ch. 24 Art. III. 

SECTION 10-1.15A. - MS MARINE SERVICES DISTRICTS 
Preamble. 
    The Marine Services Districts are designed to accommodate uses which depend upon direct access to the St. Marys River to function and/or directly serve recreational or commercial waterway users. The district regulations are designed to promote uses which utilize adjacent water resources and are aesthetically and functionally compatible with surrounding uses. 
15A00.   Principal uses permitted.
    In a Marine Services District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance: 
1.  Public and private marinas. 
2.  Recreational watercraft sales, rental, service, and seasonal storage facilities. 
3.  Retail businesses supplying commodities such as the sales of fishing equipment, bait, boating accessories, and other items of a similar character. 
4.  Water-based tour facilities. 
5.  Public and private recreation areas. 
6.  Marine provisioning and resupply services. 
7.  Nonrecreational watercraft docking and tie-up facilities, including public ports, together with their normal and customary accessory uses. 
8.  Marine fuel sales. 
9.  Nonrecreational watercraft repair. 
10.  Restaurants, taverns, or bars. 
11.  Private clubs and lodges. 
12.  Public and private campgrounds. 
13.  Underwater log recovery and drying. 
14.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
15.  Other uses of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 560-15, § 1, 8-3-15) 
15A01.   Uses subject to special conditions.
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed. 
1.  Seasonal nonrecreational watercraft storage. 
a.  Nonrecreational watercraft removed from the water for seasonal storage shall be screened from view when located closer than 100 feet to a non-waterfront property line. 
2.  Long-term nonrecreational watercraft storage. 
a.  Watercraft removed from the water for long-term, non-seasonal storage shall be stored within a building or screened from the view of adjacent properties and right-of-ways if stored outside. 
3.  Dismantling for salvage, spares, or recycling of watercraft. 
a.  All materials and equipment removed from a watercraft being dismantled shall be removed from the site or placed within a building within one calendar week of being separated from the watercraft from which it originated. 
b.  Prior to removal from the site or placement within a building, salvaged materials and equipment may be temporarily stored outside provided that it is not visible from an adjacent property or right-of-way and in no cases closer than 15 feet to a property line except when located inside of a building. 
c.  All work shall be performed in accordance with applicable state and federal environmental regulations. 
4.  Dredging. 
a.  Upon the completion of dewatering, uncontaminated spoil piles shall be removed from the site or graded into the existing site topography. Spoils incorporated into the existing topography shall be immediately stabilized with grass or similar suitable natural cover to minimize erosion by water and wind. 
b.  Spoils which are found to contain contaminants requiring special handling may be dewatered on site provided that the leachate is collected and disposed of off-site in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. Contaminated spoils shall be removed from the site within 30 days of the completion of dewatering. 
(Ord. No. 560-15, § 1, 8-3-15) 
15A02.   Area and bulk requirements.
    See [Section 10-1.16] "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS" limiting the height and bulk of buildings and the maximum density permitted. 
(Ord. No. 560-15, § 1, 8-3-15) 
SECTION 10-1.16. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 
1600.   Limiting height, bulk, density and area by land use.
Use Districts 
Area
Width 
In 
stories 
In 
feet 
Front 
Least one 
Total of two 
R-1 One-Family 
Residential 5,000 50 2 30 20(a) 3(b, c) 11(b, c) 35(m) 35 RS-1 One-Family 
Residential 8,400 70 2 30 20(a) 5(c) 15(c) 35(m) 35 RS-2 One-Family 
Residential 20,000 100 2 30 20(a) 5(c) 15(c) 35(m) 35 R-1A One-Family 
Residential 6,000 60 2 30 20 5(c) 15(c) 25 35 R-2 Two-Family 
Residential 4,000 40 2 30 20(a) 8(b, c) 16(b, c) 35(m) 35 RM-1 Multiple- 
Family Residential - - 3 40 20(h) 10(h, i) 20(h, i) 35(h, i) 35 RM-2 Multiple- 
Family Residential - - 8(j) 80(j) 20 
(g, h) 10 
(g, h, i) 20 
(g, h, i) 35 
(h, i) 40 RSV Residential 
Reserve 2 acres 100 2 30 20(a) 10(c) 20(c) 35 35 C-S Office-Services - - 2 30 - 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) B-1 Local 
Business - - 2 30 - 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) - B-2 Central 
Business - - 8 80 - 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) - B-3 General 
Business - - 3 40 - 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) - T Tourist-Service - - 3 40 - 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) - I-1 Industrial - - 8 85 20(a) 5(k) 10(l) - I-2 Industrial - - - - - 5(k) 10(l) - MS Marine Services - - 3 40 20 5(k) 10(k) 10(l) -  
(Ord. No. 249-85, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 273-87, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 307-89, § 1, 7-17-89; Ord. No. 329-90, § 1, 3-30-90; Ord. No. 410-96, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 441-99, § 2, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 560-15, § 2, 8-3-15) 

Distance Spacing for Multiple Dwellings 
NOTES TO 1600. 
(a)  In a block on one side of the street fifty per cent (50%) or more occupied, the depth of the front yard need not be more than the average depth of front yards of existing buildings and in no instance less than twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Where a side yard abuts a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be five (5) feet. 
(c)  Any side yard for a principal use or a use permissible on special condition allowed in this district, other than one and two family dwellings, shall not be less than one-half (1/2) the height of the building at the side yard. 
(d)  The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided: 
(1)  Efficiency Unit-1,100 square feet per unit. 
(2)  One Bedroom Unit-1,800 square feet per unit. 
(3)  Two Bedroom Unit-2,400 square feet per unit. 
(4)  Three Bedroom Unit-3,000 square feet per unit. 
(5)  Four Bedroom Unit-3,600 square feet per unit. 
(e)  A den or extra room shall count the same as a bedroom. 
(f)  The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided: 
(1)  Efficiency Unit-600 square feet per unit. 
(2)  One Bedroom Unit-900 square feet per unit. 
(3)  Two Bedroom Unit-1,200 square feet per unit. 
(4)  Three Bedroom Unit-1,500 square feet per unit. 
(5)  Four Bedroom Unit-1,800 square feet per unit. 
(g)  For buildings above three (3) stores in RM-2 Districts, the minimum yards shall be equal to the height of the building, except that where a lot line abuts a public street, up to one-half of the width of the right-of-way may be calculated as part of the required yard setback, provided that at least forty (40) feet of the required yard setback must be located within the property lines. 
(h)  In all RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple Residence Districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings is as follows: 
S = L/A + L/P + 2(H/A + H/B),/6 where S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. L/A = Total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. L/B = The total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. H/A = Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. H/B = Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls the length of building B. Natural level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.  
(i)  Any side or rear yard for a principal use or a use permissible on special condition allowed in this district, other than R-1, R-2, and Multiple-Family dwellings shall not be less than the height of the structure at the side or rear lot line. 
(j)  Buildings or parts of buildings, not exceeding two (2) per cent of the lot area may be erected to a height of one hundred (100) feet if the side yard is increased to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the height of such part at the eighty (80) foot level. 
(k)  Side yards may be omitted if walls abutting a side yard comply with the applicable requirements of the State Construction Code or if the side lot line abuts a public street or alley. 
(l)  If a rear yard abuts an alley, such yard may be measured from the center of the alley. 
(m)  If a main building includes a structurally attached garage, the minimum rear yard setback may be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(n)  For the purpose of this ordinance, a condominium subdivision, encompassing all of the property identified in the condominium consolidating master deed, shall be considered a single lot. Development density and spacing between buildings in such a development shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Site condominium subdivisions composed of single-family detached buildings shall not exceed a gross density of 6.7 dwelling units per acre in the R-1 and R-1A districts and 8.4 dwelling units per acre in the R-2 district. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any two (2) buildings in a single-family condominium development shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings is set forth in footnote (h), provided, however, yard setbacks from any public roads shall be as set forth in the district in which the development is located. 
(Ord. No. 307-89, § 1, 7-17-89; Ord. No. 329-90, § 1, 3-30-90; Ord. No. 417-96, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 566-16, § 1, 4-18-16) 
1601.   Subdivision open space plan.
1.  The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the following objectives: 
a.  Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets; 
b.  Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas; 
c.  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to by-pass natural obstacles on the site; 
d.  Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
2.  Modifications to the standards as outlined in section 1600, "SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS", may be made in the RS-1 and RS-2 one (1) family districts under the following terms and when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The lot area and width in all RS-1 and RS-2 one (1) family districts which are served by sanitary sewer may be reduced as follows: the required lot area may be reduced by twenty (20) percent and the required lot widths may be reduced to sixty (60) feet in the RS-1 districts and reduced to eighty (80) feet in the RS-2 districts. These lot area and width reductions shall be permitted, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to be were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for the RS-1 and RS-2 one (1) family districts under section 1600, Schedule of Regulations. All calculations shall be predicated upon the districts having the following gross densities: 
RS-1 = 3.82 dwelling units per acre 
RS-2 = 1.79 dwelling units per acre 
b.  Under the provisions of subsection 2.a., for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in section 1600, schedule of regulations, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision or to the City by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal means that runs with the land under such conditions, stipulations and maintenance requirements as approved by the City. 
c.  The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall constitute a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the parcel to be developed and in no instance be less than one (1) acre and shall be in a location and shape approved by the Planning Commission. 
d.  The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall not include bodies of water. All land dedicated shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage. 
3.  This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is mutually agreeable to the City and the subdivider or developer. 
4.  The development of land under this section is subject to other applicable ordinances, laws, and rules, including rules relating to suitability of groundwater for on-site water supply for land not served by public water and rules relating to suitability of soils for on-site sewage disposal for land not served by public sewers. 
5.  Under this subdivision open space plan approach, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the total open space area at the time of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat or at the time of filing the master deed under a condominium subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
SECTION 10-1.17. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1700.   Conflicting regulations.
    Wherever any provision of this Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this Ordinance, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
1701.   Scope.
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
1702.   Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises.
1.  Intent. Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed. Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved and shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended unless it can be conclusively shown to the Board of Appeals that such enlargement, expansion or extension will substantially improve the use and the environment of abutting uses and will not make abutting properties unusable as zoned. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
2.  Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements may be obtained through the Board of Appeals. Where two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements as established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance. 
3.  Nonconforming use of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance unless it can be conclusively shown to the Board of Appeals that such enlargement, expansion or extension will substantially improve the use and the environment of abutting uses and will not be cause for making abutting properties unusable as zoned. 
b.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
c.  If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
4.  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity unless it can be conclusively shown to the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals that such enlargement or alteration will substantially improve the structure and the environment of abutting uses and will not be cause for making abutting properties unusable as zoned. 
b.  Should such structure be damaged by any means to an extent of more than seventy-five (75%) percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
c.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
5.  Nonconforming uses of structure and land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, or unless it can be conclusively shown to the Board of Appeals that such action would substantially improve the use of structure and land and would improve the environment of abutting uses and would not be cause for making abutting properties unusable as zoned. 
b.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
c.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 
d.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
e.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision; 
f.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
6.  Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
7.  Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a general exception or special condition is permitted as provided in this Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
8.  Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
1703.   Accessory buildings.
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all yard regulations of this Ordinance, applicable to main buildings. 
2.  Accessory residential buildings shall not be erected in any required yard, except a rear yard. 
3.  The area of an accessory building shall not exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
4.  No detached residential accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any main building. 
5.  No detached accessory residential building in an R-1, RS-1, RS-2, R-1A, R-2, RM-1, RM-2 or RM-3 District shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said district. 
6.  No detached residential accessory building on a corner lot shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any side or rear lot line that abuts a street right-of-way except that if the minimum front yard setback along said street is less than 15 feet, then the lesser front yard setback shall apply. No detached residential accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line that abuts an alley right-of-way. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
7.  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than three (3) feet to any side lot line or three (3) feet to any rear lot line when there is no alley or street right-of way at the side or rear. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 437-98, § 1, 11-16-98; Ord. No. 441-99, § 3, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 524-11, 1-7-11) 
1704.   Parking requirements.
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. 
1.  Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or within four hundred (400) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
2.  Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve and subject to the provisions of Section 1703, Accessory Buildings, of this Ordinance. 
3.  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
4.  Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
5.  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance. 
6.  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
7.  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the Board of Appeals considers as being similar in type. 
8.  For the purposes of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "usable floor area" shall govern. 
9.  Where off-street parking is provided through special assessments, the number of spaces required may be reduced by the Board of Appeals by that number of spaces which can be prorated to the use which was specially assessed. 
10.  The number of minimum parking spaces per unit of measure as required in this Ordinance shall apply fully to the erection, alteration or extension of residential uses within the developed central business area, however, the provisions of parking spaces as required in the following item may be reduced by one-half (1/2) the minimum required spaces for all other uses within the developed central business area, being that area zoned B-2 on the zoning district map of this Ordinance and amendments thereto. 
11.  Business and office buildings existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance in O-S, B-1, B-2, B-3 and T Districts shall not be required to provide parking space in addition to that provided at the time of passage of this Ordinance when remodelling or altering existing buildings; provided no increase in floor area is made. In those instances where floor areas are to be increased, parking spaces shall be provided for such increased area in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
12.  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Use Number of minimum
parking spaces per unit
of measure  1. Residential: One-family One (1) for each dwelling unit Two-family One (1) for each dwelling unit Multiple-family Two (2) for each dwelling unit Rooming houses One (1) for the owner or resident manager and one (1) for each guest room Fraternities, sororities, and cooperative housing One (1) for each one (1) bed  2. Banks One (1) for each three hundred (300) square feet of usable floor area  3. Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item (4) One (1) for each four hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area  4. Professional offices of doctors, dentists, or similar professions One (1) for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area in waiting room  5. Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One (1) for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area  6. Furniture and appliance, hardware stores, household equipment repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One (1) for each eight hundred (800) square feet of usable floor area  7. Supermarkets (self-serve food stores) One (1) for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area  8. Beauty parlor or barber shops One (1) for each beauty or barber shop chair  9. Mortuary (funeral) establishments One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of assembly room usable floor space, parlors and slumber rooms 10. Motor vehicles sales and service establishments One (1) for each four hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area of sales room and one (1) for each auto service stall in the service room 11. Pool hall or club One (1) for each one (1) game table or one (1) for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable floor space in game rooms, or whichever is greater 12. Bowling alleys Four (4) for each bowling lane 13. Establishments for sale and consumption, on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshments One (1) for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area 14. Churches or temples One (1) for each four (4) seats in the main unit of worship 15. Theaters and auditoriums (except schools) One (1) for each four (4) seats 16. Elementary and junior high schools One (1) for each two (2) teachers, employees, or administrators 17. High school and college or university One (1) for each two (2) teachers, employees, or administrators and one (1) for each ten (10) students 18. Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners One (1) for each three (3) machines 19. Dance halls, roller rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area. Where legal capaCity is established, one (1) for each four (4) persons of the established legal capaCity 20. Private clubs, or lodges One (1) for each four (4) members, or one (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area whichever is the greater  
Use Number of minimum
parking spaces per unit
of measure 21. Hospitals One (1) for each four (4) beds and one (1) for each two (2) employees and/or members of the staff 22. Homes for the aged and convalescent homes One (1) for each six (6) beds and one (1) for each two (2) employees and/or members of the staff 23. Housing for the elderly One (1) for each three (3) dwelling units 24. Hotels, motels, cabins and tourist homes One (1) for each rental unit 25. Stadium and sports arena or similar outdoor place of assembly One (1) for each six (6) seats or one (1) for each twelve (12) feet of benches 26. Auto service stations One (1) for each service stall, rack or pit; and one (1) for each one (1) single or dual gasoline pump 27. Auto wash Adequate waiting space shall be provided off the street right-of-way 28. Industrial or research establishments One (1) for each two (2) employees in the largest working shift. Space on the site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. 29. Wholesale establishments One (1) for every one (1) employee in the largest working shift, or one (1) for every seventeen hundred (1,700) square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater 30. Trailer court One (1) for each trailer site and one (1) for each employee of the trailer court. 31. Video game arcades One (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area. 32. Laser tag arenas One (1) for each five hundred (500) square feet of usable floor area. 33. Indoor go kart tracks One and one-half (1.5) spaces per go kart, except spares.  
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 352-91, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. 354, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 551-14, § 1, 10-6-14) 
1705.   ;hg;Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance.
    Wherever the off-street parking requirements in 1704 above, require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
1.  No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued. Applications for a permit shall be submitted with two (2) copies of plans for the development, and construction of the parking lot showing the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
2.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot shall be provided and shall receive the review and approval of the City Engineer, in order to provide for the greatest possible public safety and welfare. Such necessary directional signs and controls as are required shall be established and maintained by the owner or lessee of the parking lot. 
3.  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. 
4.  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking 
pattern Maneuver- 
ing lane 
width Parking 
space 
width Parking 
space 
length Total width 
of one tier 
of spaces 
plus maneu- 
vering lane Total width 
of two tiers 
of spaces 
plus maneu- 
vering lane 76° to 90° 20 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 60 ft. 61° to 75° 18 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 38 ft. 58 ft. 40° to 60° 15 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft. 54 ft.  0° to 45° 12 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 31 ft. 50 ft. 45° Herring- 
bone 12 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. - 43 ft.  
5.  All maneuvering lane widths shall require one-way traffic movement, with the exception of the 90° pattern where two-way movement may be permitted. 
6.  Off-street parking areas shall be provided with a wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer in accordance with the specifications of minimum distance and setback requirements of the P-1 District and the provisions of Section 1709, on all sides where the next adjacent zoning district is designated as a residential district. 
7.  With the exception of parking spaces for one-and two-family residential dwelling units and except as provided elsewhere in this ordinance, the entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, shall have a surfacing of concrete, bituminous paving, bituminous seal-coat, brick pavers or similar paving units or other dust-free material as approved by the City engineer. Such facilities shall be so drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area. 
8.  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in overall height above ground level and shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed on the parking area only. 

(Ord. No. 349-91, § 1, 4-15-91: Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1706.   Off-street loading and unloading.
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated streets or alleys. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  All spaces in O-S, B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts shall be provided in the ratio required in 10-1.14 [Section 10-1.16], Schedule of Regulations as minimum rear yard. 
2.  All spaces in I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by fifty feet (10'×50'), or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height. All spaces in I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to gross floor area: 
Gross floor area (in square feet) Loading and unloading space required in terms of square feet of gross floor area 0-1,400 None 1,401-20,000 One (1) space 20,001-100,000 One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet 100,001 and over Five (5) spaces  
1707.   Conditional uses authorized by special permit.
    Because the uses hereinafter referred to posses unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they shall be permitted by the Planning Commission after the conditions specified and after public hearing notice of such hearing to be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 1912. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any R-1, RS-1, RS-2, R-2, RM or O-S Districts. These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the City and require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
1.  Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristic of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-1 Districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed internal design shall require approval from the Building Inspector and City Engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b.  Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the outdoor theater from abutting major thoroughfares and shall not be available from any residential street. Approval of ingress and egress points by the City Engineer shall be required. 
c.  All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.  The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed on to the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
2.  Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves, and public utility T.V. transmitting towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility T.V. transmitting towers, and their attendant facilities shall be permitted in I-1 and I-2 Districts provided said use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than one (1) time the height of the tower measured from the base of said tower to all points on each property line. 
3.  Trailer courts. [4] Trailer courts may be permitted in the B-3 General Business Districts by the Planning Commission after it finds the use as not being contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance and subject further to the following requirements and conditions: 
a.  The land parcel being proposed for trailer courts shall be of such land area as to provide for a minimum of at least twenty-five (25) trailer coach sites and shall not exceed a maximum of seven (7) trailer coach sites per acre. 
b.  Eighty (80) percent of the trailer coach sites shall contain a minimum area of at least three thousand (3,000) square feet, and twenty (20) percent shall contain a minimum area of at least two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. All such trailer site areas shall be computed exclusive of service drives, facilities, and recreation space. 
c.  All trailer courts shall have access to major or secondary thoroughfares within the City by directly abutting thereon. Frontage on said thoroughfare shall be equal to at least two hundred (200) feet in width. 
d.  The trailer court shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
e.  All trailer court developments shall further comply with Act 243 of Public Acts of the State of Michigan, 1959, (MCL § 125.1001 et seq.) as amended, and shall further comply with all codes and ordinances of the City. 
4.  Race tracks (including midget auto and karting tracks). Because race tracks develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area and cause noise levels which may project beyond the property so used, they shall be permitted in the I-1 Districts when located abutting a major thoroughfare and shall be located on a parcel of land which is abutting land zoned for industrial purposes on all sides of the parcel in question, and shall be subject further to the following conditions and such other controls as the Planning Commission deems necessary to promote health, safety and general welfare in the City. 
a.  All parking shall be provided as off-street parking within the boundaries of the development. 
b.  All access to the parking areas shall be provided from major thoroughfares. Approval of ingress and egress points by the City Engineer and the Chief of Police shall be required. 
c.  The race track shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709, Screening, buffering and landscaping. 
5.  Public Utility and Railroad Facilities. Water supply and sewage disposal plants; heating and electrical power generating plants; railroad transfer and storage yards, including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds and car or locomotive shops; railroad rights-of-way; and similar public utility (including transportation) facilities may be permitted in any nonprohibited district subject to conditions as set forth in section 1910. 
(Ord. No. 116, § 10-1.17(1707), 2-5-73; Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 407-96, § 1, 5-26-96; Ord. No. 441-99, § 4, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06: Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
1707.1.   Specified uses subject to special conditions.
    Because the uses hereinafter provided for possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in the specific use district classification, they shall be permitted subject to the conditions imposed for each use. 
1.  Adult uses. The nature of adult uses is such that they are recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or related residential uses such as schools, day care centers, libraries or parks, or to pedestrian-oriented businesses frequented by minors. Furthermore, the concentration of adult uses has an adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. The nature of adult uses requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse secondary effects would not contribute [to] or enhance criminal activity in the area of such uses nor will it contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value. As such, Adult Uses as defined in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
A.  General Provisions. 
(1)  Activities classified as obscene are not permitted and are prohibited. In no instance shall the application or interpretation of this ordinance be construed to allow an activity otherwise prohibited by law. 
(2)  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes. 
(3)  An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use pursuant to Section 200, "Definitions," shall be classified as an adult use-principal. 
B.  Adult Use-Principal. Adult use-principal shall be permitted in the B-3, General Business Districts, subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
(1)  Adult use-principal shall be located at least five hundred (500) radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the adult use-principal is located to the property line of: 
(a)  A residential zoning district. 
(b)  A licensed day care center. 
(c)  A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior high. 
(d)  A public library. 
(e)  A public park. 
(f)  Another adult use-principal. 
(g)  Any church or church related organization. 
(2)  No adult use-principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property as another adult use-principal. 
(3)  Adult use-principal shall adhere to the following signing regulations in addition to the sign regulations of section 1710 and the City Sign Code. 
(a)  Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the name of business. 
(b)  Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located. 
C.  Adult use-accessory. Adult uses-accessory, shall be permitted in the B-3, "General Business Districts," subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
(1)  Adult use-accessory shall comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located. 
(2)  Adult use-accessory shall comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
(3)  Adult use-accessory shall not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. 
(4)  Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access: 
(a)  Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation. 
(b)  Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. 
(5)  Adult use-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products. 
(Ord. No. 450-01, § 1, 12-3-01) 
1708.   Performance standards.
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any Use District which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within said area: 
1.  Smoke, dust, dirt and fly ash. [5] It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission or discharge of any smoke, dust, dirt or fly ash in quantities greater than prescribed in the codes and ordinances of the City. 
2.  Open storage. [6] The open storage of any equipment, vehicles and all materials, including wastes, shall be screened from public view, from public street and from adjacent properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall, obscuring fence or landscape buffer constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709 and of a height of not less than six (6) feet to obscure such stored materials. Scrap, junk cars and other junk materials shall not be piled or stacked as open storage to a height in excess of twenty (20) feet. Dumpsters shall be screened in accordance with Section 1709. 
3.  Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to extend beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
4.  Fire and explosive hazards. [7] 
a.  The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, is [as] determined by the Fire Chief, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards above mentioned. 
b.  The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials, goods, or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined by the Fire Chief, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and provided that the Fire Chief finds that said storage, utilization, or manufacture of goods, or products complies with the fire prevention standards in use by the City's Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 536-13, § 1, 7-15-13) 
1709.   Screening, buffering and landscaping.
    Wherever in this Ordinance a greenbelt, obscuring fence, wall or planting is required, such greenbelt, obscuring fence, wall and/or planting shall be shall be constructed and/or planted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
1.  Screening requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking for uses other than one- and two-family residential . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the off-street parking area where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
b.  Outdoor sale space for sale or retail of automobiles or house trailers or camp trailers . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the outdoor sales space area where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
c.  Self-storage facilities . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the facility where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
d.  Gasoline service stations . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the development where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
e.  Rebound tumbling facilities and similar devices . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the facility where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
f.  Outdoor storage of specified industrial uses and materials . A six-foot (6') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the designated outside storage area that abut a public street or an adjacent property. 
g.  Trailer courts . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the trailer court where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
h.  Race tracks . A four-foot (4') high wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm shall be provided on all sides of the development where adjacent property is zoned residential. 
i.  Dumpsters . A wall, obscuring fence, landscape buffer, or combination landscape buffer and berm at least four feet (4') high or the height of the dumpster, whichever is greater, shall be provided on all sides of the dumpster that face a public street or an adjacent property. 
2.  Greenbelt and landscaping requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking along a public street . Except for one- and two-family residential uses, where off-street parking abuts a public street, a greenbelt shall be provided contiguous with the street frontage that abuts the lot, and provided with one (1) deciduous tree or evergreen tree and one (1) approved shrub per each twenty-five (25) lineal feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. Trees and shrubs may be planted anywhere along the street frontage provided that the total number are planted, each tree has a minimum bed of forty (40) square feet, with no dimension less than five (5) feet, and the distance between beds does not exceed ninety (90) feet. 
b.  Interior off-street parking . Interior off-street parking lot landscaping is required when parking exceeds seventy-five (75) spaces. Such landscaping is required to break up the large interior expanse of the parking lot, and shall be provided at the rate of five (5) square feet per parking space. The minimum planting area shall be eighty (80) square feet with no dimension less than eight feet (8'). 
3.  Development standards. 
a.  Walls . When used to meet the screening requirements of this section, a wall shall be constructed on both sides with face brick, poured-in-place simulated face brick, precast panels having simulated face brick, other decorative masonry material or stone. 
b.  Obscuring fences . When used to meet the screening requirements of this section, an obscuring fence shall meet the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Fences shall be constructed of naturally durable or pressure-treated lumber or equivalent, with a minimum nominal one inch thickness and minimum nominal four- by four-inch (4 x 4) wood posts spaced not more than eight feet on centers. The finished side of the wood shall face abutting properties. Stockade fencing made up of closely fitted vertical boards with pointed tops is not permitted. 
(2)  A slatted chain link fence may be constructed in the B-3, I-1 and I-2 districts only. The fence must not exceed the ratio of one part open to six parts of solid fencing. 
c.  Landscape buffer . When used to meet the screening requirements of this section, a landscape buffer consisting of plant materials as specified in this section shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The buffer may be developed with two rows of planting materials in a planting bed with a minimum width of eight feet (8'). 
(2)  In the B-3, I-1 and I-2 districts, a buffer may be developed with a chain link fence with one row of planting materials on the inside and with a minimum width of three feet (3'). 
(3)  The planting bed shall provide year round screening, be continuous along the screened boundary. 
(4)  The buffer must achieve a minimum opaCity of at least eighty (80) percent based on the reasonable anticipated growth of the plants over a period of four years. 
d.  Berms . Earth berms may be included as part of the required screening height, allowing for lower planting material. Side slopes of berms are not to exceed a ratio of one (1) foot rise to three (3) feet of run unless properly engineered. All slopes to be protected from erosion. 
Suggested plantings that will provide the required eighty (80) percent opaCity for screening alone or in combination with a berm are listed in Section 1709.1. 
e.  General greenbelt plant materials. 
(1)  Spacing of plant material (except as provided for screening in section 1709.1). 
(a)  Plant materials shall not be closer than four feet (4) feet from the fence line or property line. 
(b)  Where planting materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
(c)  Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on centers. 
(d)  Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than three (3) feet on centers. 
(e)  Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on centers. 
(f)  Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten (10) feet on centers. 
(g)  Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four (4) feet on centers. 
(2)  Minimum size of plant materials (except as provided for screening in Section 1709.1) . 
(a)  Evergreen Trees : Juniper, Red Cedar, White Cedar, Pine, Spruce: Six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Narrow Evergreens : Pyramidal Arborvitae, Columnar Juniper, Irish Juniper: Three (3) feet in height. 
(c)  Tree-like Shrubs : Flowering Crabs, Mountain Ash, Redbud, Rose of Sharon: Six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  Large Deciduous Shrubs : Honey suckle, Viburnum, Mock-orange, Forsythia, Lilacs, Ninebark: Four (4) feet in height. 
(e)  Large Deciduous Trees : Oaks, Hard Maples, Ash, Hackberry, Sycamore: Two inch (2") caliper. 
(3)  Trees not permitted : Box Elder, Soft Maples (Silver Maple), Elms, Poplars (Lombardi and Cottonwood), Ailanthus (Tree of Heaven), Russian Olive. 
(4)  General planting standards: 
(a)  All plant materials shall be healthy, suitable for the site conditions and hardy to the project area. 
(b)  Required landscape planting beds shall contain a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches of fertile topsoil and shall be protected from vehicle damage. 
(c)  All required landscape-planting beds should be top-dressed and maintained with a minimum of four-inch (4") shredded hardwood bark mulch. 
(d)  Trees and shrubs required under this section shall not be planted in a public right-of-way, nor shall they be planted under or over power lines, or underground utilities unless pre-approval in writing is obtained from the utility. 
4.  General screening, buffering and landscaping provisions. 
a.  Suitable materials equal in characteristics to the plant materials listed with the spacing as required may be provided, subject to horticultural confirmation. 
b.  Required screening shall be located along the lot line except where underground utilities interfere or where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Upon review of the site plan, the Planning Commission may approve or require an alternate location for the screening or may waive the requirements. 
c.  Required screening may, upon approval of the Planning Commission be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way where a non-residential zone abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a consideration of the Planning Commission when making its determination. 
d.  In the event of unusual conditions of a site such as unusual topography, size of the parcel to be developed, the soil or other sub-surface conditions, the presence of existing vegetation on the site that can act as partial or full screening, existing developed screening on an adjacent developed property, and other similar conditions that would make strict adherence to the requirements of this chapter serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install or maintain the required buffer or screen, the Planning Commission may alter these requirements as long as the existing site features and any additional buffer materials stipulated will screen the proposed use as effectively as the required buffer or screening. 
e.  In cases where an adjacent residential district is considered to be an area or use in transition and will become nonresidential in the future as depicted in the Master Plan, the Planning Commission may waive or modify the screening, buffering and landscaping requirements when cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served. 
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
1709.1   Suggested plantings for screening.
SUGGESTED PLANTINGS FOR MINIMUM 6' TALL LANDSCAPE BUFFER COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME VARIETY SIZE AT PLANTING SINGLE ROW SPACING (ON CENTER) DOUBLE ROW SPACING (ON CENTER) Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana Glauca 4' tall min. 4' o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 4' apart 'Manhattan Blue' 4' o.c. Norway Spruce Picea abies 6' tall min. - 8' o.c. in staggered rows 10' apart Black Hills Spruce Picea glauca 'Densata' 6' tall min. - 8' o.c. in staggered rows 10' apart Colorado Blue Spruce Picea pungens - 6' tall min. - 8' o.c. in staggered rows 10' apart Anglo Jap Yew Taxus x media 'Hattfieldii' 6' tall min. 5' o.c. 10' o.c. in staggered rows 5' apart 'Hicksii' Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis 'Techny' 5' tall min. 3' o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 4' apart  
SUGGESTED PLANTINGS FOR MINIMUM 4' TALL LANDSCAPE BUFFER Chinese Juniper Juniperus chinensis 'Hetzii' 30" tall min. 4' o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 4' apart 'Wintergreen' Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana 'Hillii' 24" tall min. 4' o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 4' apart Dwarf Alberta Spruce Picea glauca 'Conica' 5' tall min. 4' o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 4' apart Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis 'Techny' 3' tall min. 2' o.c. 3' o.c. staggered rows 4' apart  
NOTE: ALTERNATE PLANTINGS WHEN COMBINED WITH 2' TALL EARTH BERM COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME VARIETY SIZE AT PLANTING SINGLE ROW SPACING (ON CENTER) DOUBLE ROW SPACING Bird's Nest Spruce Picea abies 'Nidiformis' 16" tall 2' o.c. 4' o.c. in staggered rows 3' between rows Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana 'Grey Owl' 16" tall 3' o.c. 6' o.c. in staggered rows 3' between rows Chinese Juniper Juniperus chinensis 'Sea Green' 16" tall 3' o.c. 6' o.c. in staggered rows 3' between rows 'Pfitzeriana' 'Blue vase' 'Aurea' Dwarf Norway Spruce Picea abies 'Pumila' 16" tall 3' o.c. 6' o.c. in staggered rows 4' between rows Mugo Pine Pinus mugo - 16" tall 3' o.c. 6' o.c. in staggered rows 3' between rows Spreading Yew Taxus x media 'Dark Green' 18" tall 4 o.c. 8' o.c. in staggered rows 6' between rows 'Densiformis' 'Tauntonii' 'Wardii' Holmstrup Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis 'Holmstrup' 18" tall 2' o.c. NOTE: Plantings suggested for 4' tall landscape buffer, when used in conjunction with a 2' tall earth berm, satisfy the requirements of a 6' tall landscape berm.  
(Ord. No. 519-10, 6-21-10) 
1710.   Signs.
    Any publicly displayed sign, symbol or notice on a premise to advertise the business there transacted, or name of person or firm conducting said business on premise, or directing to some other locale, shall be regulated as follows: 
1.  All plans for the erection of signs shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval and shall be further subject to all codes and ordinances of the City. 
2.  Prior to the erection of a sign in a public right-of-way or overhanging a public right-of-way, the sponsor of such sign shall receive the approval of the proper governmental agency (City, County or State) having jurisdiction over such right-of-way. 
3.  Billboards and signs not pertaining to the use conducted on the property on which they are located may be permitted only in I-1 and I-2 Districts. 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 20. 
1711.   Condominium subdivisions.
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by section 141 of Public Act 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.241), all condominium subdivisions must be reviewed by the Planning Commission to determine compliance with City development regulations. 
(1)  Information required. Concurrently with the notice required to be given to the City pursuant to section 71 of Public Act 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.171), a person, firm or corporation intending to develop a condominium subdivision shall provide the following information with respect to the condominium subdivision. 
a.  All information required by section 66 of Public Act 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.166); 
b.  A staging plan for the project, if applicable; 
c.  A draft copy of the proposed master deed; 
d.  A site plan showing the location, size, shape, area and width of all condominium units; 
e.  Specific locations, sizes, shapes and dimensions of all condominium units, general common elements and limited common elements as such terms are defined in Public Act 59 of 1978; 
f.  A street construction, paving and maintenance plan for all private streets within the proposed condominium subdivision. 
g.  A utility plan showing all sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer lines and systems and an indication of whether these utilities are intended to be developed as part of the City utility system or as an on-site community system or systems. 
All information is to be kept current and updated until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(2)  Site plans. Prior to recording of the master deed required by section 72 of Public Act 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.172), the condominium project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to this ordinance. In addition, the City shall require appropriate engineering plans and inspections prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. 
(3)  Monuments required. All condominium projects which consist in whole or in part of condominium units which are building sites, mobile home sites or recreational sites shall be marked with monuments demarcating proposed ownership boundaries. 
(4)  Streets and roads. All streets and roads in a single-family or two-family condominium project intended to be dedicated as public streets shall meet the design and construction standards set forth in articles VI and VII of the City subdivision regulations (chapter 23 of the City Code). All streets intended to be private shall be developed to construction, alignment and geometric specifications established by the engineering department as will insure adequacy of public safety access. 
(5)  Utilities. All utilities proposed to develop and granted to the City shall be constructed to City specifications. 
(6)  Easements. The condominium subdivision plan shall include all necessary easements granted to the City for the purpose of operating and providing public utilities. 
(7)  Review. In its review, the Planning Commission may require such easements, road dedications and public improvements as are required to provide for continuity of utility, street and circulation systems, and to meet the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 416-96, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
1712.   Residential fences, walls, and similar protective barriers.
    Fences, walls and similar protective barriers which are accessory to residential dwelling units are permitted subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers located within a side or rear yard shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
2.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers shall not be located in the front yard except as follows: 
a.  Fences up to four (4) feet in height and of no more than seventy (70) percent solid construction with open spaces spread uniformly over the entire length may be located in the front yard. 
3.  For the purposes of this section, in the case of double frontage lots, the entire front yard at the front of the main structure and also the required front yard setback area at the rear of the main structure shall be considered front yards, subject to the provisions of subsection 2. Any additional yard area at the rear of the main structure shall be considered a rear yard. 
4.  For the purposes of this section, in the case of lots fronting on both a street and the St. Mary's River, the entire yard area between the main structure and the river and also the required front year setback area along the street shall be considered front yards, subject to the provisions of subsection 2. Any additional yard area along the street shall be considered a rear yard. 
5.  For the purposes of this section, in the case of corner lots, the side and rear lot areas between the main building setback line and the street or within twenty (20) feet of the street, whichever distance is less, shall be considered front yards, subject to the provisions of subsection 2. 
6.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers up to twenty-five (25) feet in total length which are designed to serve as privacy screens and are located in the side or rear yard at least eight (8) feet from any property line may be up to eight (8) feet in height. 
7.  No fences, walls and similar protective barriers above a height of three (3) feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection. 
8.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers shall not in any way obstruct or encroach upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley right-of-way. 
9.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers shall not contain sharp-pointed materials, barbed wire, electric current or charge of electriCity. 
10.  All height dimensions are measured from the surface on the ground. Height measurement may exclude up to two (2) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground surface in most areas and up to six (6) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground in the occasional area of noticeably uneven ground. The height measurement may also exclude up to four (4) inches for decorative post tops. 
(Ord. No. 425-97, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. 531-12, 1-3-12) 
1712.1.   Commercial fences, walls, and similar protective barriers.
    Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers within the O-S, B-1, B-2, B-3, and T districts are permitted subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers located within a side or rear yard shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
2.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not be located in the front yard except as follows: 
a.  Fences up to four (4) feet in height and of no more than seventy (70) percent solid construction with open spaces spread uniformly over the entire length may be located in the front yard. 
3.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not be located within five (5) feet of a property line which is immediately adjacent to an improved public street or alley. 
4.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers installed for the purposes of securing the perimeter of an active construction or demolition site, undeveloped parcel, or lands which contain otherwise hazardous conditions, may be secured by a perimeter fence not to exceed six (6) feet in height. The setback requirements in subsection 3 shall not apply. 
5.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers installed for the purposes of securing seasonal outdoor or semi-outdoor retail spaces which are subordinate to a larger, adjacent indoor retail space may be enclosed by a fence not to exceed eight (8) feet in height when such fence is more than ten (10) feet from a property line. When within ten (10) feet of a property line, the height of the fence shall be limited to six (6) feet. 
6.  No fences, walls, and similar protective barriers above a height of three (3) feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection. 
7.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not in any way obstruct or encroach upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley right-of-way. 
8.  All height dimensions are measured from the surface on the ground. Height measurement may exclude up to two (2) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground surface in most areas and up to six (6) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground in the occasional area of noticeably uneven ground. The height measurement may also exclude up to four (4) inches for decorative post tops. 
9.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 10, barbed wire is only permitted within the B-3 district and shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Not more than three (3) strands of barbed wire may be installed. 
b.  Barbed wire may only be installed in a horizontal orientation. 
c.  The distance between the outer-most strands may not exceed two (2) feet. 
d.  Where a fence utilizing barbed wire is within ten (10) feet of a property line, the barbed wire may only project vertically or toward the interior of the enclosure. 
e.  Only common barbed wire is permitted. Razor wire, concertina wire, and their equivalents are prohibited. 
f.  The bottom strand of barbed wire may not be less than six (6) feet above the established grade. 
g.  For the purposes of determining the overall height of a fence, barbed wire sections shall not be considered. 
10.  Barbed wire may be permitted within the O-S, B-1, B-2, and T districts to discourage unauthorized access to critical infrastructure sites operated by utility providers including, but not limited to, electrical substations, water towers/booster stations, and sewage lift stations. Such sites utilizing barbed wire shall otherwise adhere to the provisions of subsection 9. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to the provisions of Section 23.5, Article V. 
11.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not contain electric current or charge of electricity. 
1712.2.   Industrial and Marine Services fences, walls, and similar protective barriers.
    Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers within the I-1, I-2, and MS districts are permitted subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers located within a side or rear yard shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not be located in the front yard except as follows: 
a.  Fences up to six (6) feet in height may be located in the front yard. 
3.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not be located within five (5) feet of a property line which is immediately adjacent to an improved public street or alley. 
4.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers installed for the purposes of securing the perimeter of an active construction or demolition site, undeveloped parcel, or lands which contain otherwise hazardous conditions, may be secured by a perimeter fence not to exceed six (6) feet in height. The setback requirements found in subsection 3 shall not apply. 
5.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers installed for the purposes of securing seasonal outdoor or semi-outdoor retail spaces which are subordinate to a larger adjacent indoor retail space may be enclosed by a fence not to exceed eight (8) feet in height when further than ten (10) feet from a property line. Within ten (10) feet of a property line, the height shall be limited to six (6) feet. 
6.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers installed for the purposes of securing open storage areas may be enclosed by a fence not to exceed ten (10) feet in height when located further than ten (10) feet from a property line. When located within ten (10) feet of a property line, the height shall be limited to eight (8) feet. 
7.  No fences, walls, and similar protective barriers above a height of three (3) feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection. 
8.  Fences, walls, and similar protective barriers shall not in any way obstruct or encroach upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley right-of-way. 
9.  All height dimensions are measured from the surface on the ground. Height measurement may exclude up to two (2) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground surface in most areas and up to six (6) inches for open space between the bottom of a fence panel and the ground in the occasional area of noticeably uneven ground. The height measurement may also exclude up to four (4) inches for decorative post tops. 
10.  The installation of barbed wire shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Not more than three (3) strands of barbed wire may be installed. 
b.  Barbed wire may only be installed in a horizontal orientation. 
c.  The distance between the outer-most strands may not exceed two (2) feet. 
d.  Where a fence utilizing barbed wire is within ten (10) feet of a property line, the barbed wire may only project vertically or toward the interior of the enclosure. 
e.  Only common barbed wire is permitted. Razor wire, concertina wire, and their equivalents are prohibited. 
f.  The bottom strand of barbed wire may not be less than six (6) feet above the established grade. 
g.  For the purposes of determining the overall height of a fence, barbed wire sections shall not be considered. 
h.  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to the provisions of Section 23.5, Article V. 
11.  Fences, walls and similar protective barriers shall not contain electric current or charge of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 570-17, § 1, 3-6-17) 
1713.   Accessory small wind energy turbines.
    Accessory small wind energy turbines are wind energy systems as defined in Section 200(cb) [Definitions]. Accessory small wind energy turbines are permitted in all districts subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Manufacture and installation: Accessory small wind energy turbines shall be commercially manufactured units and must be installed by an authorized manufacturer's representative, certified technician, or under the supervision of a registered engineer. 
2.  Maximum nameplate capaCity: The nameplate capaCity of maximum output shall not exceed twenty (20) kilowatts for tower-mounted accessory small wind energy turbines or ten (10) kilowatts for structure-mounted accessory small wind energy turbines. 
3.  Maximum number of turbines per site: No more than one (1) tower-mounted accessory small wind energy turbine or two (2) structure-mounted accessory small wind energy turbines may be installed on any one (1) site. 
4.  Maximum height: The height of a tower-mounted small wind energy turbine shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet. The height of a structure-mounted small wind energy turbine shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of adjoining roof or structure, excluding chimneys, antennae or similar features. Tower-mounted small wind energy turbines more than thirty (30) feet to sixty-five (65) feet in height shall be considered a conditional or special land use subject to the general conditions and process set forth in Section 1910. 
5.  Location and setbacks: Tower-mounted small wind energy turbines shall be located in the rear yard. A minimum setback equal to the height of the tower-mounted small wind energy turbine shall be required from any property line, public right-of-way, public easement or overhead utility lines. 
Structure-mounted small wind energy turbines shall be set back from any property line, public right-of-way, public easement or overhead utility lines a minimum distance of the height of the wind energy system including the top of the blade in its vertical position as measured from where the turbine is attached to the structure. 
6.  Clearance: The lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of a tower-mounted or structure-mounted small wind energy turbine shall be at least fifteen (15) feet above the ground, as measured from the highest point of grade within thirty (30) feet of the base of the small wind energy turbine, and also above the floor level of any outdoor habitable areas such as balconies, porches or decks. 
7.  Appearance standards: Tower-mounted small wind energy turbines shall be of monopole design and shall not include guy wires or similar apparatus. Accessory small wind energy turbines shall not contain signage, banners, flags or advertising logos except for the identification of the turbine manufacturer and unit specifications for regulatory purposes. Exterior lighting shall be permitted only to meet FAA mandatory requirements. 
8.  Construction and performance standards: Accessory small wind energy turbines shall meet the following construction and performance standards: 
a.  [Standards:] Small wind energy turbines shall conform to all applicable state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements. 
b.  [Control systems:] Accessory small wind energy turbines shall include an automatic braking, governing or feathering system in order to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over speeding or excessive pressure on the turbine. 
c.  Vibration limits: An accessory small wind energy turbine shall not produce vibrations that are perceptible to a reasonable person of normal sensibilities beyond any property line of the site upon which it is located. 
9.  Building permit required: Accessory small wind energy turbines shall require the issuance of a building permit. The building permit application must include a scaled site layout plan, turbine specifications, and any other information necessary for the administrating official to determine that the proposed wind turbine installation will meet the requirements of this section. The wind turbine must be installed and operational within six (6) months of the issuance of a building permit. 
10.  Minimum site size: The site, as defined in Section 200(cb) above, where an accessory small wind energy turbine is installed shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in size. 
Provided all other requirements of Section 1713 are met, a site of less than two (2) acres in size may be permitted if the owners, as identified in the City Assessor's records, of all adjacent properties, as defined in Section 200(bx), consent in writing to the installation of the proposed wind turbine on a site less than two (2) acres in size. 
Upon determination that a building permit application for installation of an accessory small wind energy turbine on a site less than two (2) acres in size meets all other requirements, the administrating official shall notify the adjacent property owners of the applicant's request and include copies of the proposed site layout plan and turbine specifications. 
11.  Annual inspection, maintenance and repair certification : The owner shall notify the administrating official of the date the wind turbine becomes operational. Beginning one (1) year after this date, the owner must submit documentation annually to the administrating official that the turbine has been inspected, maintained, repaired as necessary, and determined to be fully operating in good working order by a certified manufacturer or installer's representative or other qualified technician. 
If such annual documentation is not submitted, the administrating official shall notify the owner in writing. If the owner does not submit the necessary documentation to the administering official within three (3) months of receipt of initial notification, the wind turbine shall be considered to be at the end of its useful life. 
12.  Decommissioning: An accessory small wind energy turbine shall be decommissioned within six (6) months after the end of its useful life at the expense of the current property owner. If decommissioning does not take place within this six-month time period, the accessory small wind energy turbine shall thereafter be considered a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 520-10, 8-23-10) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Mobile homes, Ch.17. 

--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Air pollution prevention control, Ch. 4. 

--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage, rubbish, litter, junk, Ch. 13. 

--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and control, Ch. 12. 

SECTION 10-1.18. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 
1800.   Area, height and use exceptions.
    The regulations in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions: 
1.  Essential services. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the City; it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this Ordinance. 
2.  Voting place. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
3.  Height limit. The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers, television towers (not including commercial uses); provided, however, that the Board of Appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a use permitted on special condition or under 1507 [subsection 1707] of this Ordinance. 
4.  Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins a dedicated alley or line, for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this Ordinance, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
5.  Yard regulations. When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, as in the case of a planned development in the multiple-family district, or where their application cannot be determined on lots existing and of record at the time this Ordinance became effective, and on lots of peculiar shape, topography, or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the Board of Appeals. 
6.  Multiple dwelling side yard. For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family, a terrace, a row house, or multiple dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
7.  Projections into required open spaces. 
a.  Outside stairways, fire escapes, vestibules, balconies, bay windows and similar projections from the face of a building extending more than four (4) feet above the established grade shall be considered part of the building and shall not extend into any required yard or open space. 
b.  Obscuring fences, not exceeding six (6) feet in height on the side yard and six (6) feet in height on the rear yard may occupy a required side yard or rear yard. 
c.  Walls, chimneys or other obstructions more than four (4) feet above the established grade required for the proper maintenance of the land, may occupy parts of the side yard but may not extend more than sixteen (16) inches. 
d.  Accessory buildings not over one story or 15 feet in height may occupy part of the rear yard but not a side yard. Such occupancy shall not exceed 40% of the total rear yard in a residential district. Accessory buildings attached to the principal building shall be treated as a principal building. In a business district or industrial district, accessory buildings, if not used for dwelling purposes, may occupy only the ground the principal building is permitted to occupy. 
e.  Unenclosed vehicle storage or loading space may occupy parts of a side or rear yard and the area thus used shall not be computed in the total percentage of lot occupancy as long as it remains unenclosed. 
f.  Structures four (4) feet in height or less shall not be considered in computing maximum percent of lot coverage in residential districts. 
g.  An unenclosed terrace or porch not more than two (2) feet high may project into a front yard for a distance not to exceed six (6) feet and may include a fixed canopy or awning but this shall not be interpreted to include enclosed sides from the floor to the roof. 
h.  Unenclosed travel trailer storage for not exceeding one (1) such travel trailer may occupy parts of a rear yard of a lot in a residential district and the area thus used shall not be computed in the total percentage of lot occupancy as long as it remains unenclosed. 
i.  No person shall install a fire escape on the street facade of a building in any district; provided, however that in cases where exceptional conditions relating to the building are present which would result in undue hardship or exceptional practical difficulties as to the use of the property, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of section 2003(3) upon sufficient and compelling evidence of such undue hardship or exceptional practical difficulty. 
j.  Uncovered decks, porches and associated stairways to ground level may be constructed within the front setback as a means to provide access to the front entry of a dwelling unit subject to the following standards: 
1.  Decks shall not project into the front yard more than six (6) feet, as measured from the immediately adjacent front wall of the dwelling, or three (3) feet from the front property line, whichever is less. 
2.  The total width of a deck constructed under this provision may not exceed the width of the dwelling, or twenty (20) feet, whichever is less. 
3.  The height of the deck floor shall be less than or equal to the finished floor level of the dwelling as measured at the front entry door. 
4.  Decks constructed under this provision shall not be covered nor enclosed except as provided in subsection (k) of this Section. 
5.  Where variations in the front façade of a dwelling result in the creation of independent deck sections, the deck sections may be connected by walkways not exceeding three (3) feet in width. 
6.  For the purposes of calculating the average front yard setback, in accordance with Section 1600, Note (a), decks landings and stairways constructed under this provision shall not be considered. 
k.  To provide for protection from the elements, landings constructed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (j) of this Section may be protected with a roof or canopy no wider than five (5) feet. Such roof or canopy shall not project more than three (3) feet from the front wall of the dwelling and shall not be supported by means other than attachment to the building. 
(Ord. No. 240-83, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 365-92, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 544-14, § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 586-18, § 1, 11-19-18) 
SECTION 10-1.19. - ADMINISTRATION[8] 
1900.   Administering officer.
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the City Manager, or by such deputies of his office as he may delegate for such work. He shall make general rules and prescribe the use of such forms and methods consistent with the intent of the Ordinance as may facilitate the work. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1901.   Records.
    A record of each certificate of occupancy issued or applied for and each application for a building permit issued or applied for shall be kept on file in the department and such record shall be available at all times. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1902.   Building permit.
    No building permit shall be issued for the erection of or alteration to any structure or part thereof which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1903.   Certificate of occupancy.
    No structure shall be occupied nor land used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such occupancy or use, which occupancy of use shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. No structure or use shall be changed until a certificate has been issued for the changed structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1904.   Performance guarantees.
    In lieu of completing certain site improvements that are required by the provisions of this Ordinance in order to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy, a performance guarantee, as set forth below, may be deposited with the City. Such performance guarantee will provide assurance that the specified improvements will be accomplished and, upon the deposit of the guarantee, a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. The City may also require that certain temporary improvements be completed as a condition for issuing a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
1.  Scope of improvements. A performance guarantee may be deposited to insure completion of specific site improvements required as a condition of a proposed use as stipulated in any of the provisions of this Ordinance or as may be required as a condition of Site Plan Review or Conditional Use approval. Such improvements may include any or all of the following: surfacing of parking areas, lighting improvements, sidewalks, fences, greenbelt screening, walls, landscaping, utilities and/or drainage improvements. 
2.  Form of the performance guarantee. Performance guarantee shall mean a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit. Such performance guarantee shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the designated improvements and shall be deposited with the Clerk of the City of Sault Ste. Marie to insure faithful completion of the designated improvements. The amount of the guarantee shall be sufficient to insure completion of the specified improvements and shall be initially determined by the applicant, but subject to final verification or determination by the administrating official. Upon deposit of the performance guarantee the City shall cause the guarantee to be placed in an interest-bearing account with the interest accruing to the applicant. 
3.  Rebates. At the minimum, the City shall rebate to the applicant fifty (50) percent of the deposited funds when fifty (50) percent of the required improvements are completed as confirmed by the administrating official, and the remaining fifty (50) percent when the designated improvements are completed in accordance with the approved plans. An accelerated rebate schedule is permitted if both the applicant and the administering official agree, provided that there are always sufficient funds left in the performance guarantee deposit to insure completion of the designated improvements. 
4.  Default. If the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been deposited have not been completed with sixty (60) days of the date of the issuance of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, then the applicant shall be deemed to have forfeited the performance guarantee. The time period of November 15 through April 15, inclusive, shall not be counted in the calculation of required time period for completion of the improvements. The sixty (60) days may be extended for good cause at the sole discretion of the administrating official. 
5.  Completion of improvements by City. In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the performance guarantee was required, the City shall have the right to use the performance guarantee to complete the improvements through contract or otherwise, including specifically, the right to enter upon the subject property to make the improvements. Should the City use the performance guarantee or portion thereof, to complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after said completion shall be applied first to the City's administrative costs in completing the improvements, with any balance remaining being refunded to the applicant. 
6.  Agreement required. At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with the City, the applicant shall enter into an agreement incorporating the provisions hereof with the City regarding the performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1905.   Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings.
    Buildings accessory to dwellings shall not require separate Certificates of Occupancy but may be included in the Certificate of Occupancy for the dwelling when constructed at the same time as such dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
1906.   Application for Certificate.
    Application for Certificate of Occupancy shall be made in writing to the administrating official on forms furnished by him, and such Certificates shall be issued within seven (7) days after receipt of such application if the official determines that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    If such Certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid seven-day period. 
(Ord. No. 362-91, § 1, 12-16-91) 
[1907-1909. Reserved.]
1910.   Conditional uses, exceptions and special land uses.
    There are some uses which may be compatible with principal permitted uses in specific zoning districts if certain conditions are met. The Planning Commission shall review each such use to determine whether the conditions so identified, and the general conditions listed below, have been met. Upon a determination that conditions have been satisfied, a conditional use permit shall be issued. 
1.  General conditions. The Planning Commission shall review each conditional use and may attach such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure that: 
a.  The use is so located and arranged on the site as to avoid undue noise and other nuisances and dangers; 
b.  The development of the use is such that the proper use and enjoyment of adjoining property is not significantly impaired; 
c.  The size and scale of the use is such that existing public services and facilities are adequate to serve the proposed use; 
d.  The specific development proposal is consistent and in harmony with the master plan, the surrounding land uses and the zoning ordinance; 
e.  The granting of the conditional use will not be harmful to the public safety, health or welfare. 
2.  Application. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed in writing with the Administrating Officer, and verified by the owner. The application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking the conditional use; 
b.  Legal description of the land; 
c.  A detailed description of the proposed use and a description of neighboring land use including any map and graphics; 
d.  A detailed site plan, to scale, showing property line dimensions; existing and proposed structures, drives parking areas, streets, alleys, sidewalks, walls, fences and landscaping; the size and location of all utility and the existing and proposed drainage systems. 
e.  A fee payable to the City of Sault Ste. Marie shall accompany an application for a conditional use permit. The fee amount shall be as established or as change from time to time by the City Commission. 
3.  Procedure. If the application is complete, the administrating officer shall schedule a public hearing and provide notice of such hearing in accordance with the provisions of section 1912. 
a.  At the hearing, the applicant may present his proposal and the public shall be heard. 
b.  Conditions as may be attached to the approval of a conditional use shall be binding and failure to meet the conditions shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
c.  The decision on a conditional use shall be incorporated in a statement of findings and conclusions relative to the request under consideration. 
d.  The decision by the Planning Commission shall be final, except that an aggrieved party may appeal a decision to the Board of Appeals under its jurisdiction of administrative review. 
4.  Permit; expiration, extension. A conditional use permit expires six (6) months after Planning Commission action if no building permit is obtained. The Commission may grant time extensions upon a finding that circumstances have not changed sufficiently to warrant reconsideration of the approval of the conditional use. No public hearing shall be required prior to granting a time extension. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
1911.   Site plan review.
    In order to determine compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or development will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land and to promote the use of land in a desirable manner, a site plan shall be required as set forth below. No land use or development for which a site plan is required shall commence construction, nor shall any building permit be issued, until the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission or the administrating official. 
1.  When required. A site plan shall be submitted to the City for approval of: 
a.  Any land use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this Ordinance. 
b.  Any land use or development, except single-family and two-family dwellings, for which off-street parking areas are required. 
c.  Any land use or development for which an obscuring fence, wall or greenbelt is required. 
d.  All site condo and condominium subdivisions developed pursuant to the Condominium Act. 
e.  Any expansion of or change in an existing land use if more parking in addition to that already provided is required. 
2.  Application. Five (5) copies of a site plan containing the following information shall be submitted for review. 
a.  A scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to the inch if the property is less than three (3) acres in size and one hundred (100) feet to the inch if the property is three (3) acres or more. 
b.  Date, northpoint and scale. 
c.  The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
d.  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property. 
e.  The location, dimensions, and details of all existing and proposed drives, parking areas, loading and unloading areas, signs, curb cuts, lighting, access easements, trash receptacles, streets, alleys, sidewalks, walls, fences, required landscaping, and other associated site features. 
f.  The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities. 
g.  Location and method for collecting and disposing of surface water drainage. 
h.  A legal description of the land included in the site plan. 
i.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer and designer, together with a signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or officially acting on the owner's behalf. 
j.  Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this Ordinance. 
3.  Major projects; procedure. All developments greater than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of structure, or larger than two (2) acres in size, or which are adjacent to or within a single-family or two-family residentially zoned district, and exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of structure, or which are regulated as conditional uses in this Ordinance, are considered major projects which require review and action by the Planning Commission pursuant to the requirements below. If the application is complete, the administrating official shall place the site plan on the next Planning Commission meeting agenda. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall review the site plan in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Each site plan shall comply with the "Standards for Granting a Site Plan Approval" as described in subsection 5 below. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall obtain recommendations from such appropriate City departments as may be required in order to determine compliance with such ordinances and standards administered by such respective department. 
c.  The Planning Commission may take any of the following actions with regard to a site plan review. 
1.  Approval: If the site plan is in compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and the particular provisions of this section, the Planning Commission shall approve the site plan. 
2.  Conditional approval: If the site plan is in substantial compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and section and can be modified to be brought into full compliance, the Planning Commission may conditionally approve the site plan, with the provisions that no building or development permits may be issued until the plan has been modified in accordance with the conditions. Conditions as may be attached to the approval of a site plan shall be binding, and failure to meet these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
3.  Denial: If the site plan is not in compliance with all the provisions of this ordinance and section the Planning Commission shall deny the site plan. 
d.  All site plans shall be acted upon within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application meeting the requirements set forth in subsection 2 above. 
e.  Upon action by the Planning Commission, the plans shall be marked with the action of the Commission, signed by the Chairman, and distributed to the Building Department for filing and one (1) copy returned to applicant. 
f.  The decision by the Planning Commission shall be final, except that any aggrieved party may appeal a decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals under its jurisdiction of administrative review. The appeal must be filed within twenty-one (21) days of formal notice of the decision and shall state the factual basis for the appeal. An appeal shall stay action on the issuance of any permit pursuant to an approved site plan. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the record of action taken on the site plan and determine whether the record of action taken on the site plan supports the action taken. No new evidence shall be presented. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written findings in support of its decision on the appeal. Such decision shall be final unless an appeal shall be made within twenty-eight (28) days to the Chippewa County Circuit Court. Review by the Circuit Court shall be limited in accordance with applicable statutes and court rules. 
4.  Minor projects; procedure. All developments, other than those enumerated under the procedure for major projects are minor projects, which require review and action by the administrating official. In addition, the following developments are minor projects, subject to review and action by the administrating official: 
[a.]  Accessory uses incidental to a conforming existing use. 
[b.]  Expansions and/or additions to an existing conforming use, providing such expansion is not larger than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of structure or two (2) acres in project size, or not larger than two thousand (2,000) square feet of structure when adjacent to or within a single-family or two-family residentially zoned district. 
[c.]  Increases in off-street parking areas and loading spaces. 
[d.]  Any other site plan not delegated for review to the Planning Commission. 
If the application is complete, the administrating official shall date the application. 
a.  The administrating official shall review the site plan in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance. Each site plan shall comply with the "Standards for Granting a Site Plan Approval" as described in section 5 below. 
b.  The administrating official shall obtain recommendations from such appropriate City departments as may be required in order to determine compliance with such ordinances and standards administered by such respective departments. 
c.  The administrating official may take any of the following actions with regard to a site plan review: 
1.  Approval: If the site plan is in compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and the particular provisions of this section, the administering official shall approve the site plan. 
2.  Conditional approval: If the site plan is in substantial compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and section and can be modified to be brought into full compliance, the administering official may conditionally approve the site plan, with the provision that no building or development permits may be issued until the plan has been modified in accordance with the conditions. Conditions as may be attached to the approval of a site plan shall be binding, and failure to meet these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
3.  Denial: If the site plan is not in compliance with all the provisions of this Ordinance and section, the administrating official shall deny the site plan. 
d.  All site plans shall be acted upon with[in] forty-five (45) days receipt of a complete application meeting the requirements set forth in subsection 2 above. 
e.  Upon action by the administrating official, the plans shall be marked with the action taken, and distributed to the Building Department for filing and one (1) copy returned to applicant. 
f.  A decision by the administrating official may be appealed to the Planning Commission. The appeal must be filed with[in] twenty-one (21) days of formal notice of the decision and state the factual basis for the repeal. The Planning Commission shall review the application in accordance with the provisions of subsection 3 of this Chapter. 
5.  Standards for granting a site plan approval. Each site plan shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and shall be so designed and laid out [so that it] will ensure that: 
a.  All elements of the development will be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of the lot, the character of adjoining property and the type and size of buildings. 
b.  The site will be so developed as to not impede the normal and ordinary development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this Ordinance. 
c.  Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and existing and prospective development on contiguous land will exist. 
d.  Site drainage is adequate and will not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
e.  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within and adjacent to the site is safe and convenient and respective of the pattern of existing or planned streets, pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. 
f.  Reasonable visual and sound privacy is ensured for adjacent residential areas. 
g.  Emergency vehicles have practical means of access to all buildings or groups of buildings. 
h.  All loading and unloading areas, trash storage areas, trash receptacles and any outside storage areas are properly screened from residential areas or public streets. 
In its review of a site plan, the Planning Commission or the administrating official may require such landscaping, fences, walls or greenbelts or such other changes as may be required in pursuance of these standards, and same shall be provided as a condition of the use to which they are appurtenant. 
6.  Conformity to site plan required. Following approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission or administrating official, the applicant shall construct the site plan improvements in complete conformity with the approved plan. Failure to do so is a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the sanctions of section 10-1.25. 
7.  Expiration, extensions. A site plan review approval or conditional approval expires twelve (12) months after the Planning Commission or Administrating Official action if no building permit is obtained. The original approving authority (the Commission or administrating official) may grant time extensions upon a finding that circumstances have not changed sufficiently to warrant reconsideration of the approval or conditional approval. 
8.  Amendments to approved site plan. Amendments to an approved site plan may be made by the Planning Commission or the administrating official provided that such changes conform to the Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall submit any proposed amendments in writing to the administrating official. 
a.  Minor changes in any site plan may be approved by the administrating official provided no such change results in any of the following: 
(1)  A significant change in the use or character of the development; 
(2)  An increase in overall coverage of main structures; 
(3)  A reduction in required off-street parking and loading. 
Such minor changes may include: Minor changes in the location of building walls, not to exceed ten (10) feet, changes in the design of lighting fixtures, moving of ingress or egress drives a distance of not more than one hundred (100) feet, changing the angle of parking spaces or aisle width; or substituting landscaping plant species. 
b.  If the administrating official finds that a proposed amendment to an approved site plan does not qualify as a minor change, he shall advise the applicant in writing that the proposed amendment must be submitted to the original approving authority for approval. 
9.  Other approvals. In cases when a development project must meet other local, state or federal laws or regulations in addition to the provisions of the Ordinance, it is the sole responsibility of the applicant to obtain approval from the local, state, or federal agency administering such law or regulations. If such approval requires a change in an approved site plan, the applicant must obtain an amendment to the site plan in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection 8 above. 
(Ord. No. 363-91, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 583-18, § 1, 6-18-18) 
1912.   Public hearing notice requirements.
    Wherever a provision of this section requires a public hearing, notice of such public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended, and any other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
1.  Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing. 
2.  Notice shall be given by first-class mail or personal delivery to the owners of property that is the subject of the request. Notice shall also be given by mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the request regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of each dwelling unit or separately owned or leased spatial area. If a single structure contains more than four (4) dwelling units or separately owned or leased spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. If an occupant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing. The notice shall include the following: 
a.  Describe the nature of the request; 
b.  Identify the property that is the subject of the request, including the street address or addresses if they exist; 
c.  State when and where the request will be considered; 
d.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
3.  If eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, then notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation according to section 1912.1. Addresses as specified under section 1912.2(b) shall not be required to be included in the notice. Giving notice to property owners and occupants as specified in section 1912.2 shall not be required. 
4.  Notice shall be given by first-class mail or personal delivery to each electric, gas, and pipeline public utility company, each telecommunications service provider, each railroad operating within the district or zone affected, and the airport manager of each airport, that registers its name and mailing address with the City clerk for the purpose of receiving such notice. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing. 
5.  Notice shall be considered given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States postal service or other public or private delivery service. 
(Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

SECTION 10-1.20. - BOARD OF APPEALS[9] 
2000.   Creation and leadership.
    There shall be established and appointed by the City Commission, in accordance with Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921 (MCL § 125.581 et seq.) as amended, a Zoning Board of Appeals. The board shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternate members. The appointments shall be as follows: one (1) member appointed for a period of one (1) year; three (3) members appointed for a period of two (2) years; and three (3) members appointed for a period of three (3) years. One (1) of the regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be a member of the Planning Commission. After the initial appointments, except for a member serving because of his or her membership on the Planning Commission, whose term shall be limited to the time he or she is a member of that body each member shall be appointed to hold office for the full three (3) year term. The appointments of the two (2) alternate members shall be as follows: one (1) alternate member appointed for a one (1) year term; one (1) alternate member appointed for a two (2) year term; thereafter, each alternate member shall be appointed to hold office for a full three (3) year term. Any vacancies on the board shall be filled by the City Commission not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired for the remainder of the unexpired term the board shall annually elect its own chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. The alternate members shall attend each Board of Appeals meeting. The alternate members shall sit as a regular member in the absence of a regular member or when a regular member has abstained from acting on a matter coming before the Board of Appeals. The alternate members shall be called to sit on a rotating basis as needed. 
(Ord. No. 383-94, § 1, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2001.   Procedure of Zoning Board of Appeals.
    Meetings of the board shall be heard at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine by rule. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt his [its] own rules or procedures and shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the City clerk and shall be a public record provided, however, that a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of the Planning Commission, shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property. The fees to be charged for appeals shall be set by resolution of the City Commission. In those instances wherein lot area and yard requirements in lots existing of record cannot be complied with and must therefore be reviewed by the board, the required fees for appeal, in whole or in part, may be refunded to the petitioner at the discretion of the Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2002.   Appeals, how taken.
    The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of this state or the City, and review any order, requirements, decisions, or determinations, made by an administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of an ordinance adopted under Act 207, Public Acts of 1921 (MCL § 125.581 et seq.). 
    Appeals shall be taken within ten (10) days after the occurrence of the event which forms the basis for the appeal, by filing in writing a request for an appeal with the official from whom an appeal is taken who shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken. 
    An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal was taken [certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate] a stay would in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board, circuit court or other court of jurisdiction of notice on the application to the official from whom the appeal was taken and on due cause shown. All requests for Board of Appeals actions shall be made in writing upon forms adopted for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 383-94, § 1, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2003.   Powers and duties.
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this section, but does have power to act on those matters where this section provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. Said powers include: 
1.  Administrative review . To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this section. 
2.  Interpretation. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this section, requests for interpretation on which the section specifically authorizes the board to act. 
3.  Variance . To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict applications of the provisions of this section where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this section or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or in the case of a use variance, an unnecessary and exceptional undue hardship as to the use of the property in question upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this section. In granting a variance the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this section. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. A vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to approve a use variance. 
4.  Modification of parking requirements . Permit the modification of automobile parking space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements, or where the provisions of the required amount of parking spaces would create undue hardship in existing business areas, in the opinion of the board. 
(Ord. No. 242A-84, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2003a.   Hearings.
1.  Following receipt of a written request concerning a request for a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the request and give notice as provided in section 1912. 
2.  Upon receipt of a written request seeking an interpretation of the zoning ordinance or an appeal of an administrative decision, a notice stating the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and shall be sent to the person requesting the interpretation not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. In addition, if the request for an interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision involves a specific parcel, written notice stating the nature of the interpretation request and the time, date, and place of the public hearing on the interpretation request shall be given as provided in section 1912. 
(Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2004.   Standards.
    Each case before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be considered as individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the following standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such case. 
1.  Dimensional variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the dimensional requirements of this ordinance where it finds that a request has met all conditions listed below: 
a.  The spirit of this Zoning Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
b.  The practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships are unique to the property under consideration and not to the general neighborhood, and shall only apply to property that is under the control of the applicant. 
c.  It shall be necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning district. 
d.  There is a clear showing of an unnecessary hardship in that the property as a whole cannot reasonably be put to a use authorized by this Zoning Code. 
e.  The alleged hardship or difficulty is not solely economic and is based on the reasonable use of a particular piece of land. 
f.  The practical difficulties or hardship do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
g.  The requested variance is the minimum necessary that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
h.  The need for the variance is immediate and not anticipatory of future conditions or situations which may or may not occur. 
2.  Use variance. All uses as listed in any district requiring board approval for a permit shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts. The board shall give consideration to the following: 
a.  The location and size of the use. 
b.  The nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with it. 
c.  Its size, layout and its relation to pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use. 
d.  The assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous to the neighborhood or be incongruous therewith or conflict with normal traffic of the neighborhood. 
e.  Taking into account among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic, particularly of children. 
f.  Vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow, relation to street intersections, site distance and the general character and intensity of development of the neighborhood. 
g.  The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping of the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
h.  The nature, location, size and site layout of the uses shall be such that it will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and economic relationship of one (1) type of use to another. 
i.  The location, size, intensity and site layout of the use shall be such that its operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings, by reason of noise, fumes or flash of lights to a greater degree than is normal with respect to the proximity of commercial to residential uses, nor interfere with an adequate supply of light and air, nor increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 585-18, § 1, 11-19-18) 
2005.   Miscellaneous.
    No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection or alteration of buildings shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
    No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that the use of such permit is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in full force and effect if a building permit for such use, erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alterations are commenced and proceed to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. No person shall fail to comply with any special condition for a use as established and required by the Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
2006.   Decisions, appeals to Circuit Court.
    All decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be recited in the official minutes of the Board of Appeals. A copy of the minutes shall be mailed by first class mail to the party who caused the matter to come before the Board of Appeals. The mailing date shall be stamped upon the minutes. The Board of Appeals shall keep a record of and proof of such mailing. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final, unless within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing stamped upon the minutes, a person having an interest affected by the decision files an appeal in the Chippewa County Circuit Court in accordance with the court rules for taking such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 383-94, § 1, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 533-12, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

SECTION 10-1.21. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 
2100.   Changes and amendments.
    The City Commission may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change the boundaries of districts or regulations herein established. Such changes, amendments or supplements shall be by ordinance and shall be in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81) 
2101.   Initiation of changes.
    Changes to the zoning ordinance may be initiated by the City Commission or the Planning Commission. Changes may also be initiated by any person, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  If the change is altering the boundaries of a district or creating a new district, a petition bearing the signatures of the majority of property owners within the area to be rezoned is required. 
2.  If the change in an amendment of the zoning text, a petition bearing the signatures of at least ten (10) voters registered within the City is required. 
A petition for rezoning shall include the name and address of the applicant, a map showing the area to be rezoned, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification and intended use. (Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81) 
2102.   Fee.
    A fee payable to the City of Sault Ste. Marie shall accompany the petition. The fee amount shall be as presently established or as changed from time to the time by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1, (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 284-87, § 1, 9-14-87; Ord. No. 375-93, § 1, 6-21-93) 
2103.   Planning Commission review.
    The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Commission on any proposed change to the zoning ordinance. Prior to making a recommendation, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and provide notice of such hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 1912. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06) 
2104.   City Commission action.
    The City Commission, upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission, may introduce the proposed amendment or may refer the amendment back to the Planning Commission for a further report. If it considers it necessary, the City Commission may hold an additional public hearing, providing notice in accordance with Section 1912. The City Commission may adopt the proposed amendment, with or without change, by an affirmative vote of not less than four (4) members of the commission except as provided below. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06) 
2105.   Protest petition.
    Upon presentation of a protest petition to the City Commission before final action on the amendment, signed by either: 
1.  The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included in the proposed change, not including publicly owned land; or 
2.  The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change, not including publicly owned land; 
then an amendment to the zoning ordinance, which is the object of the petition, shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81) 
2106.   Publication.
    Following adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance by the City Commission, the zoning amendment shall be filed with the City Clerk, and, one (1) notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within fifteen (15) days after adoption. The notice shall include: 
1.  A summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment; 
2.  The effective date of the ordinance; 
3.  The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or inspected. 
4.  A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the Airport Manager or an airport entitled to notice. 
(Ord. No. 77, § 1 (10-1.21), 5-4-70; Ord. No. 217-81, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 489-06, § 1, 9-18-06) 
SECTION 10-1.22. - REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 
    The Zoning Ordinance, adopted by the City Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie on the 18th day of November, 1929, and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above Ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. It is not the intent of this paragraph to repeal any other part of the Code of Ordinances of Sault Ste. Marie. 
SECTION 10-1.23. - INTERPRETATION 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described Zoning Ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
SECTION 10-1.24. - VESTED RIGHT 
    It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this Ordinance shall be held or construed to give or grant to any person, firm or corporation any vested right, license, privilege or permit. 
SECTION 10-1.25. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES 
2500.   Violations.
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. 
2501.   Public nuisance per se.
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this Ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 18. 
2502.   Fines, imprisonment, etc.
    The owner of any building, structure or premises or parts thereof, where any condition in violation of this Ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and any person who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
2503.   Each day a separate offense.
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
2504.   Rights and remedies are cumulative.
    The right and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
SECTION 10-1.26. - SEVERANCE CLAUSE 
    Sections of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
SECTION 10-1.27. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
    Public hearing having been held hereon, this Ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after its adoption and publication. 
SECTION 10-1.28. - RESERVED[10] 
We hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance was adopted by the City Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, on the 15th day of March, 1965. 
ROBERT I. JACOBS, 
Mayor D. K. STRICKLAND, 
City Clerk  
I hereby certify that a summary or statement of purpose of Ordinance No. 30, the Zoning Ordinance, was published in the Evening News, a newspaper printed and circulated in the City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan on March 22, 1965. 
D. K. STRICKLAND, 
City Clerk  
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as public notice of Ord. No. 249-85, adopted Aug. 19, 1985, provides that such ordinance replaces the MH District with a new district, R1-A, § 10-1.28 (2801-2805) MH (Mobile Home) District, as derived from Ord. No. 104, § 10-128, adopted June 5, 1972, has been deleted, and the R-1A district provisions have been set forth as § 10-1.045 (450-454), between §§ 10-1.04 and 10-1.05. 

APPENDIX B - REVENUE BONDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B contains those revenue bond ordinances which the city requested including in this volume. The verbiage of the ordinances has been maintained as adopted, capitalization and internal designations reflect those of the ordinance, and any words added by the editor for clarity are enclosed in braces [ ]. 

[ARTICLE I. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM] 
[DIVISION 1] - ORDINANCE NO. 435-98 
    AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, FURNISHING AND EQUIPPING OF IMPROVEMENTS TO THE WATER; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS TO PAY THE COST THEREOF; TO PRESCRIBE THE FORM OF THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE COLLECTION OF REVENUES FROM THE SYSTEM SUFFICIENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COSTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND TO PAY THE PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE RESERVE FUND FOR THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE SEGREGATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE REVENUES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE RIGHTS OF THE HOLDERS OF THE BONDS IN ENFORCEMENT THEREOF; AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO THE BONDS AND THE SYSTEM. 
    THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(b)  "Adjusted Net Revenues" means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the System determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments. 
(i)  Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect. 
(ii)  Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the System. 
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in (i) and (ii) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the Issuer. 
(c)  "Authority" means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority. 
(d)  "Authorized Officers" means the Mayor, Treasurer, and City Manager. 
(e)  "Bonds" mean the Series 1998 Bonds, together with any additional Bonds of equal standing hereafter issued. 
(f)  "Issuer" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan. 
(g)  "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  "Project" means the additions, extensions and improvements to the System together with appurtenances and attachments thereto. 
(i)  "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this Ordinance. 
(j)  "Series 1998 Bonds" means the Water Supply Revenue Bonds, Series 1998, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $4,500,000 authorized by this Ordinance. 
(k)  "Sufficient Government Obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
(l)  "System" means the Water Supply System of the Issuer, including such facilities thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the Project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
    Section 2. Necessity; Approval of Plans and Specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the City's engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State of Michigan Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. 
    Section 3. Costs; Useful Life. The total cost of the Project is presently estimated not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than forty (40) years. 
    Section 4. Payment of Cost; Bonds Authorized. To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 1998 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) and issue the Series 1998 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. 
    Section 5. Issuance of Series 1998 Bonds; Details. The Series 1998 Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 1998 authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) as finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying the cost of the Project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 1998 Bonds. The Series 1998 Bonds shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully herein. The Series 1998 Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery of the Series 1998 Bond, payable in principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 1998 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. Final determination of the Principal Amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 1998 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the Authority providing for sale of the Series 1998 Bonds, and the Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above. 
    The Series 1998 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times as provided in the form of Series 1998 Bond contained in this Ordinance or as may be approved by the Authorized Officers at the time of sale of the Series 1998 Bonds or by the Authority at the time of prepayment. 
    The Series 1998 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and the Authorized Officers shall deliver the Series 1998 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. 
    The Series 1998 Bond principal amount is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer. 
    The Series 1998 Bond shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 1998 Bond shall be payable as provided, in the Series 1998 Bond form in this Resolution. 
    The City Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the City Clerk. 
    Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 1998 Bond, the Authority shall deliver the Series 1998 Bond to the Issuer for cancellation. 
    Section 6. Registration and Transfer. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The Transfer Agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 1998 Bonds contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
    If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
    Section 7. Payment of Bonds. The Series 1998 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable from the Net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this Ordinance. If the Bonds are purchased by the Authority and the Authority so requires, the Issuer shall pledge its limited tax full faith and credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Series 1998 Bonds. Should the Net Revenues of the system at any time be insufficient to pay principal and interest on the Series 1998 Bonds, as the same become due, then the Issuer shall advance from any funds available therefor, or, if necessary, levy taxes upon all taxable property in the City of Sault Ste. Marie subject to applicable constitutional and statutory limitations such sums as may be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The Issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the Net Revenues of the System subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or encumbered by this Ordinance. 
    Section 8. Bondholders' Rights; Receiver. The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty percent (20%) of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the Net Revenues of the System, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof. 
    If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the System on behalf of the Issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
    The holder or holders of the Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Bonds and the security therefor. 
    Section 9. Management; Fiscal Year. The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring of the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City Commission. The City Commission may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System. The City Commission may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System. 
    Section 10. Rates and Charges. The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
    Section 11. No Free Service or Use. No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the Issuer. 
    Section 12. Fixing and Revising Rates; Rate Covenant. The rates now in effect and the rate increases to be placed into effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law and this Ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
    Section 13. Funds and Accounts; Flow of Funds. Commencing on September 1, 1998, all funds belonging to the System shall be transferred as herein indicated and all Revenues of the System shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving Fund"). In addition, on September 1, 1998 all Revenues in any accounts of the System shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified: 
A. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND : 
    Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of the System and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
    A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration, operation and maintenance of the System for the next ensuing operating year, shall be prepared by the City Commission at least 30 days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating year. No payments shall be made to the Issuer from moneys credited to the Operation and Maintenance Fund except for services directly rendered to the System by the Issuer or its personnel. 
B. BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND : 
    There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the "Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds. The moneys in the Redemption Fund shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the Bonds, or any series thereof, are payable. 
    Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be set aside each month commencing September 1, 1998 in the Redemption Fund a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current principal of and interest on the Bonds, less any amount in the Redemption Fund representing accrued interest on the Bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the Redemption Fund. Commencing September 1, 1998, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be equal to a fraction derived from number of months from September 1, 1998 to first interest payment date of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. Commencing on the first interest payment date, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be 1/6 of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal, commencing September 1, 1998, shall be equal to that amount which is that fraction derived from number of months from September 1, 1998 of issue to first principal payment date of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity and the amount set aside each month for principal payment commencing on the first principal payment date, shall be 1/12 of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit in the Redemption Fund, including investment income thereon, is necessary to pay principal and interest due on the Bonds on the next succeeding principal payment date. 
C. REPLACEMENT FUND : 
    There shall next be established and maintained a fund, separate depositary account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND (the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund there may be deposited in the Replacement Fund such additional funds as the City Commission may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this Ordinance to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account). 
D. IMPROVEMENT FUND : 
    Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) and the Replacement Fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT FUND (the "Improvement Fund"), which Improvement Fund may have several subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the Issuer may deem advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or extensions to the System, including the planning thereof. 
E. SURPLUS MONEYS : 
    Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this Section may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or both. 
2.  Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance. 
3.  Any other use permitted by law. 
    Section 14. Priority of Funds. In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the System, except the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 15. Depositary and Funds on Hand. Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this Ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated by resolution of the Issuer, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the Issuer in the manner and at the times provided in this Ordinance. 
    Section 16. Investments. Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be invested by the Issuer in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any investments hereafter permitted by law, and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds may also be invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of the Bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the Bonds. Investment of moneys in the Bond Reserve Account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five years from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation and Maintenance Fund and Improvement Fund shall be deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year. Profit realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund including income derived from the Bond Reserve Account shall be credited as received to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 17. Bond Proceeds. From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds when received from the Authority shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the City Commission, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the Project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the City Commission a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for. 
    Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements, enlargements and extension to the System, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption. 
    Section 18. Bond Form. The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM REVENUE BOND, SERIES 1998 
Interest Rate       Maturity Date       Date of Original Issue       CUSIP 
REGISTERED OWNER: 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT:       DOLLARS 
    The CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan (the "Issuer"), for value received, hereby promises to pay the Principal Amount shown above, in lawful money of the United States of America, to the Registered Owner shown above, or registered assigns, on the Maturity Date shown above, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the Date of Original Issue shown above, or such later date to which interest has been paid, until paid, at the Interest Rate per annum shown above, payable on _______, 199___, and semiannually thereafter. Principal of this bond is payable upon surrender of this bond at the _______ office of _______, _______, Michigan, or such other transfer agent as the Issuer may hereafter designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days prior to the date of any interest payment date. Interest on this bond is payable by check or draft mailed to the person or entity who is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner of record, at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the Issuer kept by the transfer agent. For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the Issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply System of the Issuer (the "System"), including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration, (the "Net Revenues") and a statutory first lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is one of a series of bonds of even date of original issue, aggregating the principal sum of $_____ issued pursuant to Ordinance No. _____, duly adopted by the City Commission of the Issuer, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinances. 
[Bonds of this issue are not subject 
to redemption prior to maturity.] 
    [Bonds maturing in the years _____ to _____, inclusive, are not subject to redemption prior to maturity. 
    [Bonds or portions of bonds in multiples of $5,000 maturing in the year _____ and thereafter, inclusive, shall be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the Issuer, in such order of maturity as the Issuer shall determine and within a single maturity by lot, on any interest payment date on or after November 1, _____, at par and accrued interest plus a premium as follows: 
   %  of par value of each bond or portion of bond redeemed on or after November 1, _____, but prior to November 1, _____; and 
   %  of par value of each bond or portion of bond redeemed on or after November 1, _____, but prior to November 1, _____. 
No premium shall be paid on bonds or portions thereof called for redemption on or after November 1, #rule;. 
[MANDATORY REDEMPTION] 
    [The bonds maturing on November 1, _____ (the "Term Bonds"), are subject to mandatory redemption in part, by lot, at par, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption without premium on November 1 of each of the years and in the principal amounts set forth in the following schedule: 
Term Bonds Due November 1, _____ 
Redemption Dates Principal Amounts November 1, _____ $_____,000 November 1, _____ _____,000 November 1, _____ (Maturity) _____,000  
    Notice of redemption of any bond or portion thereof shall be given by the transfer agent at least thirty (30) days prior to the date fixed for redemption by mail to the registered owner at the registered address shown on the registration books kept by the transfer agent. Bonds shall be called for redemption in multiples of $5,000 and any bond of a denomination of more than $5,000 shall be treated as representing the number of bonds obtained by dividing the denomination of the bond by $5,000 and such bond may be redeemed in part. Notice of redemption for a bond redeemed in part shall state that upon surrender of the bond to be redeemed a new bond or bonds in aggregate principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the bonds surrendered shall be issued to the registered owner thereof. No further interest on a bond or portion thereof called for redemption shall accrue after the date fixed for redemption, whether presented for redemption or not, provided funds are on hand with the transfer agent to redeem the bond or portion thereof. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of the Issuer and does not constitute an indebtedness of the Issuer within any constitutional, statutory or charter limitation of the Issuer, but is payable, both as to principal and interest solely from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The Issuer has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of all outstanding bonds, the bonds of this issue and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by said Ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the Issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer agent's Certificate of Authentication on this bond has been executed by the transfer agent. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and the corporate seal of the Issuer to be printed on this bond, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
By  _____
Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
___________ 
  City Clerk 
Date of Registration: 
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION 
    This bond is one of the bonds described in the within-mentioned Ordinances. 
_____
Transfer Agent 
By _____
Authorized Signatory 
    Section 19. Covenants. The Issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the Bonds that so long as any of the Bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest - 
(a)  The Issuer will maintain the System in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the System required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, and this Ordinance. 
(b)  The Issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the Issuer, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The Issuer shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the System for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed to the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing any issue of the Bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which the Issuer is complying with the requirements of the Ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall be completed and so made available not later than four (4) months after the close of each operating year. 
(c)  The Issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the System and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of water supply systems, including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds. 
(d)  The Issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the System, or any substantial part, until all of the Bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The Issuer will operate the System as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the System in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the System in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the Bonds. 
(e)  The Issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the System and the Issuer will not operate a system that will compete with the System. 
(f)  The Issuer will cause the Project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor. 
    Section 20. Additional Bonds. Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 1998 Bonds. 
    The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of the System with the Bonds but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(b)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part of any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month operating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve- month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the Issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than twenty-eight months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues of the System shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
(c)  For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. No additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
    Section 21. Application to MDEQ and Authority. The Authorized Officers are hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 1998 Bonds with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a revenue sharing pledge agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 1998 Bonds for the Drinking Water Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 1998 Bonds to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 1998 Bond contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 1998 Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the State of Michigan and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 1998 Bonds, and an Authorized Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227. 
    Section 22. Covenant Regarding Tax Exempt Status of the Bonds. The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds, and to prevent the Bonds from being or becoming "private activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code. 
    Section 23. Repeal, Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
    Section 24. Severability; Paragraph Headings; and Conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance. 
    Section 25. Publication and Recordation. This Ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the City qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. 
    Section 26. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption. 
    Adopted and signed this _____ day of _______, 1998. 
Signed _____
Mayor 
Signed _____
Clerk 
[DIVISION 2] - ORDINANCE NO. 449-01 
    AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, FURNISHING AND EQUIPPING OF A WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS TO PAY THE COST THEREOF; TO PRESCRIBE THE FORM OF THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE COLLECTION OF REVENUES FROM THE SYSTEM SUFFICIENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COSTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND TO PAY THE PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE RESERVE FUND FOR THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE SEGREGATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE REVENUES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE RIGHTS OF THE HOLDERS OF THE BONDS IN ENFORCEMENT THEREOF; AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO THE BONDS AND THE SYSTEM. 
    THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(b)  "Adjusted Net Revenues" means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the System determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments. 
(i)  Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect. 
(ii)  Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the System. 
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in (i) and (ii) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the Issuer. 
(c)  "Authority" means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority. 
(d)  "Authorized Officers" means the Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director, and Clerk. 
(e)  "Bonds" mean the Series 2001 Bonds, together with any additional Bonds of equal standing hereafter issued. 
(f)  "Issuer" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan. 
(g)  "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  "Project" means the additions, extensions and improvements to the System together with appurtenances and attachments thereto. 
(i)  "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this Ordinance. 
(j)  "Series 2001 Bonds" means the General Obligation Limited Water Supply System Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2001, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $1,800,000 authorized by this Ordinance. 
(k)  "Sufficient Government Obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
(l)  "System" means the Water Supply System of the Issuer, including such facilities thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the Project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
    Section 2. Necessity Approval of Plans and Specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the City's engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State of Michigan Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. 
    Section 3. Costs; Useful Life. The total cost of the Project is presently estimated not to exceed One Million Eight Hundred Thousand Dollars ($1,800,000) including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than forty (40) years. 
    Section 4. Payment of Cost; Bonds Authorized. To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2001 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed One Million Eight Hundred Thousand Dollars ($1,800,000) and issue the Series 2001 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. 
    Section 5. Issuance of Series 2001 Bonds; Details. The Series 2001 Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated GENERAL OBLIGATION LIMITED TAX WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 2001 authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed One Million Eight Hundred Thousand Dollars ($1,800,000) or as otherwise finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying the cost of the Project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2001 Bonds. The Series 2001 Bonds shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully herein. The Series 2001 Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery of the Series 2001 Bonds, payable in principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2001 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. Final determination of the Principal Amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2001 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the Authority providing for sale of the Series 2001 Bonds, and the Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above. 
    The Series 2001 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times as provided in the form of Series 2001 Bond contained in this Ordinance or as may be approved by the Authorized Officers at the time of sale of the Series 2001 Bonds or by the Authority at the time of prepayment. 
    The Series 2001 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and the Authorized Officers shall deliver the Series 2001 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. 
    The Series 2001 Bond principal amount is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer. 
    The Series 2001 Bond shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2001 Bond shall be payable as provided, in the Series 2001 Bond form in this Ordinance. 
    The City Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the City Clerk. 
    Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2001 Bond, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2001 Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation. 
    Section 6. Registration and Transfer. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The Transfer Agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2001 Bonds contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
    If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
    Section 7. Payment of Bonds. The Series 2001 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable from the Net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this Ordinance. If the Series 2001 Bonds are purchased by the Authority and if the Authority so requires, the Issuer shall pledge its limited tax full faith and credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Series 2001 Bonds. Should the Net Revenues of the System at any time be insufficient to pay principal and interest on the Series 2001 Bonds, as the same become due, then the Issuer shall advance from any funds available therefor, or, if necessary, levy taxes upon all taxable property in the Issuer, subject to applicable constitutional and statutory limitations, such sums as may be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The Issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the Net Revenues of the system subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or encumbered by this Ordinance. 
    Section 8. Bondholders' Rights; Receiver. The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty percent (20%) of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the Net Revenues of the System, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof. 
    If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the System on behalf of the Issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
    The holder or holders of the Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Bonds and the security therefor. 
    Section 9. Management; Fiscal Year. The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring of the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City Commission. The City Commission may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System. The City Commission may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System. 
    Section 10. Rates and Charges. The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
    Section 11. No Free Service or Use. No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the Issuer. 
    Section 12. Fixing and Revising Rates; Rate Covenant. The rates now in effect and the rate increases to be placed into effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law and this Ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
    Section 13. Funds and Accounts; Flow of Funds. Commencing upon the adoption of this Ordinance, all funds belonging to the System shall be transferred as herein indicated and all Revenues of the System shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving Fund"). In addition, all Revenues in any accounts of the System shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified: 
A. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND : 
    Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of the System and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
    A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration, operation and maintenance of the System for the next ensuing operating year, shall be prepared by the City Commission at least 30 days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating year. No payments shall be made to the Issuer from moneys credited to the Operation and Maintenance Fund except for services directly rendered to the System by the Issuer or its personnel. 
B. BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND : 
    There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the "Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds. The moneys in the Redemption Fund shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the Bonds, or any series thereof, are payable. 
    Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be set aside each month commencing October 1, 2001 in the Redemption Fund a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current principal of and interest on the Bonds, less any amount in the Redemption Fund representing accrued interest on the Bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the Redemption Fund, (including investment income on amounts held as part of the Bond Reserve Account). Commencing October 1, 2001, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be 1/6 of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal, commencing April 1, 2003, shall be 1/12 of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit in the Redemption Fund, including investment income thereon, is necessary to pay principal and interest due on the Bonds on the next succeeding principal payment date. 
    There is established a separate account in the Redemption Fund to be known as the BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve Account"). There shall be periodically deposited in the Bond Reserve Account in such amounts as the City Commission shall annually determine sums sufficient to fund the "Reserve Amount" which shall be the lesser of (1) the maximum annual debt service due in the current or any future year, (2) 125% of the average annual debt service or (3) 10% of the principal amount of the bonds. The Reserve Account shall be funded in the Reserve Amount within ten years of the date of issue of the Series 2001 Bonds. Interest on the Bond Reserve Account must be transferred into the Redemption Fund once the Reserve Amount has been reached. Transfer shall be made as to the Bond Reserve Account annually until the Reserve Amount has been reached. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the moneys credited to the Bond Reserve Account shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the Bond Reserve Account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be replaced from the Net Revenues first received thereafter which are not required for current principal and interest requirements until the amount on deposit equals the Reserve Amount. If additional Bonds are issued, each Ordinance authorizing the additional Bonds shall provide for additional deposits to the Bond Reserve Account to be made from the proceeds of the additional Bonds or Issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use in an amount that will result in the Bond Reserve Account being equal to the maximum annual principal and interest requirements on the Bonds outstanding after issuance of the additional Bonds, or such lesser amount as may be necessary to maintain the tax-exempt status of the Bonds. If on any principal payment date the amount in the Bond Reserve Account exceeds the Reserve Amount, the excess shall be transferred to the Redemption Fund for payment of principal and interest on the Bonds due on that date. 
C. REPLACEMENT FUND : 
    There shall next be established and maintained a fund, separate depositary account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND (the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account), there may be deposited in the Replacement Fund such additional funds as the City Commission may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this Ordinance to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account). 
D. IMPROVEMENT FUND : 
    Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) and the Replacement Fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT FUND (the "Improvement Fund"), which Improvement Fund may have several subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the Issuer may deem advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or extensions to the System, including the planning thereof. 
E. SURPLUS MONEYS : 
    Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this Section may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or both. 
2.  Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance. 
3.  Any other use permitted by law. 
    Section 14. Priority of Funds. In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the System, except the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 15. Depositary and Funds on Hand. Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this Ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated by resolution of the Issuer, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the Issuer in the manner and at the times provided in this Ordinance. 
    Section 16. Investments. Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be invested by the Issuer in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any investments hereafter permitted by law, and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds may also be invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of the Bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the Bonds. Investment of moneys in the Bond Reserve Account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five years from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation and Maintenance Fund and Improvement Fund shall be deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year. Profit realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund including income derived from the Bond Reserve Account shall be credited as received to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 17. Bond Proceeds. From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds when received from the Authority shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the City Council, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the Project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the City Council a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for. 
    Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements, enlargements and extension to the System, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption. 
    Section 18. Bond Form. The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
GENERAL OBLIGATION LIMITED TAX WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2001 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: _______ Dollars ($_____,000) 
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: September 28, 2001 
    The CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan (the "City"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, primarily out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached to the Purchase Contract, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $_____,000 is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. Interest is first payable on April 1, 2001, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of October and April of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    The Bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of Bank One Trust Company, N.A. or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. In addition in case of insufficiency of said Net Revenues, the principal of and interest on the bonds shall be payable from the general funds of the City or, if necessary, from ad valorem taxes levied upon all taxable property in the City, subject to applicable charter, statutory and constitutional tax rate limitations. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 449-01 duly adopted by the City Council of the City, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinance. 
    This bond is primarily a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, primarily from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. [As additional security, the City has pledged its limited tax full faith and credit for payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds of this issue, which includes the Issuer's obligation to levy taxes, if necessary, within applicable constitutional, statutory and charter tax limitations.] 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by said Ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with the manual signatures of its Mayor and its Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
By _____
Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
_______ 
  City Clerk 
    Section 19. Covenants. The Issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the Bonds that so long as any of the Bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest - 
(a)  The Issuer will maintain the System in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the System required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, and this Ordinance. 
(b)  The Issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the Issuer, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The Issuer shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the System for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed to the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing any issue of the Bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which the Issuer is complying with the requirements of the Ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall be completed and so made available not later than four (4) months after the close of each operating year. 
(c)  The Issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the System and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of water supply systems, including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds. 
(d)  The Issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the System, or any substantial part, until all of the Bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The Issuer will operate the System as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the System in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the System in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the Bonds. 
(e)  The Issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the System and the Issuer will not operate a system that will compete with the System. 
(f)  The Issuer will cause the Project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor. 
    Section 20. Additional Bonds. Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 2001 Bonds. 
    The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of the System with the Bonds but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(b)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part of any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month operating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the Issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than twenty-eight months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues of the System shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
(c)  For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. No additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
    Section 21. Application to MDEQ and Authority. The Authorized Officers are hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2001 Bonds with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a revenue sharing pledge agreement, purchase contract, and supplemental agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2001 Bonds for the Drinking Water Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 2001 Bonds to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 2001 Bond contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2001 Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the State of Michigan and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2001 Bonds, and an Authorized 
    Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227. 
    Section 22. Covenant Regarding Tax Exempt Status of the Bonds. The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds, and to prevent the Bonds from being or becoming "private activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code. 
    Section 23. Repeal, Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
    Section 24. Severability; Paragraph Headings; and Conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance. 
    Section 25. Publication and Recordation. This Ordinance shall be published in full in The Evening New, a newspaper of general circulation in the Issuer qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. 
    Section 26. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption. 
    Adopted and signed this 20th day of August, 2001. 
Signed _____
Mayor 
Signed _____
Clerk 
[DIVISION 3] - ORDINANCE NO. 458-02 
    AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, FURNISHING AND EQUIPPING OF ADDITIONS TO THE EXISTING WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM OF THE CITY SAULT STE. MARIE; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS OF EQUAL STANDING WITH REVENUE BONDS NOW OUTSTANDING TO PAY THE COST THEREOF; TO PRESCRIBE THE FORM OF THE BONDS; TO CONFIRM EXISTING RATES FOR THE SYSTEM; AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO THE BONDS AND THE SYSTEM. 
    THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(b)  "Adjusted Net Revenues" means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the System determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments. 
(i)  Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect. 
(ii)  Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the System. 
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in (i) and (ii) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the Issuer. 
(c)  "Authority" means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority. 
(d)  "Authorized Officers" means the Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director, and Clerk. 
(e)  "Bonds" mean the Series 2002 Bonds, together with any outstanding or additional Bonds of equal standing hereafter issued. 
(f)  "Issuer" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan. 
(g)  "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  "Project" means the additions, extensions and improvements to the System together with appurtenances and attachments thereto. 
(i)  "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this Ordinance. 
(j)  "Series 2001 Bonds" means the General Obligation Limited Tax Water Supply System Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2001, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $1,800,000 authorized by Ordinance No. 449-01 
(k)  "Series 2002 Bonds" means the General Obligation Limited Tax Water Supply System Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2002, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $4,500,000 authorized by this Ordinance. 
    Section 2. Necessity; Approval of Plans and Specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the City's engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State of Michigan Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. 
    Section 3. Costs; Useful Life. The total cost of the Project is presently estimated not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than forty (40) years. 
    Section 4. Payment of Cost; Bonds Authorized. To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2002 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) and issue the Series 2002 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. 
    Section 5. Issuance of Series 2002 Bonds; Details. The Series 2002 Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated GENERAL OBLIGATION LIMITED TAX WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 2002 authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed Four Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,500,000) or as otherwise finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying the cost of the Project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2002 Bonds. The Series 2002 Bonds shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully herein. The Bonds shall be executed in the name of the Issuer with the manual signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk and shall have the City's seal impressed on them. The Series 2002 Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery of the Series 2002 Bonds, payable in principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2002 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. Final determination of the Principal Amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2002 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the Authority providing for sale of the Series 2002 Bonds, and the Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above. 
    The Series 2002 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times as provided in the form of Series 2002 Bond contained in this Ordinance or as may be approved by the Authorized Officers at the time of sale of the Series 2002 Bonds or by the Authority at the time of prepayment. 
    The Series 2002 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and the Authorized Officers shall deliver the Series 2002 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. 
    The Series 2002 Bond principal amount is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer. 
    The Series 2002 Bond shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2002 Bond shall be payable as provided, in the Series 2002 Bond form in this Ordinance. 
    The City Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the City Clerk. 
    Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2002 Bond, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2002 Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation. 
    Section 6. Registration and Transfer. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The Transfer Agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2002 Bonds contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
    If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
    Section 7. Payment of Bonds. The Series 2002 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable from the Net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby recognized a statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues created by Ordinance 449-01 of equal standing with the lien created in favor of the Series 2001 Bonds which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this Ordinance. If the Series 2002 Bonds are purchased by the Authority and if the Authority so requires, the Issuer shall pledge its limited tax full faith and credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Series 2002 Bonds. Should the Net Revenues of the System at any time be insufficient to pay principal and interest on the Series 2002 Bonds, as the same become due, then the Issuer shall advance from any funds available therefor, or, if necessary, levy taxes upon all taxable property in the Issuer, subject to applicable constitutional and statutory limitations, such sums as may be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The Issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the Net Revenues of the system subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or encumbered by this Ordinance. 
    Section 8. Rates and Charges. The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
    Section 9. Funds and Accounts; Flow of Funds. The funds and accounts established for the System shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 449-01 provided however the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund established by Section 13B of Ordinance No. 449-01 shall be increased to provide for timely payment of the Series 2002 Bonds on each October and April 1st. Provided, further that the Bond Reserve Amount as defined in said Section 13B shall be increased to take into account the issuance of the Series 2002 Bonds and the Bond Reserve Account shall be fully funded no later than ten years from the date of issue of the Series 2002 Bonds. 
    Section 10. Bond Proceeds. From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds when received from the Authority shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the City Commission, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the Project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the City Commission a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for. 
    Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements, enlargements and extension to the System, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption. 
    Section 11. Bond Form. The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
GENERAL OBLIGATION LIMITED TAX WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2002 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: _______ Dollars ($_____,000) 
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: September 26, 2002 
    The CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan (the "City"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, primarily out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached to the Purchase Contract, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $_____,000 is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. Interest is first payable on _______ 1, 200___, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of October and April of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    The Bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of Bank One Trust Company, N.A. or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created which lien is of equal standing with the lien created in favor of the City's General Obligation Limited Tax Water Supply System Improvement Revenue Bond, Series 2001, dated September 28, 2001. In addition in case of insufficiency of said Net Revenues, the principal of and interest on the bonds shall be payable from the general funds of the City or, if necessary, from ad valorem taxes levied upon all taxable property in the City, subject to applicable charter, statutory and constitutional tax rate limitations. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 449-01 and Ordinance No. _____ duly adopted by the City Commission of the City, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinances. 
    This bond is primarily a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, primarily from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. [As additional security, the City has pledged its limited tax full faith and credit for payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds of this issue, which includes the Issuer's obligation to levy taxes, if necessary, within applicable constitutional, statutory and charter tax limitations.] 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by said Ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with the manual signatures of its Mayor and its Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
By _____
Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
___________ 
  City Clerk 
    Section 12. Application to MDEQ and Authority. The Authorized Officers are hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2002 Bonds with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a revenue sharing pledge agreement, purchase contract, and supplemental agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2002 Bonds for the Drinking Water Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 2002 Bonds to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 2002 Bond contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2002 Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the State of Michigan and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2002 Bonds, and an Authorized Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227. 
    Section 13. Covenant Regarding Tax Exempt Status of the Bonds. The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds, and to prevent the Bonds from being or becoming "private activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code. 
    Section 14. Effect of Ordinance No. 449-01. Except as changed by this Ordinance, all the provisions of Ordinance 449-01 shall apply to the Series 2002 Bonds issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the same as though each of said provisions were repeated in this Ordinance in detail; the purpose of this Ordinance being to authorize the issuance of additional revenue bonds in finance the cost of the Project, additional bonds of equal standing with the Series 1991 Bonds for such purpose being authorized by the provisions of Ordinance No. 91-11 upon the conditions therein stated, which conditions have been fully met. 
    Section 15. Repeal, Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
    Section 16. Severability; Paragraph Headings; and Conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance. 
    Section 17. Publication and Recordation. This Ordinance shall be published in full in The Evening News, a newspaper of general circulation in the Issuer qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. 
    Section 26. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption. 
    Adopted and signed this 19th day of August, 2002. 
Anthony G. Bosbous, Mayor 
Lori J. Clarke, City Clerk ;oh3;eol;ORDINANCE NO. 512-09 
    AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, FURNISHING AND EQUIPPING OF IMPROVEMENT TO THE CITY'S WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS TO PAY THE COST THEREOF; TO PRESCRIBE THE FORM OF THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE COLLECTION OF REVENUES FROM THE SYSTEM SUFFICIENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COSTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND TO PAY THE PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS AND OUTSTANDING BONDS; TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE RESERVE FUND FOR THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE SEGREGATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE REVENUES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE RIGHTS OF THE HOLDERS OF THE BONDS IN ENFORCEMENT THEREOF; TO PROVIDE FOR THE COMBINATION OF THE CITY'S WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCE NUMBERS 435-98, 449-01 AND 458-02 TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE COMBINATION OF SYSTEMS AND TO SUBSTITUTE SECURITY FOR OUTSTANDING REVENUE BONDS AUTHORIZED BY ORDINANCES NO. 435-98, 449-01 AND 458-02 AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO THE BONDS AND THE SYSTEM. 
PREAMBLE 
PREAMBLE 
    The City of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan (the "City") has previously issued its Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 1998, 2001 and 2003 (the "Prior Bonds"). Each series of the Prior Bonds was purchased by the Michigan Municipal Bond authority as part of the State of Michigan Drinking Water Revolving Funds ("DWRF") which requires that certain credit criterion be met prior to the purchase of bonds. In order to meet the required credit criterion the City has pledged its limited tax full faith and credit as secondary security for the payment of the Prior Bonds. It is the intent of the City to combine its Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems, the net revenues of which will now be sufficient to meet the required credit criterion in order for the City to participate in the DWRF, and to delete it limited tax full faith and credit pledge. 
    THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE THEREFORE ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(b)  "Adjusted Net Revenues" means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the System determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments: 
(i)  Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect. 
(ii)  Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the System. 
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in (i) and (ii) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the Issuer. 
(c)  "Authority" means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority. 
(d)  "Authorized Officers" means the Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director and Clerk. 
(e)  "Bonds" mean the Series 2010 Bonds, together with any additional Bonds of equal standing hereafter issued. 
(f)  "City" or "Issuer" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan. 
(g)  "MDEQ" Means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  "Outstanding Bonds" means the City's Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 1998 authorized by Ordinance No. 435-98; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2001 authorized by Ordinance No. 449-01; and Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003 authorized by Ordinance No. 458-02. 
(i)  "Prior Ordinances" means Ordinance No. 435-98 adopted September 29, 1998; Ordinance No. 449-01 adopted August 20, 2001 and Ordinance No. 458-02 adopted April 20, 2003. 
(j)  "Project" means the additions, extensions and improvements to the System consisting of sanitary sewer improvements together with appurtenances and attachments thereto. 
(k)  "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this Ordinance. 
(l)  "Series 2010 Bonds" means the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Revenue Bonds, Series 2010, of the Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $7,500,000 authorized by this Ordinance. 
(m)  "Sufficient Government Obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
(n)  "System" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System, including such facilities thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the Project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
    Section 2. Necessity; Approval of Plans and Specifications; Combination of Systems. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the City's consulting engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State of Michigan Revolving Loan Fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of not to exceed three percent (3%) per annum. The City's Water Supply System and its Sewage Disposal System be and are hereby combined as the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System. 
    Section 3. Costs; Useful Life. The total cost of the Project is presently estimated to be Seven Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($7,500,000) including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than forty (40) years. 
    Section 4. Payment of Cost; Bonds Authorized. To pay all or part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2010 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed Seven Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($7,500,000) (the "Principal Amount") and issue the Series 2010 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining cost of the Project, if any, shall be defrayed from Issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
    Section 5. Bond Details, Issuance in Series, Registration and Execution. The Series 2010 Bonds hereby authorized shall be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 2010, shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully in Section 7 hereof, shall consist of a fully single fully registered bond, nonconvertible bond of the full Principal Amount thereof, dated as of the date of its delivery, payable in principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2010 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. 
    Final Determination of the Principal Amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2010 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the Authority providing for the sale of the Series 2010 Bonds, and any of the Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above. 
    The Series 2010 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times set forth in the form of the Series 2010 Bonds contained in this Ordinance or as may be approved by any of the Authorized Officers at the time of sale of the Series 2010 Bonds or by the Authority at the time of prepayment. The Series 2010 Bonds shall be executed in the name of the Issuer with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk and shall have the Issuer's seal printed on them. 
    The Series 2010 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not to exceed three percent (3%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and any of the Authorized Officers shall deliver the Series 2010 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. 
    The Series 2010 Bond principal amount is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer. 
    The Series 2010 Bond shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2010 Bond shall be payable as provided in the Series 2010 Bond from this Ordinance. 
    The City Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the City Clerk. 
    Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2010 Bonds, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2010 Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation. 
    Section 6. Registration and Transfer. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. A bank or financial institution shall be designated as the transfer agent. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2010 Bonds contained in this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
    If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
    Section 7. Payment of Bonds. The Series 2010 Bonds and the Outstanding Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely from the Net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues, which lien is subject to the provisions of Section 20(d) hereof and the issuance of additional bonds superior standing, which shall be a lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this Ordinance. 
    Section 8. Bondholders' Rights; Receiver. The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty percent (20%) of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the Net Revenues of the System, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof. 
    If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the System on behalf of the Issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
    The holder or holders of the Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Bonds and the security therefor. 
    Section 9. Management; Fiscal Year. The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring of the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City Commission. The City Commission may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System. The City Commission may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System. 
    Section 10. Rates and Charges. The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
    Section 11. No Free Service or Use. No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the Issuer. 
    Section 12. Fixing and Revising Rates; Rate Covenant. The rates now in effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law and this Ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
    Section 13. Funds and Accounts; Flow of Funds. Commencing on the date of adoption of this Ordinance, all funds belonging to the System as combined herein shall be transferred as herein indicated and all Revenues of the System shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving Fund"). In addition, on the date of adoption of this Ordinance all Revenues in any accounts of the System shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified: 
A.  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND: 
    Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of the System and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
    A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration, operation and maintenance of the System for the next ensuing operating year, shall be prepared by the City Commission at least 30 days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating year. No payments shall be made to the Issuer from moneys credited to the Operation and Maintenance Fund except for services directly rendered to the System by the Issuer or its personnel. 
B.  BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND: 
    There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the "Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds. The moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the Bonds, or any series thereof, are payable. 
    Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be set aside each month commencing upon the adoption of this Ordinance in the Redemption Fund a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current principal of and interest on the Bonds, less any amount in the Redemption Fund representing accrued interest on the Bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the Redemption Fund, (including investment income on amounts held as part of the Bond Reserve Account). Commencing first day of the month following the adoption of this Ordinance, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be an amount sufficient to pay the interest on the Bonds next coming due. Commencing April 1, 2010, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Bonds shall be 1/6 of the total amount of interest on the Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal upon the adoption of this Ordinance shall be an amount sufficient to pay the principal installment due on the next installment date and, commencing April 1, 2010, shall be 1/12 of the amount of principal installment next coming due by maturity. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit in the Redemption Fund, including investment income thereon and on the Bond Reserve Account, is necessary to pay principal and interest due on the Bonds on the next succeeding principal installment payment date. 
    There is established a separate account in the Redemption Fund to be known as the BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve Account"). There may be periodically deposited in the Bond Reserve Account in such amount, if any, as the City Commission shall annually determine sums sufficient to fund the "Reserve Amount" which shall not exceed the lesser of (1) the maximum annual debt service due in the current or any future year, (2) 125% of the average annual debt service or (3) 10% of the principal amount of the bonds. Interest on the Bond Reserve Account shall be transferred into the Redemption Fund once the Reserve Amount has been reached. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the moneys credited to the Bond Reserve Account shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the Bond Reserve Account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be replaced from the Net Revenues first received thereafter which are not required for current principal and interest requirements until the amount on deposit equals the Reserve Amount. If bonds of superior status are issued additional Bond Reserve Accounts shall be established for such series of bonds prior to the issuance of same. If on any principal payment date the amount in the Bond Reserve Account exceeds the Reserve Amount, the excess shall be transferred to the Redemption Fund for payment of principal and interest on the Bonds due on that date. 
C.  REPLACEMENT FUND: 
    There shall next be established and maintained a fund, separate depositary account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND (the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account), there may be deposited in the Replacement Fund such additional funds as the City Commission may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this Ordinance to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account). 
D.  IMPROVEMENT FUND: 
    Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) and the Replacement Fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT FUND (the "Improvement Fund"), which Improvement Fund may have several subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the Issuer may deem advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or extensions to the System, including the planning thereof. 
E.  SURPLUS MONEYS: 
    Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this Section may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or both. 
2.  Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance. 
3.  Any other use permitted by law. 
    Section 14. Priority of Funds. In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the System, except the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 15. Depositary and Funds on Hand. Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this Ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated by resolution of the Issuer, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the Issuer in the manner and at the times provided in this Ordinance. 
    Section 16. Investments. Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be invested by the Issuer in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any investments hereafter permitted by law, and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds may also be invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of the Bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the Bonds. Investment of moneys in the Bond Reserve Account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five years from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation and Maintenance Fund and Improvement Fund shall be deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year. Profit realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund (including income derived from the Bond Reserve Account) shall be credited as received to the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 17. Bond Proceeds. From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the City Commission, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the Project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the City Commission a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for. 
    Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, at the discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements, enlargements and extension to the System, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption. 
    Section 18. Bond Form. The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
;b;UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;\b;;eol;;b;STATE OF MICHIGAN;\b;;eol;;b;COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA;\b;;eol;;adv=8q;;b;CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE;\b;;eol;;adv=8q;;b;WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM;\b;;eol;;b;REVENUE BOND SERIES 2010;\b> 
Interest 
Rate Maturity 
Date Date of 
Original 
Issue CUSIP  
;b;UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;\b;;eol;;b;STATE OF MICHIGAN;\b;;eol;;b;COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA;\b;;eol;;adv=8q;;b;CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE;\b;;eol;;adv=8q;;b;WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM;\b;;eol;;b;REVENUE BOND SERIES 2010;\b> 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: DOLLARS  
    The CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan (the "Issuer"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, but only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenue of the Issuer's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined) in lawful money of the United States of America to the Registered Owner shown above, or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the Issuer pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the Issuer, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality on the Maturity Date shown above, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the Issuer under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the Issuer a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the Issuer of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced (subject to any principal forgiveness as provided in Schedule A), all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached to the Purchase Contract, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $___________,000 is disbursed to the Issuer or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of ___ and ___ percent (_._%) per annum. Interest is first payable on ________, 200_, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of October and April of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    The Bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of ___________, or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the Issuer by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the Issuer agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the Issuer and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the Issuer's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the Issuer shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the Issuer's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the Issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the Issuer, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, nonconvertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 512-09 duly adopted by the City Commission of the City, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinance. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of the Issuer and does not constitute an indebtedness of the Issuer within any constitutional, charter or statutory limitation, but is payable, both as to principal and interest, solely from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. This bond is of equal standing and priority of lien with the Issuer's outstanding Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 1998, dated September 29, 1998; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2001, dated September 28, 2001 and its Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003, dated March 27, 2003. 
    The Issuer has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest on and the principal of the bonds of this issue and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to create and maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by the Ordinance. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the Issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner hereof in person, or by the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer agent's Certificate of Authentication on this bond has been executed by the Transfer Agent. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and its corporate seal to be printed on this bond, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
By ___________ 
Anthony G. Bosbous, Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
___________ 
Robin R. Troyer, City Clerk 
    Section 19. Covenants. The Issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the Bonds that so long as any of the Bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest - 
(a)  The Issuer will maintain the System in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the System required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, the Issuer's Charter and this Ordinance. 
(b)  The Issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the Issuer, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The Issuer shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the System for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed to the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing any issue of the Bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which the Issuer is complying with the requirements of the Ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall be completed and so made available not later than six (6) months after the close of each operating year. 
(c)  The Issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the System and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems, including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds. 
(d)  The Issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the System, or any substantial part, until all of the Bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The Issuer will operate the System as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the System in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the System in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the Bonds. 
(e)  The Issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the System and the Issuer will not operate a system that will compete with the System. 
(f)  The Issuer will cause the Project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor. 
    Section 20. Additional Bonds. Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 2010 Bonds. 
    The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of the System with the Bonds but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(b)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part of any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month operating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the Issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than twenty-eight months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues of the System shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
(c)  For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. No additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
(d)  For the issuance of additional Bonds of prior and superior standing with the Bonds upon either (i) the written consent of the holder(s) of the Series 2010 Bonds and any bonds of equal standing with the Series 2010 Bonds, or (ii) upon a determination that the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month overeating [operating] years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower that the average shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the Bonds and on the additional bonds then being issued. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional bonds of superior standing and priority of liens to the Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional bonds shall be issued pursuant to authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payment to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 21. Amendment and Effect of Outstanding Ordinances; Substitution of Security. Upon the written consent of the Authority as holder of the Outstanding Bonds and in order to fully secure the Series 2010 Bonds and the Outstanding Bonds the revenues of the System are as provided herein pledged for the payment of principal and interest on said Bonds in substitution for and in place of the Issuer's pledge of its limited tax full faith and credit. The definition of "System" and Section 7 of each of the Outstanding Ordinances shall and are hereby amended by said definition and Section 7 set forth herein. 
    Section 22. Application to MDEQ and Authority. The Authorized Officers are each hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2010 Bonds with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are each further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a revenue sharing pledge agreement, purchase contract, and supplemental agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2010 Bonds for the State Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 2010 Bonds to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 2010 Bond contained in Section 18 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes to the title of the Bonds, in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2010 Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the State of Michigan and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2010 Bonds, and an Authorized Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227. 
    Section 23. Covenant Regarding Tax Exempt Status of the Bonds. The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds, and to prevent the Bonds from being or becoming "private activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code. 
    Section 24. Repeal, Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
    Section 25. Severability; Paragraph Headings; and Conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance. 
    Section 26. Publication and Recordation. This Ordinance shall be published in full in The Evening News, a newspaper of general circulation in the City qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. 
    Section 27. Effective Date. In conformity with Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, as amended this Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption and publication. 
    Adopted and signed this 2nd day of November, 2009. 
Signed ___________ 
Anthony G. Bosbous, Mayor 
Signed ___________ 
Robin R. Troyer, City Clerk 
DIVISION 5. - ORDINANCE NO. 549-14 
    AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE ACQUISITION AND CONSTRUCTION OF ADDITIONS, EXTENSIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS TO THE WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM OF THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS TO PAY THE COST THEREOF; TO PRESCRIBE THE FORM OF THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE COLLECTION OF REVENUES FROM THE SYSTEM SUFFICIENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COSTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND TO PAY THE PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR SECURITY FOR THE BONDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE SEGREGATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE REVENUES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE RIGHTS OF THE HOLDERS OF THE BONDS IN ENFORCEMENT THEREOF; AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO THE BONDS AND THE SYSTEM. 
THE CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(b)  "Authority" means the Michigan Finance Authority or its successor. 
(c)  "Authorized Officers" means the Mayor, the City Manager, the City Clerk and the Finance Director/City Treasurer of the Issuer. 
(d)  "Bonds" means the Series 2014 Bonds, together with any additional bonds heretofore or hereafter issued of equal standing with the Series 2014 Bonds. 
(e)  "Engineers" means C2AE, registered engineers. 
(f)  "Issuer" or "City" means the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan. 
(g)  "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  "Outstanding Bonds" means the Issuer's Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 1998 authorized by Ordinance No. 435-98; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2001 authorized by Ordinance No. 449-01; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003 authorized by Ordinance No. 458-02; and Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2010 authorized by Ordinance No. 512-09. 
(i)  "Prior Ordinances" means, collectively, the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Commission of the Issuer authorizing the issuance of the Outstanding Bonds, including Ordinance No. 435-98 adopted September 29, 1998; Ordinance No. 449-01 adopted August 20, 2001; Ordinance No. 458-02 adopted April 20, 2003; and Ordinance No. 512-09 adopted on November 2, 2010. 
(j)  "Project" means the acquisition, construction, furnishing and eqiupping of improvements and additions to the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System including sewer separation improvements, rehabilitation and replacement of water mains and sewer lines, together with all related street restoration, appurtenances and attachments. 
(k)  "Purchase Contract" means the purchase contracts to be entered into between the Authority and the Issuer relating to the purchase by the Authority of the Series 2014A Bonds and Series 2014B Bonds, respectively. 
(l)  "Revenues" and "Net Revenues" means the revenues and net revenues of the System and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "Revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the Prior Ordinances and this Ordinance. 
(m)  "Series 2014 Bonds" means collectively the Series 2014A Bonds and the Series 2014B Bonds. 
(n)  "Series 2014A Bonds" means the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bond, Series 2014A, in the principal amount of not to exceed $7,750,000 issued pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(o)  "Series 2014B Bonds" means the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bond, Series 2014B, in the principal amount of not to exceed $4,750,000 issued pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(p)  "Sufficient Government Obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
(q)  "Supplemental Agreement" means the supplemental agreements among the Issuer, the Authority and MDEQ relating to the Series 2014A Bonds and the Series 2014B Bonds, respectively. 
(r)  "System" means the entire Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the Issuer, including the Project and all additions, extensions and improvements hereafter acquired. 
    Section 2. Necessity; Approval of Plans and Specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer to acquire and construct the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the Engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The Project qualifies for the State Revolving Fund and Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing programs being administered by the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) per annum. 
    Section 3. Costs; Useful Life. The cost of the Project is estimated to be Thirteen Million Eight Hundred Ten Hundred Thousand Dollars ($13,810,000), including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in Section 4 of this Ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed. The period of usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than twenty-five (25) years. 
    Section 4. Payment of Cost; Bonds Authorized. To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2014 Bonds, the Issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed Twelve Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($12,500,000), or such lesser amount as shall have been advanced to the Issuer pursuant to the Purchase Contract and the Supplemental Agreement, and issue the Series 2014 Bonds pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining costs of the Project shall be defrayed from other bond issues and Issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
    Except as amended by or expressly provided to the contrary in this Ordinance, all of the provisions of the Prior Ordinances shall apply to the Series 2014 Bonds issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the same as though each of said provisions were repeated in this Ordinance in detail; the purpose of this Ordinance being to authorize the issuance of additional revenue bonds of equal lien with respect to the Outstanding Bonds to finance the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System, additional bonds of equal standing with the Outstanding Bonds for such purpose being authorized by the provisions of the Prior Ordinances, upon the conditions therein stated, which conditions have been fully met. 
    Section 5. Issuance of Series 2014 Bonds; Details. The Series 2014A Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2014A and the Series 2014B Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2014B, are authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed Twelve Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($12,500,000) or such lesser amount as finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying part of the cost of the Project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2014 Bonds. The Series 2014 Bonds shall be payable out of the Net Revenues, as set forth more fully in Section 8 hereof, provided that the Series 2014 Bonds shall be of equal standing to the prior lien with respect to the Net Revenues in favor of the Outstanding Bonds and of any additional bonds of equal standing with the Outstanding Bonds hereafter issued. 
    The Series 2014 Bonds shall each be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery, payable in principal installments as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2014 Bonds and approved by the Authority and an Authorized Officer. Principal installments of the Series 2014 Bonds shall be payable on October 1 of the years 2017 through 2036, inclusive, or such other payment dates as hereinafter provided. Interest on the Series 2014 Bonds shall be payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing April 1, 2015 or on such other interest payment dates as hereinafter provided. Final determination of the principal amount of and interest on the Series 2014 Bonds and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2014 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract and each of the Authorized Officers is authorized and directed to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above; provided, however, that the first principal installment shall be due no earlier than April 1, 2015 and the final principal installment shall be due no later than April 1, 2038 and the total principal amount of the Series 2014 Bonds shall not exceed $12,500,000. 
    The Series 2014 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and any Authorized Officers as shall be appropriate shall deliver the Series 2014 Bonds in accordance with the delivery instructions of the Authority. 
    The principal amount of the Series 2014 Bonds is expected to be drawn down by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer. 
    The Series 2014 Bonds shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2014 Bonds shall be payable as provided in the Series 2014 Bond form in this Ordinance. 
    The Series 2014 Bonds shall be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer with the prior written approval of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    The City Treasurer shall record on the registration books payment by the Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the City Treasurer. 
    Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2014 Bonds, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2014 Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation. 
    Section 6. Execution of Series 2014 Bonds. The Series 2014 Bonds shall be signed by the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and countersigned by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the Issuer and shall have the corporate seal of the Issuer or a facsimile thereof impressed thereon. The Series 2014 Bonds bearing the manual signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk of the Issuer sold to the Authority shall require no further authentication. 
    Section 7. Registration and Transfer. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The Issuer shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2014 Bonds contained in Section 14 of this Ordinance and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept at its principal office sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and upon presentation for such purpose the transfer agent shall under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe transfer or cause to be transferred on said books Bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
    If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this Ordinance shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
    Section 8. Payment of Series 2014 Bonds; Security; Priority of Lien. Principal of and interest on the Series 2014 Bonds shall be payable from the Net Revenues. There is hereby recognized the statutory lien upon the whole of the Net Revenues created by this Ordinance which shall be a lien that is equal to the lien of the Outstanding Bonds created by the Prior Ordinances, to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all Bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or until sufficient cash or Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. The Issuer reserves the right to issue bonds with a statutory lien that is senior in standing to the lien on the Bonds on the conditions stated in the Prior Ordinances. 
    Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government Obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under the Prior Ordinances or this Ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the Bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under the Prior Ordinances or this Ordinance. 
    Section 9. Management; Fiscal Year. The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring and constructing of the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the Issuer. The Issuer may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System. The Issuer may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System. The System shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the Issuer's fiscal year. 
    Section 10. Rates and Charges; No Free Service. The rates and charges for service furnished by the System and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the Issuer. 
    Section 11. Fixing and Revising Rates; Rate Covenant. The rates now in effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law and this Ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
    Section 12. Funds and Accounts; Flow of Funds; Junior Lien Bond and Interest Redemption Fund. The funds and accounts established by the Prior Ordinances are hereby continued, the flow of funds established by the Prior Ordinances, as amended, is hereby continued, and the applicable sections of the Prior Ordinances, as amended, relating to funds and accounts and flow of funds are incorporated herein, with the following revisions and replacements to Section 13(C), (D) and (E) of Ordinance No. 512-09: 
    C. REPLACEMENT AND IMPROVEMENT FUND: 
    There shall next be established and maintained a fund, separate depositary account, designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT or such other designation determined by the Treasurer (the "Replacement Account"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund, there may be deposited in the Replacement Fund such additional funds as the City may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this Ordinance to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
    D. General Obligation Debt Fund: 
    Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to monthly after meeting the requirements of the foregoing Fund, to an account designated General Obligation Debt Fund (the "G.O. Fund"), or from other available moneys such sums as shall be necessary to pay debt service on presently existing or future general obligation bond issues of the City or general obligations or contractual obligations of the City incurred or to be incurred for System purposes. 
    E. SURPLUS MONEYS: 
    Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this Section may, at the discretion of the City, be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Transferred to the Replacement Fund. 
2.  Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to this Ordinance. 
3.  Any other use permitted by law. 
    Section 13. Bond Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of the Series 2014 Bonds as received by the Issuer shall be deposited in a separate account in a bank or banks qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94 designated WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REVENUE BONDS CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). The Issuer shall maintain separate subaccounts within the Construction Fund for each series of the Series 2014 Bonds to monitor the expenditure of the respective portion of the Project. Moneys in each of the subaccounts in the Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the respective portion of the Project and any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. 
    Section 14. Bond Form. The Series 2014 Bonds shall be in substantially the following form with such changes or completion as necessary or appropriate to give effect to the intent of this Ordinance and, subject to such modifications which may be required by the Michigan Attorney General and the Authority and approved by bond counsel: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF CHIPPEWA 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2014[A][B] 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Finance Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: ___________ Dollars ($___,000) 
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: _______, 2014 
    The CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan (the "City"), acknowledges itself to owe and for value received hereby promises to pay, but only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Finance Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid or reduced prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced (subject to any principal forgiveness as provided for in Schedule A), all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $_______ is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) per annum. Interest is first payable April 1, 2015 and semiannually thereafter and principal is payable on the first day of October commencing October 1, 2017 (as identified in the Purchase Contract) and annually thereafter. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Bond, so long as the Authority is the owner of this Bond, (a) this Bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this Bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; in the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the City's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the City shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative costs and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this Bond shall be given by the City and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created which is equal in standing and priority of lien as to the City's outstanding Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 1998; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2001; Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003; Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2010 and Water and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2014[A][B] (collectively, the "Outstanding Bonds") and of any additional bonds of the City of equal standing and priority of lien with the Outstanding Bonds. The City has reserved the right to issue additional bonds of equal standing and priority of lien as to the Net Revenues, or of senior standing and priority of lien, with this series of bonds and the Outstanding Bonds. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinances Nos. 435-98, Ordinance No. 449-01, Ordinance No. 458-02, Ordinance No. 512-09 and Ordinance No. ___________ duly adopted by the City Commission of the City (the "Ordinances"), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the Ordinances. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, solely and only from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of this bond, the Outstanding Bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing with the Outstanding Bonds, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by the Ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinances, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, by its City Commission has caused this bond to be executed with the manual or facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed or imprinted hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SAULT STE. MARIE 
      ANTHONY G. BOSBOUS, 
      Its Mayor   (Seal) 
Countersigned: 
      ROBIN R. TROYER, 
      Its City Clerk   DEQ Project Number: 5129-10 
DEQ Approved Amt: $ _______ 
SCHEDULE A 
    Based on the schedule provided below unless revised as provided in this paragraph, repayment of the principal of the bond shall be made until the full amount advanced to the City is repaid. In the event the Order of Approval issued by the Department of Environmental Quality (the "Order"), approves a principal amount of assistance less than the amount of the bond delivered to the Authority, the Authority shall only disburse principal up to the amount stated in the Order. In the event (1) that the payment schedule approved by the City and described below provides for payment of a total principal amount greater than the amount of assistance approved by the Order or (2) that less than the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order is disbursed to the City by the Authority, or (3) that any portion of the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order and disbursed to the City is forgiven pursuant to the Order, the Authority shall prepare a new payment schedule which shall be effective upon receipt by the City. 
Maturity Date Principal Amount October 1, 2017 $300,000 October 1, 2018 310,000 October 1, 2019 320,000 October 1, 2020 325,000 October 1, 2021 335,000 October 1, 2022 340,000 October 1, 2023 350,000 October 1, 2024 360,000 October 1, 2025 370,000 October 1, 2026 380,000 October 1, 2027 390,000 October 1, 2028 400,000 October 1, 2029 410,000 October 1, 2030 420,000 October 1, 2031 430,000 October 1, 2032 440,000 October 1, 2033 450,000 October 1, 2034 460,000 October 1, 2035 475,000 October 1, 2036 485,000  
    Interest on the bond shall accrue on that portion of principal disbursed by the Authority to the City which has not been forgiven pursuant to the Order from the date such portion is disbursed, until paid, at the rate of 2.50% per annum, payable April 1, 2015, and semi-annually thereafter. 
    The City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository, or such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise. In the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the City's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the City shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative costs and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment. 
DEQ Project Number: 7010-06 
DEQ Approved Amt: $ _______ 
SCHEDULE A 
    Based on the schedule provided below unless revised as provided in this paragraph, repayment of the principal of the bond shall be made until the full amount advanced to the City is repaid. In the event the Order of Approval issued by the Department of Environmental Quality (the "Order"), approves a principal amount of assistance less than the amount of the bond delivered to the Authority, the Authority shall only disburse principal up to the amount stated in the Order. In the event (1) that the payment schedule approved by the City and described below provides for payment of a total principal amount greater than the amount of assistance approved by the Order or (2) that less than the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order is disbursed to the City by the Authority, or (3) that any portion of the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order and disbursed to the City is forgiven pursuant to the Order, the Authority shall prepare a new payment schedule which shall be effective upon receipt by the City. 
Maturity Date Principal Amount October 1, 2017 $185,000 October 1, 2018 190,000 October 1, 2019 195,000 October 1, 2020 200,000 October 1, 2021 205,000 October 1, 2022 210,000 October 1, 2023 215,000 October 1, 2024 220,000 October 1, 2025 225,000 October 1, 2026 230,000 October 1, 2027 240,000 October 1, 2028 245,000 October 1, 2029 250,000 October 1, 2030 255,000 October 1, 2031 265,000 October 1, 2032 270,000 October 1, 2033 275,000 October 1, 2034 285,000 October 1, 2035 290,000 October 1, 2036 300,000  
    Interest on the bond shall accrue on that portion of principal disbursed by the Authority to the City which has not been forgiven pursuant to the Order from the date such portion is disbursed, until paid, at the rate of 2.50% per annum, payable April 1, 2015, and semi-annually thereafter. 
    The City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository, or such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise. In the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the City's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the City shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative costs and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment. 
    Section 15. Bondholders' Rights; Receiver. The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty per cent (20%) of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the Net Revenues of the System, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof. 
    If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest upon the Series 2014 Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the System on behalf of the Issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
    The holder or holders of the Series 2014 Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Series 2014 Bonds and the security therefor. 
    Section 16. Additional Bonds. The Issuer may issue additional bonds of equal standing with the Series 2014 Bonds for the following purposes and subject to the following conditions: 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 2010 Bonds. 
    The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of the System with the Bonds but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(b)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part or all of any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month operating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the Issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than twenty-eight months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues of the System shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
(c)  For refunding a part or all of the Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the bond reserve account for such Bonds. No additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
(d)  For the issuance of additional Bonds of prior and superior standing with the Bonds upon either (i) the written consent of the holder(s) of the Bonds, or (ii) upon a determination that the Adjusted Net Revenues of the System for the then last two (2) preceding twelve month overeating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve month operating year, if the same shall be lower that the average shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the Bonds and on the additional bonds then being issued. Determination by the Issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional bonds of superior standing and priority of liens to the Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional bonds shall be issued pursuant to authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall then be in default in making its required payment to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund. 
    Section 17. Negotiated Sale; Application to MDEQ and Authority; Execution of Documents. The Issuer determines that it is in the best interest of the Issuer to negotiate the sale of the Series 2014 Bonds to the Authority because the State Revolving Fund and Drinking Water Revolving Fund financing programs provide significant interest savings to the Issuer compared to competitive sale in the municipal bond market. The Authorized Officers are hereby authorized to make application to the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2014 Bonds with the Authority. The actions taken by the Authorized Officers with respect to the Series 2014 Bonds prior to the adoption of this Ordinance are ratified and confirmed. The Authorized Officers are authorized to execute and deliver the Purchase Contract, the Supplemental Agreement and the Issuer's Certificate. Any Authorized Officers is further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2014 Bonds for the State Revolving Fund and Drinking Water Revolving Fund. Prior to the delivery of the Series 2014 Bonds to the Authority, any Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of the Series 2014 Bonds contained in Section 13 of this Ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Act 227, Public Acts of Michigan 1985, as amended ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. 
    Section 18. Covenant Regarding Tax Exempt Status of the Bonds. The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exemption of the interest on the Series 2014 Bonds from general federal income taxation (as opposed to any alternative minimum or other indirect taxation) under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Series 2014 Bonds proceeds and moneys deemed to be Bond proceeds. 
    Section 19. Approval of Bond Counsel. The representation of the Issuer by Miller, Canfield, Paddock and Stone, p.l.c. ("Miller Canfield"), as bond counsel is hereby approved, notwithstanding the representation by Miller Canfield of the Authority in connection with the State Revolving Fund program which may include advising the Authority with respect to this borrowing. 
    Section 20. Approval of Bond Details. The Authorized Officers are each hereby authorized to adjust the final bond details set forth herein to the extent necessary or convenient to complete the transaction authorized herein, and in pursuance of the foregoing is authorized to exercise the authority and make the determinations authorized pursuant to Section 7a(1)(c) of Act 94, including but not limited to determinations regarding interest rates, prices, discounts, maturities, principal amounts, denominations, dates of issuance, interest payment dates, redemption rights, the place of delivery and payment, and other matters, provided that the principal amount of Series 2014 Bonds issued shall not exceed the principal amount authorized in this Ordinance, the interest rate per annum on the Series 2014 Bonds shall not exceed two and one-half percent (2.50%) per annum, and the Series 2014 Bonds shall mature in not more than twenty (20) annual installments. 
    Section 21. Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or part thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
    Section 22. Severability; Paragraph Headings; and Conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this Ordinance. 
    Section 23. Publication and Recordation. This Ordinance shall be published in full in The Evening News, a newspaper of general circulation in the Issuer qualified under State law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. 
    Section 24. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption and publication. 
ADOPTED AND SIGNED THIS 21st day of July, 2014. 
      ANTHONY G. BOSBOUS, 
      Its Mayor         ROBIN R. TROYER, 
      Its City Clerk       I HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of an Ordinance duly adopted by the City Commission of the City of Sault Ste. Marie, County of Chippewa, State of Michigan, at a regular meeting held on the 21st day of July, 2014, and that said meeting was conducted and public notice of said meeting was given pursuant to and in full compliance with the Open Meetings Act, being Act 267, Public Acts of Michigan, 1976, and that the minutes of said meeting were kept and will be or have been made available as required by said Act. 
    I further certify that the following Members were present at said meeting: Mayor Bosbous, Commissioner Bauer, Gerrie, Lynn, Shimmens, Stefanski, and Twardy. 
and that the following Members were absent: None. 
    I further certify that Commissioner Twardy moved for adoption of said Ordinance and that said motion was supported by Commissioner Gerrie. 
    I further certify that the following Members voted for adoption of said Ordinance: Mayor Bosbous, Commissioner Bauer, Gerrie, Lynn, Shimmens, Stefanski, and Twardy. 
and that the following Members voted against adoption of said Ordinance: None. 
    I further certify that said Ordinance has been recorded in the Ordinance Book and that such recording has been authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. 
      ROBIN R. TROYER, City Clerk   
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
Section Disposition 15.231-15.246       2-61 15.261-15.275       2-61 24.201-24.328       24-16 29.1 Ch. 12(note) App. A, § 10-1.17 38.601 Charter, § 5.17 46.401 Charter, Ch. 15(note) 117.1 Charter(note) § 2.2 § 5.1 117.3 8-16 12-30 8-34 8-107 17.2 117.3(a) Charter, §§ 3.8 4.2 4.6 117.3(b) Charter, § 3.2 117.3(d) Charter, Ch. 4(note) § 4.6 § 5.1 117.3(e) Charter, § 3.3 117.3(f) Charter, § 9.2 117.3(g) Charter, § 9.1 117.3(h) Charter, § 8.4 117.3(i) Charter, §§ 9.2 9.5 9.8 117.3(j) Charter, § 6.9 117.3(k) Charter, §§ 7.3 7.8 117.4a Charter, Ch. 10(note) 117.4a(1) Charter, §§ 11.1 11.2 117.4a(2) Charter, § 11.1 117.4b Charter, Ch. 10(note) 117.4d Charter, Ch. 10(note) 117.4h(2) Charter, § 14.5 117.4i(6) Charter, § 7.10 117.4i(10) Charter, § 7.5 1-6 117.4j(3) Charter, § 2.2 117.5 Charter, Ch. 10(note) 117.5b Charter, § 7.9 1-1 117.5c Charter, § 4.3 117.5(d) Charter, § 5.9 117.5(i) Charter, § 14.2 117.18 Charter, § 2.3 16.6 117.28 Charter, §§ 16.1 16.6(f) 16.9 117.28a Charter, § 16.6 123.51 2-76 123.161 Charter, § 13.4 125.31 2-67 2-89 125.71 2-141 2-145 125.581 App. A(note) § 10-1.20 App. A, § 10-1.20(2000) App. A, § 10-1.20(2002) 125.651 2-129 2-133 125.1001 App. A, § 10-1.17(e) 125.1401 et seq. 18.5-20 18.5-22 18.5-23 125.1501 Ch. 8(note), 8-34 125.1508 8-16 125.3101 et seq. 2-59 125.3514(1) 23.5-91 125.3801 et seq. 2-59 2-62 168.1 Charter, Ch. 3(note) Ch. 11(note) 168.30a Charter, § 3.17 168.327 Charter, § 5.4 168.492 Charter, § 3.1 168.544a Charter, § 3.12 168.631 Charter, § 3.5 168.639 Charter, §§ 3.5 5.7 168.644a Charter, § 3.4 168.647 Charter, § 3.6 168.861 Charter, § 3.18 168.866 Charter, § 3.18 168.868 Charter, § 3.18 168.706 Charter, § 3.16 168.720 Charter, § 3.7 168.931 Charter, § 3.19 207.558 Charter, § 9.3 211.1 Charter, Ch. 9(note) 211.30a Charter, § 9.10 242.1 Charter, § 17.5 252.201 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 8(note) 9-36 252.301 3-1 257.1 17-1 Ch. 24(note) 257.1-257.82       24-16 257.601-257.616       24-16 257.606(a)1. Ch. 24, Art. III(note) 257.627-257.750       24-16 257.941-257.961       24-16 257.951 24-16 257.1501 Ch. 24, Art. VI(note) 257.1503 24-118 257.1512 24-145 257.1512a 24-138 257.1512(g) 24-149 257.1513 24-128 257.1514 Ch. 24, Art. VI(note) 257.1515(a) 24-130 257.1515(b) 24-131 257.1515(c) 24-132 257.1515(d) 24-152 257.1515(e) 24-133 257.1515(f) 24-129 257.1515(g) 24-134 257.1515(h) 24-154 257.1515(j) 24-135 257.1516 24-119 287.261 Ch. 7, Art. II(note) 287.266 7-17 324.43503 16-18 324.43515 16-18 329.101 7-21 333.26421 18-41 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(cc) App. A, § 10-1.04(401)8. App. A, § 10-1.045(452)6. App. A, § 10-1.07(701)6. 333.26423(d). App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(cc) 333.7106 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(cc) 336.11 Ch. 4(note) 399.171 2-103 2-107 399.172 2-103 2-107 445.371 Ch. 9, Art. V(note) 445.401 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 9-23 445.471 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 9-23 446.201 Ch. 9, Art. VIII(note) §§ 9-171-9-173 560.101 Ch. 23(note) 23-2 600.9921 Charter, §§ 3.8 4.6 5.8 Ch. 16(note) 691.1201 Ch. 4(note) 708.10 Charter, § 9.3 722.751 15-1 750.141c 15-2 750.141d 15-2 750.167 16-3 16-70 750.170 16-67 750.215 16-8 750.240 12-46 750.309 16-5 750.335a 16-70 750.493d 16-16 750.546 16-46 752.541 16-64 752.542 16-65 752.882 16-103 752.a863 16-101  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - STATE CONSTITUTION 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the State Constitution. 
Article Disposition II, § 8 Charter, § 3.19 VII, § 22 Charter (note) § 22 Charter, Ch. 7(note) § 24 Charter, § 13.1 § 25 Charter, § 11.3, § 13.1, § 14.2 § 30 Charter, § 14.2 VIII, §§ 23, 24 Charter § 11.1  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED[1] 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
Section Disposition 4.559(1) Ch. 12(note) 5.2.73(j) Charter, § 6.9 5.278(31) App. A, § 10-1.17(e) 5.299 2-89 5.359(1) Charter, Ch. 15(note) 5.2071 Charter(note) §§ 2.2 5.1 5.2073 8-16, 8-34 8-107, 12-30 5.2073(a) Charter, §§ 3.8 4.2 4.6 5.2073(b) Charter, § 3.2 5.2073(d) Charter, Ch. 4(note) §§ 4.6 5.1 5.2073(e) Charter, § 3.3 5.2073(f) Charter, § 9.2 5.2073(g) Charter, § 9.1 5.2073(h) Charter, § 8.4 5.2073(i) Charter, §§ 9.2 9.5 9.8 5.2073(k) Charter, §§ 7.4 7.8 5.2073(l) Charter, §§ 6.4 17.2 5.2074 Charter, Ch. 10(note) 5.2074(1) Charter, §§ 11.1 11.2 5.2074(2) Charter, § 11.1 5.2075 Charter, Ch. 10(note) 5.2077 Charter, Ch. 10(note) 5.2081(2) Charter, § 14.5 5.2082 1-6 5.2082(6) Charter, § 7.10 5.2082(10) Charter, § 7.5 5.2083(3) Charter, § 2.2 5.2084 Charter, Ch. 10(note) § 14.2 5.2084(d) Charter, § 5.9 5.2084(2) 1-1 Charter, § 7.9 5.2084(3) Charter, § 4.3 5.2097 Charter, §§ 2.3 16.6 5.2107 Charter, §§ 16.1 16.6(f) 16.9 5.2108 Charter, § 16.6 5.2531(1) Charter, § 13.4 5.2931 § 10-1.20 5.2949 8-34 5.2949(1) Ch. 8(note) 5.2949(8) 8-16 5.2991 2-67 5.3011 2-129 2-133 5.3188(12b) Charter, § 10.7 5.3395 2-103 5.3396 2-103, 2-107 5.3501 2-141 2-445 5.4001 Charter, § 5.17 6.1001 Charter, Ch. 3(note) Ch. 11(note) 6.1030(1) Charter, § 3.17 6.1327 Charter, § 5.4 6.1492 Charter, § 2.3 6.1544(1) Charter, § 3.12 6.1631 Charter, § 3.5 6.1639 Charter, §§ 3.5 5.7 6.1644(1) Charter, § 3.4 6.1647 Charter, § 3.6 6.1706 Charter, § 3.16 6.1720 Charter, § 3.7 6.1861 Charter, § 3.18 6.1866 Charter, § 3.18 6.1868 Charter, § 3.18 6.1951 Charter, § 3.19 7.1 Charter, Ch. 9(note) 7.30(1) Charter, § 9.10 7.800(8) Charter, § 9.3 9.591 Charter, § 17.5 9.391(10) 3-1 9.391(11) Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 3(note) 9-36 9.1801 17-1 Ch. 24(note) 9.2306(a)1 Ch. 24, Art. III(note) 9.2306(a)8 Ch. 24, Art. IV(note) 9.2651 24-16 9.3200(1) 24-117 Ch. 24, Art. VI(note) 9.3200(3) 24-118 9.3200(12) 24-145 9.3200(12a) 24-138 9.3200(12)(g) 24-149 9.3200(13) 24-128 9.3200(14) Ch. 24, Art. VI(note) 9.3200(15)(a)- 24-130- 9.3200(15)(c) 24-132 9.3200(15)(d) 24-152 9.3200(15)(e) 24-133 9.3200(15)(f) 24-129 9.3200(15)(g) 24-134 9.3200(15)(h) 24-154 9.3200(15)(j) 24-135 9.3200(16) 24-119 12.511 Ch. 7, Art. II(note) 12.516 7-17 14.311 7-21 14.58(1) Ch. 4(note) 14.528(201) Ch. 4(note) 18.1070(1) 6-88 Ch. 16, Art. VII(note) 16-116 18.185(1) 6-88 19.551 Ch. 9, Art. VII(note) 19.565(1) Ch. 9, Art. VII(note) 19.581 Ch. 9, Art. VIII(note) 9-171, 9-172 19.581 9-173 19.691 Ch. 9, Art. V(note) 19.711 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 9-23 19.740(1) 9-23 19.2328 Ch. 9, Art. VII(note) 26.430(101) Ch. 23(note) 23-2 27.3178(420) Charter, § 9.3 27A.9921 Charter, §§ 3.8 4.6 5.8 Ch. 16(note) 28.276 16-28 28.298 16-69 28.311 16-11 28.336(3)(4) 15-2 28.342(1) 15-1 28.354(2) 16-6 28.362 16-32 28.364 16-2-16-4 16-32, 16-61 16-62 16-68-16-70 28.412 16-8 28.436(4) 16-102 28.436(24) 16-101 28.436(32) 16-103 28.437 12-46 28.451 et seq. 16-60 28.457 16-60 28.541 16-5 28.567(1) 16-70 28.569 16-69 28.588 16-45 28.609 16-44 28.643(11) Ch. 16, Art. VIII(note) 28.703 16-83 28.707 16-84 28.714 16-85 28.761(4) 16-16 28.790(1) 16-64 28.790(2) 16-65 28.790(3) 16-63 28.808(5) 16-31 28.814 16-46 440.2328 Ch. 9, Art. VII(note) 750.335a 16-70  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Michigan Statutes Annotated are obsolete and will no longer be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text and notes as pages are supplemented. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1957 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1957 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1957 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1.01 1-1 1-1.02 1-7 1-1.03 1-3 1-1.04 1-10 1-1.05 1-2 1-1.06 1-8 1-1.07 1-9 1-1.08 1-6 1-1.09 1-5 1-1.10 1-14 2-1.01-2-1.03 12-16-12-18 2-2.01-2-2.03 19-16-19-18 2-3.01 2-16 2-3.02 2-17 3-1.01 2-29 3-1.02 2-33 3-1.03 2-34 3-1.04 2-32 3-1.05 2-30 3-1.06 2-31 3-1.07-3-1.14 2-35-2-42 3-2.01 2-67 3-2.02 2-68, 2-69 3-3.01 2-50 3-3.02 2-51 4-1.01-4-1.05 21-1 4-1.06-4-1.08 21-16-21-18 4-1.09-4-1.24 21-30-21-45 4-1.30-4-1.33 21-57-21-60 4-1.34, 4-1.35 21-61 4-1.36-4-1.38 21-62-21-64 4-1.39 21-76 4-1.40 21-77 4-1.41-4-1.46 21-89-21-94 4-1.47-4-1.50 21-106-21-109 4-1.51-4-1.53 21-121-21-123 4-1.54-4-1.60 21-135-21-141 4-1.61 21-153 4-1.62 21-154 5-1.48 24-33 5-1.59 24-19 5-1.60 24-31, 24-32 5-1.77 24-84 5-1.78-5-1.82 24-85-24-89 5-1.84 24-90 5-1.101 24-2 5-1.102 24-1 5-2.01-5-2.17 12-41-12-57 5-3.01-5-3.04 12-64-12-67 5-5.01-5-5.08 12-74-12-81 5-6.01-5-6.09 12-88-12-96 5-8.01 20-82 5-8.02 20-41-20-45 5-8.03 20-2, 20-58-20-68 5-8.04-5-8.11 20-83-20-90 6-1.02 18-2 6-1.03 18-3, 18-13 6-1.05 18-5 6-1.06 3-1 6-1.07 18-6 6-1.08 18-7 6-1.09 25-1 6-1.10 25-20, 25-21 6-1.11-6-1.13 7-1-7-3 6-1.14 7-16-7-21 7-28-7-33 6-2.01 15-5 6-2.01-6-2.04 15-1-15-4 6-3.01(a) 16-61 6-3.01(aa) 16-46 6-3.01(b) 16-68 6-3.01(bb) 16-47 6-3.01(cc) 16-44 6-3.01(f) 16-70 6-3.01(g) 16-71 6-3.01(h) 16-83 6-3.01(i) 16-30 6-3.01(j), (k) 16-59 6-3.01(m) 16-29 6-3.01(n) 16-3, 16-7 6-3.01(o) 16-2 6-3.01(q) 16-66 6-3.01(r) 16-5 6-3.01(s) 16-85 6-3.01(v) 16-84 6-3.01(w) 16-104 6-3.01(y) 16-101 6-3.01(1) 16-62 6-3.01(2) 16-60 7-1.01 22-18-22-21 22-36, 22-48 7-1.02-7-1.04 22-4-22-6 7-1.05 16-10, 22-34, 22-35 22-37-22-46 22-49 7-1.06 25-16-25-19 25-22 7-1.07 22-2 7-1.08 22-1 7-1.09 22-3 7-2.01 27-21 7-2.02 27-22 7-2.03 27-24 7-2.04 27-25 7-2.05 27-26 7-2.06 27-27 7-2.07 27-28 7-2.08 27-29 7-2.09 27-7 7-2.10 27-8 7-3.01-7-3.04 27-41-27-44 7-4.01 13-16 7-4.02 13-18, 13-24 7-4.03 13-25 7-4.04 13-23 7-4.05 13-19, 13-20 7-4.06 13-22 7-4.07 13-17 7-5.01-7-5.04 24-63-24-66 7-5.05 24-66 7-6.01-7-6.03 5-1-5-3 7-7.01 10-4 7-7.02 10-2 7-7.03 10-3 7-7.04 10-1 8-5.04 17-1, 17-2 8-7.01 4-1 8-7.03-8-7.10 4-3-4-10 Ch. 9, Art. 2 14-6 9-1.01 14-1 9-1.02 14-4 9-1.03 14-2 9-1.04 14-3 9-1.05 14-5 9-1.07-9-1.09 14-6-14-8 9-1.10 14-12 9-1.11 14-13 9-1.12-9-1.14 14-9-14-11 9-1.15 14-14 9-3.01 9-46 9-3.02-9-3.07 9-56-9-61 9-3.08 9-48 9-3.09 9-62 9-3.10 9-47 9-3.11 9-49 9-4.01 9-74 9-4.02-9-4.08 9-83-9-89 9-4.09 9-75 9-4.10 9-76 9-5.01 9-101 9-5.02-9-5.04 9-111-9-113 9-5.05 9-115 9-5.06 9-116 9-5.07 9-114 9-5.08 9-117 9-5.09 9-102 9-5.10 9-103 9-6.01 6-70, 6-74 9-6.02 6-71-6-73 9-6.03 6-75 9-6.04 6-62 9-6.05 6-61 9-6.06 6-76 9-6.07 6-16, 6-17, 6-19, 6-26-6-28 9-6.08 6-45 9-6.09 6-35-6-37 6-44, 6-46-6-49 9-7.01 26-16 9-7.02-9-7.04 26-26-26-28 9-7.05 26-30 9-7.06 26-29 9-7.07 26-31 9-7.08 26-17 9-7.09-9-7.12 26-38-26-41 9-7.13 26-18 9-7.14 26-19 9-9.01-9-9.03 9-12-9-131 9-11.01 9-16 9-11.02 9-24 9-11.03 9-23 9-11.04-9-11.08 9-25-9-29 9-12.01-9-12.03 9-157-9-159 9-12.01 9-143 9-12.04-9-12.10 9-144-9-150 9-13.01 9-1 9-14.01 9-171 9-14.02 9-172 9-14.03 9-173 10-2.01 8-16 10-2.02, 10-2.03 8-17 10-3.01 8-34 10-3.02 8-54 10-3.03 8-47, 8-55, 8-58-8-60 8-62, 8-63 8-73 10-3.04 8-61 10-3.05 8-71, 8-72 10-3.06 8-35, 8-37, 8-40, 8-41, 8-45, 8-46, 8-56, 8-57 8-64 10-3.07 8-37 10-3.08 8-42 10-3.09 8-38 10-3.10 8-37 10-4.13-10-4.15 8-93-8-95  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1957 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1957 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 280 8-30-54 1 7-4 3 7-1-57 1 14-6 7 7-7-58 1(5-5.04) 12-77 9 7-20-59 1(10-2.04) 8-19 (10-2.05), (10-2.06) 8-20 10 10-19-59 1(7-3.08) 27-6, 27-7 27-9 1(7-3.10) 27-4 12 3-7-60 1(8-5.04) 17-1, 17-2 15 7-5-61 1(10-6.01) 2-129 (10-6.02) 2-130-2-132 (10-6.03) 2-133, 2-134 16 8-21-61 1(9-6.01) 6-70, 6-74 17 2-19-62 9-7.12 26-41 18 10-15-62 7-5.05 24-66 21 8-5-63 1(7-4.03) 13-21 25 6-1-64 1(5-8.12) 20-69 1(5-8.13) 20-70 1(5-8.14) 20-57 26 8-3-64 1(9-6.07) 6-18 29 3-1-65 1(3-10.01) 2-141 (3-10.02) 2-142-2-144 (3-10.03) 2-145 (3-10.04) 2-146 30 3-15-65 App. A(note) 32 6-21-65 5-2.18-5-2.22 12-30-12-34 35 10-4-65 6-4.01-6-4.05 16-138-16-141 39 5-2-66 10-6.02 2-130-2-132 42 6-6-66 5-1.111 24-103 5-1.119 24-105 5-1.114 24-102 5-1.115 24-104 44 9-12-66 9-11.09-9-11.12 9-16-9-38 9-11.15 9-39 48 12-5-66 11-1.02 23-2 11-1.03 23-17-23-20 11-1.04 23-32-23-37 11-1.05 23-68-23-71 11-1.06 23-49-23-56 11-1.07 23-3 11-1.08 23-4, 23-5 51 10-2-67 1(7-1.05) 22-47 52 10-16-67 10-2.07 8-21 53 11-6-67 1(10-1.04) App. A, § 10-1.05 55 2-26-68 2 27-1 9 27-2 10 27-8 11 27-6 12 27-5 14 27-3 56 2-26-68 1 27-8 60 8-19-68 2(5-4.01)-6(5-4.05) 8-107-8-111 61 9-9-68 2(6-5.01), (6-5.02) 25-34 3(6-5.03) 25-35 4(6-5.04) 25-36 5(6-5.05) 25-37 6(6-5.06) 25-37 7(6-5.07) 25-38 8(6-5.08) 25-35 9(6-5.09) 25-39 64 12-3-68 2-6.01-2-6.06 24-51-24-56 65 1-20-69 1(10-6.03) 2-133 66 3-3-69 1(3-11.01) 2-103 (3-11.02) 2-104-2-106 1(3-11.03), (3-11.04) 2-107 (3-11.05) 2-108 67 4-21-69 1(10-3.01) 8-34 1(10-3.02) 8-36, 8-54 1(10-3.03) 8-47, 8-55, 8-58-8-60 8-62, 8-63 1(10-3.04) 8-61 1(10-3.05) 8-71, 8-72 1(10-3.06) 8-35, 8-37 8-40, 8-41, 8-45, 8-46 8-56, 8-57, 8-64, 8-73 1(10-3.07) 8-37 1(10-3.08) 8-42 1(10-3.10) 8-38 1(10-3.11) 8-39 1(10-3.12) 8-37 1(10-3.13) 8-43, 8-44 76 3-16-70 10-1.03(305) App. A, § 10-1.03 77 5-4-70 1(10-1.21) App. A, § 10-1.21 83 10-5-70 9-15.01 6-88-6-90 9-15.02 6-101 9-15.03-9-15.07 6-102-6-106 9-15.08 6-107, 6-108 9-15.09 6-109 9-15.11 6-91 9-15.12 6-92 9-15.13 6-93 84 11-16-70 5-1.20 24-117 5-1.21 24-145-24-151 5-1.22 24-128 5-1.23 24-129-24-132 24-135, 24-152 24-153 5-1.24 24-119 5-1.25 24-136 5-1.26 24-155 5-1.27 24-120 5-1.28 24-137 5-1.29 24-156 5-1.30 24-138 5-1.31 24-121 88 5-24-71 2-7.01-2-7.15 2-169-2-183 89 6-21-71 3-12.01 24-40 3-12.02 24-41, 24-42 3-12.03 24-44 3-12.04 24-43 93 10-18-71 10-2.07 8-21 94 2-7-72 6-3.01(ee) 16-12 95 2-28-72 2-7.01-2-7.04 2-1 96 2-28-72 8-5.04 17-1, 17-2 97 2-28-72 5-2.18 12-30 98 2-28-72 10-3.01 8-34 103 6-5-72 10-1.04 App. A, § 10-1.04 104 6-5-72 10-1.28 App. A, § 10-1.28 (2801)-(2805) 108 8-21-72 7-4.05 13-19 110 9-18-72 3-13.01 2-116-2-119 3-13.02-3-13.04 2-120-2-122 114 1-8-73 24-56 116 2-5-73 10-1.17(1707) App. A, § 10-1.17(a) 127 5-7-73 7-2.02 27-23 128 6-18-73 10-2.05 8-20 132 11-19-73 3-6.01 2-76, 2-82 3-6.02 2-77, 2-78 3-6.03 2-82, 2-94 3-6.04 2-80, 2-95 3-6.05 2-81, 2-93 3-6.06 2-79 133 12-17-73 6-3.01(ff) 16-13 (gg) 16-1 134 1-7-74 10-2.05 8-20 136 1-21-74 3-4.01 2-89 3-4.02 2-90-2-92 137 2-18-74 1(9-7.13) 26-18 142 4-15-74 8-5.04 17-1, 17-2 145 11-4-74 1(10-1.09) App. A, § 10-1.09 146 11-4-74 1(10-1.10) App. A, § 10-1.10 1(10-1.11) App. A, § 10-1.11 148 11-4-75 1(10-1.08) App. A, § 10-1.08 150 1-20-75 1 11-1 151 3-3-75 10-2.01-10-2.03 8-16-8-18 152 4-7-75 3-14.01 5-17 3-14.02 5-18 3-14.03 5-19, 15-22 3-14.04 15-20 3-14.05 15-23 3-14.06 15-24 3-14.07 15-21 3-14.08 15-25 3-14.09 15-26 155 7-21-75 3-15.01 2-154 3-15.02 2-157 3-15.03 2-155 3-15.04 2-156 170 6-21-76 2-141-2-149 171 10-4-76 2-164-2-168 173 10-18-76 1 8-125 176 1-3-77 2-103-2-108 180 2-21-77 24-40-24-43 183 9-7-77 1 26-18 186 11-7-77 1 8-34 189 12-19-77 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 12-19-77(Res.) 24-32 191 2-6-78 1       Rpld 8-107-8-111 2-6       Added 8-107-8-111 192 6-5-78 1 18.5-11 2 18.5-12, 18.5-18 3-7 18.5-13-18.5-17 194 8-7-78 24-157-24-167 196A 8-6-79 1 26-18 197 8-6-79 24-16 199 11-16-79 13-19 200 2-4-80 Ch. 8, Art. V(note) 8-131 201  2-18-80       Added 18.5-75-18.5-77 202 4-7-80 24-57 203 4-21-80 1 26-18 204 5-21-80 24-32 209 10-20-80 1 24-56 210 12-15-80 8-123 211 1-19-81 1 2-184 213-81 3-16-81 App. A, § 10-1.06(601)5. 215-81 7-6-81 1, 2 15-1 217-81 8-17-81 App. A, § 10-1.21(2100)-(2106) 218-81 10-5-81 1 26-18 220-81 12-21-81 1 App. A, §§ 10-1.08(800)8, 10-1.09(900)7, 10-1.10(1000)16, 10-1.11(1100)15 222-82 2-1-82 1       Rpld 2-67-2-69 2-141-2-149 2-164-2-168 2       Added 2-59-2-67 224-82 4-5-82 1 11-1 226-82 8-2-82 1 22-50-22-66 227-82 10-18-82 1 8-39 228-82 10-18-82 1 8-54       Rpld 8-55-8-64 230-82 11-1-82 1 16-12(b) 231-82 2-7-83 1 8-54       Rpld 8-55-8-64 233-83 3-21-83 1 14-6(c) 234-83 4-18-83 23-1-23-7, 23-10, 23-20-23-25, 23-30-23-33, 23-40-23-46, 23-50-23-57, 23-60-23-69, 23-70-23-74 236-83 5-2-83 24-16 237-83 8-17-83 2-4 16-17 239-83 10-17-83 1-6 2-161-2-166 240-83 11-7-83 1 App. A, § 10-1.18(1800)7.i 242-84 5-22-84 1, 2 16-101 242A-84 8-6-84 App. A, §§ 10-1.04(401), 10-1.14(1400), (1401) 10-1.17(1703), (1704), (1707) 10-1.02(200)(bu) 10-1.19(1910) 10-1.20(2003) 243-84 11-5-84 16-72-16-75 245-85 7-1-85 1 14-6(c) 246-85 7-1-85 8-20(a) 247-85 7-1-85 1 8-39 249-85 8-19-85       Rpld App. A, § 1.28       Added App. A, § 1.045 250-85 9-3-85       Rpld 27-41-27-44       Added 27-41-27-58 251-85 12-16-85 1 24-56 254-86 4-7-86 8-123 255-86 4-7-86 24-41(a) 257-86 8-18-86 27-30 258-86 11-17-86 18.5-31 259-86 11-17-86 18.5-36 262-86 12-15-86 18.5-41 264-87 5-4-87 1 27-26(a) 265-87 5-4-87 1 27-58(f) 267-87 6-1-87 1 16-105 268-87 6-1-87 1 13-48 2       Rpld 13-49 269-87 6-1-87 1       Rpld 13-65 270-87 6-1-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(i), (s), (t) 271-87 6-1-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.04(400)1. 272-87 6-1-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.05(500)1. 273-87 6-1-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.06(1600) 277-87 8-3-87 1 App. A, 10-1.10(1000)18. 278-87 8-3-87 23-51(2)(a) 279-87 8-3-87 23-62(1) 280-87 8-17-87 1 2-77 281-87 9-14-87 1 14-6(c) 282-87 9-14-87 1 8-125(e)(4) 283-87 9-14-87 1 23-72 284-87 9-14-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.21(2102) 286-87 10-5-87 1 App. A, § 10-1.12(1200) 10, 11 288-88 2-15-88 1 14-6(c) 293-88 9-19-88 1 18.5-31(c), (e) 294-88 9-19-88 1 18.5-36(c), (e) 297-88 11-21-88 1 24-34 299-88 12-19-88 1 24-56 301-89 4-3-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.11(1101)2 302-89 6-6-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.07(701)5 304-89 7-6-89 1 8-20(a) 307-89 7-17-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.16(1600), footnote (m) 308-89 7-17-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(op)(1) 309-89 8-21-89 1 22-67 310-89 8-21-89 1 22-68 312-89 8-21-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.12(1200)12; (1201)6 313-89 8-21-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.10(1000)19 314-89 8-21-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.11(1100)16 315-89 8-21-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.12(1200)8, 13 318-89 11-6-89 1 8-125(h) 321-89 11-20-89 1 App. A, § 10-1.08(800)9       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.08(801)2 322-89 11-20-89 1       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.09(900)8 324-90 1-22-90 1       Rpld 8-34-8-47, 8-54, 8-71-8-73 325-90 2-19-90 1 8-124, 8-125(e), (f), (g)(1), (7)-(9), (i) 326-90 2-19-90 1 8-124, 8-125(e)(1) 327-90 2-19-90 1       Rpld 8-21 328-90 2-19-90 1 8-132 329-90 3-30-90 1 App. A, § 10-1.16(1600), footnotes (a), (g), (k) 336-90 6-18-90 1 8-125(j) 338-90 7-23-90 1 13-17(a), (d) 13-22(d) 339-90 7-23-90 1 8-20(a) 340-90 8-20-90 1 26-18(a), 26-41(a)(4) 342-90 9-17-90 1 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(bv) 343-90 9-17-90 1       Added Ch. 13, Art. V, §§ 13-100-13-113 349-91 4-15-91 1 App. A, § 10-1.15(1504) 1 App. A, § 10-1.17(1705) 352-91 7-15-91 1 App. A, § 10-1.17(1704) 354-91 6-17-91 1       Added App. A, § 10-1.065(650), (651) 1 App. A, § 10-1.17(1704) 355-91 6-17-91 1 App. A, § 10-1.02 (200)(bw) 360-91 11-4-91 1 24-145 361-91 12-2-91 1 13-23 362-91 12-16-91 1       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.19 (1900)-(1907)       Added App. A, § 10-1.19 (1900)-(1906) 363-91 12-16-91       Added App. A, § 10-1.19 (1911) 365-92 4-20-92 1 App. A, § 10-1.18 (1800)7.b, c 369-92 5-4-92 1 22-42 373-93 5-3-93 18.5-31(f) 374-93 5-3-93 18.5-36(f) 375-93 6-21-93 1       Rpld 8-20       Added 8-21       Rpld 8-132       Added 8-133 14-6(c), (d) 23-22, 23-72 App. A, § 10-1.19 (19102.e.) App. A, § 10-1.21 (2102) 376-93 8-16-93 1, 2 20-71 377-93 9-13-93 1-17 23.5-11-23.5-27 381-94 4-4-94 1 26-18 383-94 7-18-94 1 App. A, § 10-1.20 (2000), (2002), (2006) 386-94 12-5-94 1 24-56(2) 387-94 12-5-94 1 24-130 2       Added 24-139 388-95 12-19-94 Ch. 18.5, Art. II(note) 389-94 12-19-94       Rpld 20-1-20-90       Added 20-1-20-65 397-95 10-2-95 1       Rpld 7-16-7-21, 7-28-7-33       Added 7-26-7-31, 7-33-7-38, 7-51, 7-52, 7-76, 7-77, 7-80-7-82 398-95 10-16-95 1 24-133, 24-134, 24-139       Rpld 24-145-24-147, 24-150-24-152 24-153, 24-154, 24-156 400-95 11-20-95 1       Rpld 6-35-6-37, 6-44-6-49 402-95 12-18-95 1 11-1 407-96 5-26-96 1 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1707)(5) 408-96 5-26-96 1 App. A, § 10-1.2 (1200)(1) 410-96 7-15-96 1 App. A, § 10-1.16 (1600) 414-96 10-21-96 1 12-44, 12-45 2       Rpld 13-23 416-96 10-21-96 1 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1711) 417-96 10-21-96 1 App. A, § 10-1.16 (1600)note(n) 418-96 12-2-96 1 26-18 26-41(a)(4) 420-96 1-6-97 1 27-54 421-96 1-20-97 1 22-47 422-97 2-17-97 1, 2 24-56 423-97 4-21-97 27-27 425-97 5-19-97 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1712) 427-98 1-5-98 1 24-32 428-98 2-2-98 1 22-1(a) 429-98 3-16-98 1       Rpld 2-154-2-157 431-98 4-20-98 1       Rpld 13-21 13-63, 13-64 2 13-65, 13-66 432-98 5-4-98 1 8-123-8-125 433-98 5-18-98 1       Rpld 24-57(c) 435-98 9-4-98 App. B, Art. I, Div. 1 437-98 11-16-98 1 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1703)(5) 438-98 12-21-98 1 8-190-8-197, 8-200 440-99 3-1-99 1 27-22 2 27-31 441-99  3-15-99 1 App. A, § 10-1.04 (400)-(402)       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.04 (403) 2 App. A, § 10-1.16 (1600) 3 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1703)5 4 App. A, § 10-1.17 (1707) 443-00  4-17-00 7-39 444-00  8- 7-00 1 7-51 445-00  9-19-00       Rpld 8-123-8-125       Added 8-126, 8-127 447-01  3- 5-01 1 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(ag) App. A, § 10-1.04(401.6) App. A, 10-1.045(452.2) App. A, 10-1.07(701.5) 449-01  8-20-01 App. B, Art. I, Div. 2 450-01 12- 3-01 1 App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(ca) App. A, § 10.1.11(1101) App. A, § 10-1.17(1701.1) 452-01 12-17-01 1-4 18.5-39-18.5-39.2 453-02  2-18-02 3-9 18.5-19 454-02  4- 1-02 1 11-1 456-02  5- 3-02 1 18-14 458-02  8-19-02 App. B, Art. I, Div. 3 459-02  9-16-02 1       Rpld 24-84-24-90 2       Added 24-91, 24-93, 24-95, 24-97 462-02 11- 4-02 1 20-8(1) 463-02 11- 4-02 1 23.5-40-23.5-58, 23.5-60 465-02 12- 2-02 2-104, 2-109 466-03  1- 6-03 1 2-62, 2-64       Dltd 2-63 467-03  4-21-03 1 18.5-19(g) 468-03  5-19-03 1 Art. II title 2 24-2,; 
;24-16-24-18 469-03  6- 2-03 1 24-41(a) 470-03  8- 4-03 2 18.5-41 472-03 10- 6-03 1 13-19 475-04  4-19-04 1, 2 18.5-31 476-04  5-17-04 1       Added 16-18 477-04  6-21-04 1 24-55 478-04  9-20-04 1 App. A, § 10-1.10 App. A, § 10-1.12 479-04  9-20-04 22-43 480-04 12- 6-04 1 24-134 481-04 12-20-04 1       Rpld 24-19 2       Added 24-35 483-05  1-17-05 1, 2       Added 23.5-70 484-05  9- 6-05 1 2-134 485-05  9- 6-05       Added 16-106 486-05 11- 7-05       Dltd 24-40-24-43 488-06  3- 6-06 1       Added 12-201-12-206 489-06  9-18-06 1 App. A, § 1707 App. A, § 1910       Added App. A, § 1912       Added App. A, § 2003a. App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 2104       Added App. A, § 2106 4. 493-07  7- 2-07 1 2-177(a), (f) 2-178(a), (f) 2-179 2-181(b) 496-07  9- 4-07 1, 2       Added 2-300-2-355 497-07  9-17-07 1       Added 18-24-18-26 498-07 11- 5-07 1       Added 18.5-20 501-08  4-21-08 1 App. A, § 10-1.11 502-08  5-16-08 1       Added 2-185 504-08  9- 2-08 1 24-130 24-138(a)-(c)       Added 24-138(d), (e) 24-154 505-08  9-15-08 1       Added 18.5-25 507-09  4- 6-09       Added 18-27-18-30 508-09  6-15-09       Added 18.5-77(b) 18.5-31(a), (d)       Added 18.5-31(g) 18.5-36(d) 509-09  7- 6-09 1 18.5-20(9) 510-09  9-21-09 1 20-22(2)a., f. 511-09 10- 5-09 1 2-185(4) 512-09 11- 2-09 1-27       Added App. B, Art. I, Div. 4 513-09 11-16-09 1       Added 18.5-20(3)(h) 514-09  3- 1-10 1       Added 18.5-22 515-09  3- 8-10 1 App. A, § 10-1.03(305) 516-10  5- 3-10 1       Rpld 25-19 2 25-18 3       Added 25-23(1)-25-32 517-10  5-17-10 1 2-185(4) 518-10  6- 7-10       Added 9-300-9-315 519-10  6-21-10 App. A, § 10.102(200(af) App. A, § 10-1.04(401)3.d. App. A, § 10-1.06(601)1.d., 3.b. App. A, § 10.1-109(901)1.b. App. A, § 10.1-11(1101)1.c., 2.f. App. A, § 10-1.12(1201)2.a. 3.c., 4.a. App. A, § 10-1.13(1300)2 App. A, § 10-1.14(1400)4. App. A, § 10.1-15(1503), (1506)2. App. A, § 101.17(1705)6. (1707)3.d., 4.c. (1708)2.       Added (1709) 520-10  8-23-10       Added App. A, § 10-1.02(bx), (cb)       Added 10-1.17  1713 521-10  9-28-10       Added 18-40-18-43 522-10 10- 4-10 1 27-4 27-7-27-9 27-21-27-28 27-30 524-11  1- 7-11 App. A, § 10-1.17  1703 526-11  3- 7-11 18-41-18-43 527-11  8- 8-11       Added 18.5-23 528-11  9- 6-11       Rpld 2-59-2-67       Added 2-59-2-68 529-11  9- 6-11 18-41-18-43 531-12  1- 3-12 App. A, § 10-1.17(1712) 532-12  1-16-12       Added App. A, § 10-1.02(200)(cc) App. A, § 10-1.04(401)8. App. A, § 10-1.045(452)6. App. A, § 10-1.07(701)6. 533-12  6-18-12 1 App. A, § 10-1.20(2000)-(2006)(bu)       Added App. A, § 10-1.16(1601) App. A, § 10-1.17(1707), (1709)4.b.-e., (1711) App. A, § 10-1.19(1910)-(1912) App. A, § 10-1.20 534-12 12- 3-12 1 8-200       Added 8-201 536-13  7-15-13 1 App. A, § 10-1.17(1708)4.b. 537-13  8-19-13 1       Added App. A, § 10-1.0200(cd) App. A, § 10-1.1500 App. A, § 10-1.1501 540-13  8-19-13 1 16-60 541-13  9- 3-13       Added 18.5-77(c) 542-13 12- 2-13       Rpld 16-2 543-13 12-16-13 1 18.5-39.1 544-14  1- 6-14 1       Added App. A, § 10-1.18(1800)7.j., k. 545-14  1-20-14 1       Added Ch. 23.5, Art. V, §§ 23.5-90-23.5-95 546-14  2- 3-14 19-18 548-14  4-21-14 16-18 549-14  7-21-14 1-23       Added App. B, Div. 5 551-14 10- 6-14 1       Added 10-1.17(1704)(12)31-33 552-14 10- 6-14 1       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.04(400)2.,       Rpld App. A, § 10-1.045(451)3. 553-14 10- 6-14 1       Added 18-51 554-14 11-17-14 1 18.5-36(a) 555-15  3- 2-15 1       Added 24-158(f)       Amd. 24-159(c), (d), 24-167 558-15  4-20-15 1       Rpld Ch. 24, Art. V, §§ 24-102-24-105 559-15  4-20-15 1 22-6       Added 22-7, 22-8 560-15  8- 3-15 1       Added App. A, § 10-1.15A 2 App. A, § 10-1.16 561-15  8-17-15 1 10-1.13 563-15 10-19-15 1 2-185 564-16  2-15-16 1 18.5-41(d) 565-16  4- 4-16       Added 18.5-24 566-16  4-18-16 1 App. A, § 10-1.16 567-16  7- 5-16 1-4       Added 16-33 569-17  1-16-17 1       Added 24-36 570-17  3- 6-17 1       Added App. A, §§ 10-1.1712.1, 10-1.1712.2 571-17  3-20-17       Added 18.5-25 576-18  1-15-18       Added 12-1 12-30 12-33 12-34       Added 12-35.3, 12-35.4, 12-36, 12-58, 12-61, 12-62 12-67 12-74-12-79 577-18  4- 2-18 1.A.       Rpld 6-16-6-19, 6-26-6-28, 6-61, 6-62, 6-70-6-76, 6-88-6-93, 6-101-6-109 578-18  4- 2-18 1.A.       Rpld 9-1, 9-26, 
9-27, 
9-129-9-131, 9-143-9-150, 9-157-9-159, 9-185-9-187, 9-194-9-197, 9-300-9-315 580-18  4-16-18 1 18.5-25(i) 581-18  5-21-18 1       Rpld 15-3, Ch. 15, Art. II, §§ 15-17-15-26 582-18  5-21-18 1       Rpld 16-4, 16-6, 16-7, 16-10, 16-11, 16-15, 16-28, 16-30-16-32, 16-44, 16-45, 16-61-16-65, 16-68, 16-69, 16-71, Ch. 16, Art. V, §§ 16-83-16-85, 16-99, 16-100, 16-102, Ch. 16, Arts. VII, VIII, §§ 16-116-16-126, 16-138-16-142 583-18  6-18-18 1 App. A, § 10-1.1911 584-18 11-19-18 1A.       Rpld 2-1, 2-41       Rpld 2-50, 2-51       Rpld 2-80, 2-81 2-82(B)       Rpld 2-89-2-95       Rpld 2-161-2-166 1B.       Rpld 3-19, 3-20 1C.       Rpld 4-1-4-10 1D.       Rpld 18-6       Rpld 18-27-18-43 1E.       Rpld 23.5-11-23.5-27 1F.       Rpld 26-16-26-19       Rpld 26-26-26-31       Rpld 26-36-26-41 585-18 11-19-18 1 App. A, § 10-1.2004 586-18 11-19-18 1 App. A, § 10-1.1800(7)j., k. 587-18 11-19-18 1       Added App. A, § 10-1.0301(3) 588-18 11-19-18 1       Added 9-129 589-19  3- 4-19 1       Added 18.5-26 591-19  4-15-19 1       Rpld 8-190(7)(d) 592-19  4- 1-19 1 16-60  
