
Saginaw, MI Code of Ordinances


SAGINAW, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Contains 2019 S-1, current through
Ordinance O-210, passed 5-6-2019, effective 5-16-2019



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE O-204



Moved by Council Member Bryant, seconded by Council Member Boensch that an
ordinance introduced on July 23, 2018, be taken up and enacted, entitled and
reading as follows:




O-204




AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT THE GENERAL REVISIONS TO AND COMPILATION OF THE CITY OF
SAGINAW CODE OF ORDINANCES, WHICH AMEND, REVISE, AND COMPILE ALL CITY
ORDINANCES PURSUANT TO SECTION 24 OF CHAPTER IV OF THE SAGINAW CITY CHARTER,
WHICH INCLUDES THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE, ADMINISTRATION, PUBLIC SERVICES,
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS, GENERAL REGULATIONS, BUSINESS REGULATIONS, GENERAL
OFFENSES, LAND USAGE, AND SPECIAL ORDINANCES.



The City of Saginaw Ordains:



An ordinance to adopt the general revisions to and compilation of the City of
Saginaw Code of Ordinances, which includes the Administrative Code,
Administration, Public Services, Traffic Regulations, General Regulations,
Business Regulations, General Offenses, Land Usage, and Special Ordinances.



   1.   The City Charter at Chapter IV, “Legislation,” § 24
“Compilation and Revision,” states that City Council shall, by
resolution, order a general revision and compilation of the City’s
ordinances.



   2.   City Council adopted resolution 2017-031 on June 19, 2017
ordering a general revision and compilation of the City’s Code of
Ordinance, O-1.



   3.   The City awarded the general revision and compilation project
to American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio.    



   4.   American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the
revision and compilation, which contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since supplement 25 to the Code of Ordinances. 



   5.   It is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance be adopted.



   6.   The general revision and compilation to the Code of Ordinance
as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation is adopted by reference
as if set out in its entirety.   



   7.   Such revision and compilation shall be the City’s Code of
Ordinance and shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the City Council and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and
ordered to replace the Code of Ordinance, O-1 kept on file in the Office of
the City Clerk.



   8.   Copies of the Code of Ordinances are available at the City
Clerk’s Office, at cost, and will be available to access on the Internet.



This ordinance shall become effective September 6, 2018. 



Enacted:  August 27, 2018. 



Yeas:      Six



Nays:      None



Absent:   Two



Abstain:   None




ORDINANCE DECLARED ADOPTED




_______________________________            
__________________________________



Dennis D. Browning                     Janet Santos,
CMMC/MMC



Mayor                           City Clerk



I, Janet Santos, City Clerk of the City of Saginaw, Michigan, do hereby
certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of the ordinance
adopted by the City of Saginaw, Saginaw County, State of Michigan, at a
public meeting held on August 27, 2018; the original thereof is on file in
the records of my office; the meeting was conducted and public notice of said
meeting was given pursuant to Act No. 267, Public Acts of Michigan, 1976, as
amended, and minutes of this meeting were kept and will be made available as
required.



                                    _______
____ _______________________



                                    Janet
Santos, CMMC/MMC



                                    City
Clerk



TITLE I:  ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES



      12.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      13.   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE



      14.   FINANCE AND PURCHASING



      15.   PERSONNEL



      16.   POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM



      17.   MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Effective date



   10.02   Title



   10.03   Severability



§ 10.01  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This title shall take effect January 1, 1939.



(Prior Code, § 10.01)



§ 10.02  TITLE.



   This title may be known and cited as the “Saginaw Administrative
Code”.



(Prior Code, § 10.02)  (Ord. D-8, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940)



§ 10.03  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Should any provision or section of this title be held
unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting
the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the
intent that this title shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any
provision or section.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall apply to all
amendments of this title whether or not such a provision is re-enacted in the
amendatory ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10.03)  (Ord. D-1126, passed 12-23-1974, effective 1-2-1975)



CHAPTER 11:  DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES



Section



General Provisions



   11.01   Division of administrative service



Departments and Offices



   11.15   Office of City Manager



   11.16   Department of Fiscal Services



   11.17   Department of Fire



   11.18   Department of Police; Police Reserve



   11.19   Department of Law



   11.20   Department of Records and Elections



 



   11.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 11.01  DIVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.



   The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the
following offices and departments:



 

Office/Department
 
Official Head




Office of the City Manager
 
City Manager


Office of the City Clerk
 
City Clerk


Office of Human Resources
 
Director of Human Resources


Office of Management and Budget
 
Director of Office of Management and Budget


Department of Public Services
 
Director of Public Services


Department of Water and Wastewater Services
 
Director of Water and Wastewater Services


Department of Fiscal Services
 
Director of Finance


Community Public Safety - Fire
 
Fire Chief


Community of Public Safety - Police
 
Police Chief


Office of Neighborhood Services and Inspections
 
Director of Neighborhood Services and Inspections


Department of Technical Services
 
Director of Technical Services




 



(Prior Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. D-1636, passed 7-5-1991, effective 7-15-1991)



DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES



§ 11.15  OFFICE OF CITY MANAGER.



   The Office of the City Manager shall be headed by the City Manager who
shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 11.10)  (Ord. D-1571, passed 1-25-1988, effective 2-4-1988)



§ 11.16  DEPARTMENT OF FISCAL SERVICES.



   (A)   The Department of Fiscal Services shall be headed by the
Finance Director, who shall be responsible for planning, directing, and
monitoring all operations related to the city’s finance, property
assessments, purchasing, and special projects and services.



   (B)   This Department shall be divided into the following divisions:



      (1)   Financial Area, which shall be supervised by the Finance
Director with duties are described in the City Charter; and



      (2)   The Finance Director is responsible for the following
divisions:



         (a)   Division of Finance. The Division of Finance,
which shall be supervised by the Controller, who shall be in charge of the
city’s financial management and accounting;



         (b)   Division of the Treasurer. The Division of the
Treasurer, which shall be supervised by the Treasurer, who shall be in charge
of receiving and collecting all monies due the city;



         (c)   Division of the Assessor. The Division of the
Assessor, which shall be supervised by the City Assessor, who shall be in
charge of all work related to the assessment of property and the preparation
of all assessments and tax rolls and tax notices as required by state law and
City Charter;



         (d)   Division of Purchasing. The Division of
Purchasing, which shall be supervised by the Purchasing Officer, who shall be
in charge of all work related purchasing and the preparation of all bids,
quotes, and centralized purchasing and administering the purchasing policies;
and



         (e)   Division of Customer Accounting. The Division of
Customer Accounting, which shall be supervised by the Administrator of
Utilities Accounts, who shall be in charge of all work related to water/sewer
billing administration and application of local and state regulations.



         (f)   Division of Income Tax.  The Division of Income
Tax, which shall be supervised by the Income Tax Administrator, shall be in
charge of all work related to administering the Uniform City Income Tax
Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 11.13)  (Ord. D-1571, passed 1-25-1988, effective 2-4-1988;
Ord. D-1636, passed 7-5-1991, effective 7-15-1991; Ord. D-1907, passed
12-3-2001, effective 12-13-2001)



§ 11.17  DEPARTMENT OF FIRE.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall be headed by the Fire Chief, who
shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the
protection of life and property against fire, and the removal of fire hazards.



   (B)   This Department shall be divided into the following divisions.



      (1)   Administration Division. The Administration Division
shall be responsible for planning and management of the Fire Department.



      (2)   Operations Division. The Operations Division shall be
responsible for the extinguishment of fires, the saving of lives and property
from fire, and the performance of various miscellaneous public services
related to the prevention and extinguishment of fires or other emergencies.



      (3)   Fire Prevention and Planning Division. The Fire
Prevention and Planning Division shall be responsible for the inspection of
potential hazards and the abatement of existing fire hazards, the conducting
of an educational fire prevention program, and providing such administrative
assistance to the Fire Chief as the Fire Chief may direct.



      (4)   Training Division. The Training Division shall be
responsible for the Training Department and personnel.



      (5)   Maintenance Division. The Maintenance Division shall be
responsible for maintaining fire apparatus, equipment, and department
facilities.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and
care of all property used by the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 11.14)  (Ord. D-1571, passed 1-25-1988, effective 2-4-1988;
Ord. D-1578, passed 8-22-1988, effective 9-1-1988; Ord. D-1879, passed
10-23-2000, effective 11-2-2000)



§ 11.18  DEPARTMENT OF POLICE; POLICE RESERVE.



   (A)   Department of Police.



      (1)   The Police Department shall be headed by the Chief of
Police who shall be charged with the enforcement of law and order and the
protection of life and property within the jurisdiction of the city.



      (2)   The Police Department shall be structured into the
following major divisions.



         (a)   Patrol Division. The Patrol Division shall be
supervised by a command officer who, under the direct supervision of the
Chief of Police, shall be responsible for sustained and intensive preventive
patrol and shall be charged with primary responsibility for the
Department’s effort to prevent crime and delinquency, protect life and
property, and preserve the public peace.



         (b)   Investigation Division. The Investigation Division
shall be supervised by a command officer who, under the direct supervision of
the Chief of Police, shall be responsible for the in-depth follow-up
investigation of crimes, the recovery of stolen property, and the preparation
of cases for court presentation.



      (3)   Functional sections, special staff sections or units,
and auxiliary responsibilities will be assigned by order of the Chief of
Police in accordance with the operational needs and authorized personnel
strength of the Department. Administrative support, communications equipment,
records and identification, and automated data processing shall be performed
by other departmental personnel over whom direct supervision shall be
temporarily transferred from their respective departments to the Chief of
Police.



      (4)   The Chief of Police shall assign sworn officers to the
Patrol and Investigation Divisions of the Department and shall make such
other assignments deemed necessary.



   (B)   Police Reserve.



      (1)   A Police Reserve Unit, hereinafter called Reserve, is
hereby established as a voluntary organization to serve gratuitously,
composed of persons appointed by the Chief of Police hereinafter called the
Chief.



      (2)   The Police Chief shall have operational authority and
control over the Reserve. The Chief may appoint as a member thereof any
person determined to be qualified and may reject any application for
membership. The Chief may provide for the training of candidates for
membership and for the further training of members. Membership is open to
qualified persons not less 18 years of age.



      (3)   No person shall become a member of the Reserve until the
person has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements
prescribed by the Chief. When so qualified and selected, the person shall
then be sworn in by the Chief or by the Chief’s representative as a member
of the Reserve.



      (4)   The duties of the Reserve shall include assisting the
regular members of the Police Department of this city in the enforcement of
law and the maintenance of peace and order whenever and wherever its services
are required. The Chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to
govern the Reserve, including the fixing of specific duties of its members
and the providing for the maintenance of discipline. The Chief may change
such orders from time to time.



      (5)   An identification card, badge, and cap, and such other
insignia or evidence of identification as the Chief may prescribe shall be
issued to each member who must carry the card at all times. Each member must
surrender all issued city property upon the termination of his or her
membership.



      (6)   The membership of any person in the Reserve may be
terminated by the Chief at any time, and such member may resign from the
Reserve upon notifying the Chief in writing of the resignation; provided,
however, that the personnel regulations of the City Manager applicable to
full- time, regular city employees shall not be applicable to the Reserve.



      (7)   No member of the Reserve shall carry any firearm until
the member has qualified for and received a gun permit and only in cases of
extreme emergency and necessity as determined by the Chief and the City
Manager.



      (8)   A member of the Reserve, when on duty as assigned by the
Chief, shall have the authority to direct traffic and shall have such other
duties as the Chief may direct.



      (9)   The Chief may, by order, diminish or expand the
membership of the Reserve.



      (10)   The badge and cap may be worn only while on duty as
assigned by the Chief.



      (11)   Each member of the Reserve while acting under the
direction of the Chief during a regular assigned tour of duty is an employee
of the city for worker’s disability compensation purposes only and is
eligible, but only to the extent provided for hereinafter, to receive
worker’s disability compensation benefits from the city in accordance with
the provisions of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Law of the state. If
any member sustains an illness or injury otherwise covered by the Worker’s
Disability Compensation Law, which is not caused, aggravated, accelerated, or
contributed to by alcoholism or the member’s willful misconduct, or which
is not intentionally self-inflicted, and which, with or without negligence,
is proximately caused by and arises out of and in the course of the
performance of duties while acting under the direction of the Chief during a
regular assigned tour of duty, for the purpose of computing the benefits to
which such member, or the member’s dependents within the meaning of the
provisions of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Law, may be entitled
pursuant to the Worker’s Disability Compensation Law, a member of the
reserve will receive benefits based upon the member’s average weekly
earnings, inclusive of all fringe benefits and should be taken to be the
usual wage for similar services if these services are rendered by paid
employees in accordance with the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act,
Public 317 of 1969.



(Prior Code, § 11.15)  Penalty, see § 11.99



§ 11.19  DEPARTMENT OF LAW.



   (A)   The Department of Law shall be headed by the City Attorney who
shall be charged with the performance of all legal services of the city,
including those of legal advisor to the Council, the Manager, and to all
departments and officers of the city, and the prosecution of all cases
arising out of the violation of the provisions of the city ordinances. The
City Attorney shall also represent the city in matters in which the city is
interested coming before any court or tribunal and shall perform such other
duties as may be required by the Manager.



   (B)   (1) The City Attorney shall investigate all cases in which
worker’s compensation is involved, shall file all papers and documents
required by the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of
1969, being M.C.L. §§ 418.101 et seq. of this state, and shall prepare and
approve all worker’s compensation payrolls.



      (2)   The City Attorney may, with the approval of the City
Manager, enter into worker’s compensation redemption (settlement)
agreements and applications for lump sum advances in cases where the city is,
or may reasonably expect to become, legally liable for worker’s
compensation benefits; provided, that the total amount to be paid does not
exceed two-thirds of the computed value of deferred weekly indemnity benefits
as computed in accordance with the Worker’s Disability Act of this state.
The Finance Director shall pay such redemption agreements and lump sum
advances as approved by the City Manager, the City Attorney, and the
Worker’s Compensation Bureau, subject to availability of funds appropriated
for that purpose by the Council.



   (C)   The City Attorney shall be charged with the responsibility for
calling to the attention of the Manager all matters of law affecting the city.



   (D)   The City Attorney may, with the approval of the City Manager,
adjust, settle, or compromise any action, causes of action, account, debt,
claim, demand, dispute, and matters in favor of or against the city or in
which the city is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may
hereafter arise, not involving a sum exceeding or requiring payment to exceed
$2,000, provided the money to settle claims generally has been appropriated
and is available therefor. The City Attorney shall keep a record of all
claims and suits disposed of under the provisions of this subsection and of
division (B)(2) above.



   (E)   When an officer or employee of the city requests in writing to
be legally represented by the City Attorney, and such request is approved by
the City Manager, in any matter involving injury to persons or property not
exceeding $2,000 caused by negligence of the officer or employee while in the
course of employment and while acting within the scope of authority, the
matter may be handled and disposed of as if it were a claim against the city
under division (D) above.



(Prior Code, § 11.16)  (Ord. D-1571, passed 1-25-1988, effective 2-4-1988)



§ 11.20  DEPARTMENT OF RECORDS AND ELECTIONS.



   The Department of Records and Elections shall be headed by the City
Clerk who shall serve as Clerk of the Council. The City Clerk shall be
responsible for the safekeeping of all proceedings of the Council, shall keep
and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections, shall publish all legal notices unless otherwise
provided, file and preserve all contracts, bonds, oaths of office, and other
documents not required to be filed elsewhere, collect all license fees
required by ordinance or statute except as otherwise provided, be the
custodian of the official seal; shall at all times during office hours have
available in the office a courteous employee qualified to furnish information
concerning the city government and to receive complaints of citizens relative
to the public service. All requests for information shall be promptly
complied with, provided the required information is available in the office;
otherwise, the City Clerk shall request the proper agency of the city for
such information as is required and such agency shall forthwith supply the
same. All complaints made by citizens relative to the service shall be taken
and transmitted to the proper department for handling via the established
process established by the City Manager or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 11.17)  (Ord. D-1571, passed 1-25-1988, effective 2-4-1988)



§ 11.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 11.18, it shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days or by fine
not to exceed $500, or both for any person not a member of the Reserve:



      (a)   To wear, carry or display a Reserve identification card,
badge, cap, or insignia; or



      (b)   To represent being a member of the Reserve in any manner.



(Prior Code, § 11.15)



CHAPTER 12:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



General Provisions



   12.001   Members serving when code adopted



   12.002   Vacancies



   12.003   Removal



   12.004   Compensation



Boards



   12.015   Board of Examiners of Stationary Boiler Operators and
Stationary Engineers



   12.016   Board of Electrical Appeals



   12.017   Board of Building Appeals



   12.018   Board of Mechanical Appeals



   12.019   Housing Board of Appeals



   12.020   Board of Fire Code Appeals



   12.021   Board of Plumbing Appeals



Commissions



   12.035   City Planning Commission



   12.036   Housing Commission



   12.037   Saginaw Human Planning Commission



   12.038   Local Officers Compensation Commission



   12.039   Saginaw Arts and Enrichment Commission



   12.040   Saginaw Historic District Commission



   12.041   Saginaw Riverfront Development Commission



Authorities



   12.055   Downtown Development Authority



Economic Development Corporation



   12.070   Application approved



   12.071   Articles of incorporation (non-profit)



   12.072   Incorporation authorized



   12.073   Time limitation for incorporation



Urban Redevelopment Corporations



   12.085   Designation of supervisory agency



   12.086   Public Services



   12.087   Filing of development plan



   12.088   Report to Planning Commission



   12.089   Review and approval by Planning Commission



   12.090   Review by Director of Finance



   12.091   Transmission of plan to Council



   12.092   Ordinance granting tax benefits



Cross-reference:



   Special Assessment Board, see § 33.16



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 12.001  MEMBERS SERVING WHEN CODE ADOPTED.



   All members serving on boards and commissions at the time this code is
adopted shall, provided the board or commission on which they are serving is
continued by this code, remain in office for the duration of the term for
which they were appointed.



(Prior Code, § 12.01)



§ 12.002  VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission
shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner
provided for original appointment.



(Prior Code, § 12.02)



§ 12.003  REMOVAL.



   The appointing authority may remove any member for cause.



(Prior Code, § 12.03)



§ 12.004  COMPENSATION.



   Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall
serve without compensation as members thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12.04)



BOARDS



§ 12.015  BOARD OF EXAMINERS OF STATIONARY BOILER OPERATORS AND STATIONARY
ENGINEERS.



   (A)   Creation; membership. There is hereby created a Board of
Examiners of Stationery Boiler Operators and Stationary Engineers, composed
of three members appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the City
Manager. No person shall be so appointed unless he or she is qualified by
technical training or has had at least ten years actual experience in
operating steam boilers and steam actuated machinery. Members shall serve for
a term of three years.



   (B)   Meetings; compensation. The Board shall meet one Saturday of
each month or upon call of the City Clerk and members shall be compensated on
a quarterly basis in an amount recommended by the City Clerk and approved by
the City Manager and City Council through the approval of the budget each
year.



   (C)   Power and duties. The Board is hereby empowered, in accordance
with the provisions of Ch. 110, to conduct examinations for persons seeking
licenses to operate steam boilers and steam actuated machinery and by
majority vote to authorize the City Clerk to issue said licenses.



(Prior Code, § 12.10)  (Ord. D-8, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940;
Ord. D-347, passed 9-7-1954, effective 9-17-1954; Ord. D-1522, passed
7-28-1986, effective 8-7-1986; Ord. D-1893, passed 8-13-2001, effective
8-23-2001; Ord. O-14, passed 9-8-2003, effective 9-18-2003; Ord. O-135,
passed 1-9-2012, effective 1-19-2012; Ord. O-147, passed 6-17-2013, effective
6-27-2013)



§ 12.016  BOARD OF ELECTRICAL APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation; membership. There is hereby created a Board of
Electrical Appeals. Said Board of Electrical Appeals shall have only the
powers and duties stated in this section. The Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the City Manager, who
are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
design, construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical systems and
equipment. All members shall serve for a term of three years. The Electrical
Inspector of the city shall serve as the Secretary of the Board, shall attend
its meetings, and shall furnish such technical information and advice as it
may require. Currently serving members of the herein repealed Board of
Electrical Examiners shall serve on the Board of Electrical Appeals until
they resign or are replaced by the Council pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Board shall, upon the written application for a
hearing of any person who is aggrieved by any action or decision of any
official acting under the provisions of the Saginaw Electrical Regulations
(hereafter “regulations”), conduct a hearing on the appeal of the action
or decision. On the hearing the Board shall be limited in its consideration
to a determination of whether any materials or methods of construction
proposed as alternates for the materials or methods of construction required
by the regulations are suitable and consistent with the purpose of this code,
and to providing for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the
regulations where review of the official’s interpretation is requested.
Service of an appeal shall be made on the Secretary of the Board within ten
days after such action or decision appealed from. The Board shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and
hearings pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in writing to the
Chief Inspector with a duplicate copy to the appellant.



      (2)   The appellant, or any officer or official board or body
of the city, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to correct
errors of law in such decisions. Applications for review shall be made to the
appropriate court within 15 calendar days after the filing of the Board’s
decision with the Chief Inspector.



      (3)   The Board may advise the Council and the City Manager
concerning any recommendation it may have regarding the electrical
regulations of the city, new materials, or alternate methods of construction.



(Prior Code, § 12.11)  (Ord. D-1505, passed 10-14-1985, effective
11-24-1985)



Cross-reference:



   Electrical Board of Appeals, see § 150.08



§ 12.017  BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   The Board of Building Appeals heretofore established is
continued. This Board shall consist of seven members, three of whom shall be
officers or employees of different departments of the city, to be appointed
by the City Manager to serve for indefinite terms at the pleasure of the
Manager. The remaining four members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council, each to serve a term of two years.



      (2)   The Chief Inspector of the Neighborhood Services and
Inspections shall serve as the Secretary of the Board but shall not be a
member thereof.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  The Board shall have the powers and
duties conferred upon it by the City Charter and City ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 12.12)  (Ord. D-911, passed 3-16-1970, effective 3-26-1970)



Cross-reference:



   Building Board of Appeals, see § 150.06



§ 12.018  BOARD OF MECHANICAL APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   There is hereby created a Board of Mechanical Appeals.
The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Council upon
recommendation of the City Manager, who are qualified by experience and
training to pass upon matters pertaining to design, construction,
installation, maintenance, and the public health aspects of mechanical
systems and equipment.



      (2)   All members shall serve for a term of three years. The
Mechanical Inspector of the city shall serve as Secretary of the Board, shall
attend its meetings, and shall furnish such technical information and advice
as it may require. Currently serving members of the Board of Mechanical
Systems Installation Examiners shall serve on the Board of Mechanical Appeals
until they resign or are replaced by the Council pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Board shall, upon the written application for a
hearing of any person who is aggrieved by any action or decision of any
official acting under the provisions of the Saginaw Mechanical Regulations
(hereafter “regulations”), conduct a hearing on the appeal of the action
or decision. On the hearing, the Board shall be limited in its consideration
to a determination of whether any materials or methods of construction
proposed as alternates for the materials or methods of construction required
by the regulations are suitable and consistent with the purpose of these
regulations, and to providing for reasonable interpretations of the
provisions of the regulations where review of the official’s interpretation
is requested. Service of an appeal shall be made on the Secretary of the
Board within ten days after such action or decision appealed from. The Board
shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and hearings pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Chief Inspector.



      (2)   The Board may advise the Council and the City Manager
concerning any recommendation it may have regarding the mechanical
regulations of the city, new materials, or alternate methods of construction.



(Prior Code, § 12.13)  (Ord. D-1549, passed 6-29-1987, effective 7-9-1987)



Cross-reference:



   Mechanical Board of Appeals, see § 150.09



§ 12.019  HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Housing Board of Appeals having been created pursuant to
Ord. D-443 is hereby continued. This Board shall consist of five members
appointed by Council. Membership on the Board shall consist of a building
contractor, a registered architect or engineer, two members of the general
public, and an individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer,
or inspector under state law. The latter member may be a city employee. The
term of each member shall be three years, the terms of two members expiring
in the even-numbered years and the terms of three members expiring in the
odd-numbered years.



   (B)   Council may appoint not more than two alternate members to the
Board, said alternate members to have the same term as regular members of the
Board, with one alternate member’s term expiring in even-numbered years and
one alternate member’s term expiring in the odd-numbered years, and to be
subject to the same qualifications and other provisions contained herein
applicable to regular members of the Board.



   (C)   The Chairperson of the Board may call upon either or both of
the alternate members on a rotating basis to sit as regular members of the
Board in the absence of one or two regular members; or where a regular member
has abstained for reasons of a conflict of interest.



   (D)   Once appointed to hear a case, an alternate member shall serve
in the case and shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the
Board until a decision has been made.



   (E)   The Board annually shall elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and other officers that the Board considers necessary. The Chief
Inspector, or his or her designated representative, shall serve as the
Secretary of the Board.



   (F)   A majority of the Board appointed and serving constitutes a
quorum. Final action of the Board shall be only by affirmative vote of a
majority of the Board members appointed and serving.



   (G)   Meetings of the Board shall be held pursuant to the state’s
Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 through
15.275, as amended.



(Prior Code, § 12.14)  (Ord. D-1651, passed 2-10-1992, effective 2-10-1992;
Ord. O-178, passed 5-9-2016, effective 5-19-2016)



§ 12.020  BOARD OF FIRE CODE APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   The Board of Fire Code Appeals is hereby created. The
members of the Board of Building Appeals shall also serve as members of the
Board of Fire Code Appeals. In addition, the Mayor, with Council approval,
shall appoint an experienced fire code official from another jurisdiction to
serve as an additional member of the Board.



      (2)   The Fire Chief or an officer of the Fire Department
designated by the Fire Chief shall serve as Secretary of the Board but shall
not be a member thereof.



      (3)   The Board shall select one of its members as Chairperson
and another as Vice Chairperson to serve in the absence of the Chairperson.
The Chairperson or the Secretary shall call meetings of the Board as required
to perform its duties.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Board shall determine the suitability
of alternate materials and types of construction and provide reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of the adopted Fire Code. The Board shall
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Fire Chief with a
duplicate copy to the appellant and may recommend to the Council such new
legislation as is consistent with the adopted Fire Code.



(Prior Code, § 12.15)  (Ord. D-1084, passed 10-29-1973, effective
10-29-1973; Ord. D-1183, passed 4-12-1976, effective 4-22-1976; Ord. O-128,
passed 9-26-2011, effective 10-6-2011)



§ 12.021  BOARD OF PLUMBING APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   (a)   The Board of Plumbing Appeals is hereby
created. The composition of this Board will be as follows:



            1.   One journeyman plumber;



            2.   One master plumber;



            3.   One city employee;



            4.   One plumbing material supplier; and



            5.   One citizen without any of the foregoing
qualifications.



         (b)   The city employee member of this Board shall be
appointed by the City Manager to serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure
of the City Manager. The remaining four members of this Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Each
of said remaining four members will serve a term of two years.



      (2)   The Plumbing Inspector of the Division of Building
Inspections in the Department of Public Works shall serve as the Secretary of
this Board but shall not be a member thereof.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   Application for appeal. The owner of a building or
structure or any other person, hereinafter referred to as appellant, may
appeal in writing on a form provided by the Chief Inspector to the Board of
Appeals the decision of the Plumbing Official refusing to grant a
modification of the provisions of this code covering the manner of
construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, or repair
of the plumbing system. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or an equally good or better form of construction can be used.



      (2)   Appeals procedure. Appeals shall be heard at public
hearings as prescribed as follows.



         (a)   Notice of meetings. The Board shall meet upon
notice of the Chairperson within 14 days of the filing of an appeal, or at
stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work.



         (b)   Public hearing. All hearings shall be public and
the appellant, his or her representative, the official of the jurisdiction,
and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



      (3)   Decision of the Board of Plumbing Appeals. Appeals shall
be acted upon by the Board of Appeals and the plumbing official as follows.



         (a)   Action of Board. The Board shall affirm, modify,
or reverse the decision of the Plumbing Official by a concurring vote of
three members.



         (b)   Resolutions of Board. Every action of the Board
shall be by resolution and certified copies shall be furnished to the
appellant and to the Plumbing Official.



         (c)   Determining vote. Failure to secure three
concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the
Plumbing Official.



         (d)   Enforcement of decision. The Plumbing Official
shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board.



      (4)   Court review. The appellant, or any officer or official
board of the city, may apply to the appropriate court to correct errors of
law in such decisions. Application for review shall be made to the proper
court of jurisdiction within 15 days after the filing of the Board’s
decision in the office of the Plumbing Official.



(Prior Code, § 12.16)  (Ord. D-1161, passed 7-14-1975, effective 7-24-1975;
Ord. D-1392, passed 7-12-1982, effective 7-22-1982)



Cross-reference:



   Plumbing Board of Appeals, see § 150.07



COMMISSIONS



§ 12.035  CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation. The City Planning Commission is created for the city
in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L. §§ 125.3811 et seq.



   (B)   Membership.



      (1)   The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine
members, six of whom shall be representative, insofar as possible, of
important segments of the community in accordance with the major interests as
they exist in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
approval by a majority vote of the members elect of the Council, and three of
whom shall be ex officio members. The ex officio members shall be comprised
of the City Manager or his or her designee, the Mayor, and one or more
Council Members selected by the Council, or any combination thereof. The term
of each appointed member shall be three years or until his or her successor
takes office. The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenures, except that the term of any administrative
official selected by the City Manager as his or her designee shall terminate
with the term of the City Manager selecting him or her. 



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided herein, an elected officer
or employee of the city is not eligible to be a member of the City Planning
Commission.



      (3)   Members of the City Planning Commission shall be
qualified electors of the city, except 1 member may be a qualified elector of
another jurisdiction.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commission is hereby vested with all
the powers and duties conferred upon it by law, by City Charter, and by
ordinances.



   (D)   Advisory Committee. The City Planning Commission may appoint
advisory committees whose members are not members of the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 12.30)  (Ord. D-308, passed 5-25-1953, effective 6-4-1953;
Ord. D-414, passed 3-4-1957, effective 3-14-1957; Ord. D-548, passed
3-6-1961, effective 7-1-1961; Ord. D-1637, passed 7-15-1991, effective
7-25-1991; Ord. O-207, passed 3-4-2019, effective 3-14-2019)



§ 12.036  HOUSING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being
M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq., as amended (“Act 18”), a commission is
hereby created in and for the city to be known as the “Saginaw Housing
Commission”.



      (2)   The City Mayor is hereby directed to appoint the five
members of the said Housing Commission. Said members may be removed with or
without cause by City Council upon recommendation of the Mayor.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall have all the powers
and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public
Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq., as
heretofore or hereinafter amended, and any laws heretofore or hereinafter
enacted which are supplemental thereto; except for the following enumerated
powers and duties reserved to the City Council.



      (2)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall select and appoint
such officers or employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise
of its powers, functions, and duties, but their compensation shall be
determined by the salary ranges and/or classifications set by City Council.



      (3)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall obtain City Council
approval prior to entering or accepting any grant agreements in the name of
the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (4)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall report in writing
on an annual basis on grant project activities, audit and operations. This
report shall be made within 90 days of the Saginaw Housing Commission’s
fiscal year end.



      (5)   (a)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall pay an
annual service fee in lieu of all taxes with respect to projects or
facilities of the Commission or qualified entities.



         (b)   The fee shall be computed as total annual shelter
rent minus utilities not to exceed 10% of the net annual shelter rent
obtained from the project or facilities.



         (c)   The City Manager shall annually determine the
amount of fee due.



   (C)   Additional powers and duties granted by City Council. Public
Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq. provides
the City Council may grant the following enumerated powers and
responsibilities to the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (1)   All existing deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases,
purchases, or other agreements regarding real property including agreements
to acquire or dispose of real property shall be assigned to the Saginaw
Housing Commission. All future deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases,
purchases, or other agreements regarding the real property, including
agreements to acquire or dispose of real property, shall be approved by and
executed in the name of the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (2)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall have the power to
act as a borrower for purposes of issuing bonds or notes under M.C.L. §§
125.651 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 12.31)  (Ord. D-114, passed 7-14-1947, effective 7-16-1947;
Ord. D-1730, passed 11-21-1994, effective 12-1-1994; Ord. D-1804, passed
5-12-1997, effective 5-22-1997)



§ 12.037  SAGINAW HUMAN PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   The Saginaw Human Planning Commission is hereby created
to provide effective citizen participation in an advisory capacity only to
aid the City Council in solving the social and physical problems of the city.



      (2)   There shall be 21 Neighborhood District representatives
on the Commission, one to be appointed by City Council (hereinafter in this
section referred to as “Council”) from the Neighborhood Districts adopted
by City Council at the time this section becomes effective and any subsequent
amendments.



      (3)   A map clearly indicating the geographical area of each
of the Neighborhood Districts in the city shall be maintained in the City
Clerk’s office for public examination.



   (B)   Neighborhood districts. The neighborhood districts are as
follows:



      (1)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District One;



      (2)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Two;



      (3)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Three;



      (4)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Four;



      (5)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Five;



      (6)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Six;



      (7)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Seven;



      (8)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Eight;



      (9)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Nine;



      (10)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Ten;



      (11)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Eleven;



      (12)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Twelve;



      (13)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Thirteen;



      (14)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Fourteen;



      (15)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Fifteen;



      (16)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Sixteen;



      (17)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Seventeen;



      (18)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Eighteen;



      (19)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Nineteen;



      (20)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District Twenty;
and



      (21)   Human Planning Commission Neighborhood District
Twenty-One.



   (C)   Qualification of representatives.



      (1)   A Neighborhood District representative must meet the
following qualifications prior to appointment:



         (a)   United States citizenship;



         (b)   Eighteen years old; and



         (c)   Registered voter of the city.



      (2)   During the Neighborhood District representative’s
tenure, the individual cannot hold any board membership, employment, or
subcontracting relationship with any agency currently being funded with or
applying for Community Development Block Grant funds while the person is
serving on the Human Planning Commission.



   (D)   Term of office. The term of office of Neighborhood District
representatives shall be two years from the date of appointment.



   (E)   Vacancy in office. The office of Neighborhood District
representative shall be declared to be automatically vacant due to one of the
following circumstances:



      (1)   Death;



      (2)   Resignation;



      (3)   The Neighborhood District representative no longer
occupies as a principle residence, a dwelling in the Neighborhood District
from which the person was appointed;



      (4)   The Neighborhood District representative has been
convicted of a felony;



      (5)   The Neighborhood District representative has been
judicially declared mentally incompetent; and



      (6)   The Neighborhood District representative holds any board
membership or obtains employment or a subcontracting relationship with any
agency currently being funded with or applying for Community Development
Block Grant funds while the individual is serving on the Human Planning
Commission.



   (F)   Filling vacancy in office. City Council shall fill a vacancy
by appointment. The individual will complete the remainder of the former
Neighborhood District representative’s term.



   (G)   Organization of Commission. The Saginaw Human Planning
Commission shall select its own Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary, and
any other officers it may deem necessary. The Commission shall establish its
own rules of procedure.



   (H)   General duties and powers. The Saginaw Human Planning
Commission shall address itself to the social and physical problems of the
city. Nothing in this section is intended to or shall be construed to
conflict with the provisions of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public
Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L. §§ 125.3811 et seq., vesting certain powers
and duties concerning a program for public structures and improvements in the
City Planning Commission. The Commission will establish program priorities by
direct communication with the citizens in the respective neighborhood
districts. The Commission shall have authority to plan and research social
programs and review and recommend programs and action proposed by others in
the area of social programming proposed for the city.



   (I)   Personnel. Personnel to assist the Commission will be assigned
from the city’s Community Development Block Grant Division. The Community
Development Block Grant Administrator will consult with the Commission as to
type and number of staff to be assigned to it.



(Prior Code, § 12.33)  (Ord. D-1135, passed 2-17-1975, effective 2-27-1975;
Ord. D-1425, passed 4-25-1983, effective 5-5-1983; Ord. D-1502, passed
9-23-1985, effective 10-3-1985; Ord. O-59, passed 6-18-2007, effective
6-28-2007; Ord. O-90, passed 11-9-2009, effective 11-19-2009; Ord. O-177,
passed 3-28-2016, effective 4-17-2016)



§ 12.038  LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation, membership, terms, vacancies. As authorized by the
Home Rule City Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L. §§ 117.5c, a Local
Officers Compensation Commission is created which shall determine the
salaries of all local elected officials. The Commission shall consist of
seven members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by the Mayor
subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on
the Council. The terms of office shall be seven years, except that of the
members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two,
three, four, five, six, and seven years. Members shall be appointed before
October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative,
judicial, or executive branch of any level of government or members of the
immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member
of the Commission.



   (B)   Determination of salaries; expense allowances or
reimbursements. The Commission shall determine the salaries of such local
elected officials which determination shall be the salaries unless the
Council by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and
serving on the Council reject them. The determinations of the Commission
shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the City Clerk unless
rejected by the Council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall
prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in
addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city
business and accounted for to the city.



   (C)   Meetings of Commission; quorum; concurrence of majority;
Chairperson; session days; compensation. The Commission shall meet for not
more than 15 session days in 1983 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and
shall make its determination within 45 calendar days after its first meeting.
A majority of the members of the Commission constitute a quorum for
conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall take no
action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the
members appointed and serving on the Commission. The Commission shall elect a
Chairperson from among its members. SESSION DAYS means any calendar day on
which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
Commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their
actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.



   (D)   Implementation; changes in procedure for establishing
compensation. The governing body shall implement this provision by
resolution. After one year following the date this section goes into effect,
the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be
changed by Charter amendment or revision.



   (E)   Open meetings. The business which the Commission may perform
shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Commission held in compliance
with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261
et seq. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting of the
Commission shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq.



   (F)   Freedom of information. A writing prepared, owned, used, in
the possession of, or retained by the Commission in the performance of an
official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with
the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§
15.231 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 12.34)  (Ord. D-1417, passed 11-15-1982, effective
11-25-1982)



§ 12.039  SAGINAW ARTS AND ENRICHMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation of membership.



      (1)   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being
M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq., as amended (“Act 18”), a commission is
hereby created in and for the city to be known as the “Saginaw Housing
Commission”.



      (2)   The City Mayor is hereby directed to appoint the five
members of the said Housing Commission. Said members may be removed with or
without cause by City Council upon recommendation of the Mayor.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall have all the powers
and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public
Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq., as
heretofore or hereinafter amended, and any laws heretofore or hereinafter
enacted which are supplemental thereto; except for the following enumerated
powers and duties reserved to the City Council.



      (2)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall select and appoint
such officers or employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise
of its powers, functions, and duties, but their compensation shall be
determined by the salary ranges and/or classifications set by City Council.



      (3)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall obtain City Council
approval prior to entering or accepting any grant agreements in the name of
the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (4)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall report in writing
on an annual basis on grant project activities, audit and operations. This
report shall be made within 90 days of the Saginaw Housing Commission’s
fiscal year end.



      (5)   (a)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall pay an
annual service fee in lieu of all taxes with respect to projects or
facilities of the Commission or qualified entities.



         (b)   The fee shall be computed as total annual shelter
rent minus utilities not to exceed 10% of the net annual shelter rent
obtained from the project or facilities.



         (c)   The City Manager shall annually determine the
amount of fee due.



   (C)   Additional powers and duties granted by City Council. Public
Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq. provides
the City Council may grant the following enumerated powers and
responsibilities to the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (1)   All existing deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases,
purchases, or other agreements regarding real property including agreements
to acquire or dispose of real property shall be assigned to the Saginaw
Housing Commission. All future deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases,
purchases, or other agreements regarding the real property, including
agreements to acquire or dispose of real property, shall be approved by and
executed in the name of the Saginaw Housing Commission.



      (2)   The Saginaw Housing Commission shall have the power to
act as a borrower for purposes of issuing bonds or notes under M.C.L. §§
125.651 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 12.31)  (Ord. D-114, passed 7-14-1947, effective 7-16-1947;
Ord. D-1730, passed 11-21-1994, effective 12-1-1994; Ord. D-1804, passed
5-12-1997, effective 5-22-1997)



§ 12.040  SAGINAW HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   The Saginaw Historic District Commission is hereby created and shall
have such members, powers, and duties as specified by law and in the city
zoning regulations.



(Prior Code, § 12.36)  (Ord. D-1541, passed 2-9-1987, effective 2-19-1987)



Cross-reference:



   Historic District Commission, see § 153.538



§ 12.041  SAGINAW RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation and membership.



      (1)   The Saginaw Riverfront Development Commission is hereby
created to recommend and advise City Council on the development of the
riverfront and implementation of the River Corridor Master Plan. Said
Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to City Council.



      (2)   The Commission shall be comprised of not more than 15 at
large members appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the City Council.
The at large members shall consist of a broad range of expertise to
contribute and promote riverfront development.



      (3)   The City Manager appointed by virtue of his or her
position and three staff persons appointed by the City Manager shall serve in
addition to the 15 at large members of the Commission as voting members of
the Commission for a total membership not to exceed 19 members.



   (B)   Qualifications of members. A member must be a citizen of the
United States and at least 18 years of age.



   (C)   Term. All terms shall commence April 1, 2000. Initially five
members shall be appointed for three years, five members for four years, and
the remaining five members for five years. Thereafter, the term of the
members shall be for five years.



   (D)   Compensation of members. The members of the Commission shall
receive no compensation for their services.



   (E)   Vacancy. A vacancy shall be declared by the Commission when a
member has died, has resigned, has been convicted of a felony, or has been
judicially declared to be mentally incompetent. A vacancy for an unexpired
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.



   (F)   Organization.



      (1)   The Commission shall select a Chairperson. Subcommittees
will be appointed by the Chairperson as needed. The Commission shall
establish its own bylaws and procedures. A quorum shall always be a majority
of those appointed and serving.



      (2)   The Commission shall meet, at a minimum, once monthly.



      (3)   The Chairperson of the Commission or the Chairperson’s
designee shall be responsible to communicate recommendations of the
Commission to City Council.



      (4)   The City Manager shall appoint a Secretary to perform
duties such as, but not limited to, keeping minutes, handling correspondence,
and issuing meeting notices, and may assign other support staff as needed.



   (G)   Purpose and responsibilities of Commission. The primary
purpose and responsibility of the Commission shall be, but not be limited to,
as follows:



      (1)   Recommending ways to promote, develop, and expand
Saginaw Riverfront Development to City Council;



      (2)   Implementing the Council-approved River Corridor Master
Plan;



      (3)   Assisting in obtaining and recommending grants and other
financing to aid in revitalization efforts;



      (4)   Reviewing and updating the Riverfront Corridor Master
Plan annually;



      (5)   Obtaining consultants to assist in riverfront
development by drafting RFPs, interviewing the consultants, and drafting the
consultant’s contract language, and submitting the proposed consultant’s
contracts to Council for approval;



      (6)   Recommending development projects, events, marketing
strategies, land use, and use of waterway system;



      (7)   Reporting to Council every six months of progress at a
Committee of the whole meeting; and



      (8)   Preparing riverfront development annual budgets for
Council approval.



(Prior Code, § 12.37)  (Ord. D-1853, passed 4-17-2000, effective 4-27-2000;
Ord. D-1858, passed 6-19-2000, effective 6-29-2000)



AUTHORITIES



§ 12.055  DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Establishment. In recognition of the fact that it is in the
best interest of the public to halt property value deterioration within the
downtown business district, to eliminate the causes of such deterioration,
and to promote economic growth within the downtown business district, a
Downtown Development Authority is hereby established pursuant to the Downtown
Development Authority Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L. §§ 125.1651
et seq., to be known as the City of Saginaw Downtown Development Authority.



   (B)   Powers, duties, procedures. The City of Saginaw Downtown
Development Authority shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the
Downtown Development Authority Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L. §§
125.1651 et seq. The Authority shall provide the City Planning Commission all
reports and studies regarding the formulation and implementation of project
development plans. The Authority shall secure the approval of development
plans from the Planning Commission and City Council prior to the
implementation of any plans thereof.



   (C)   Boundaries. The Authority shall exercise its powers within the
following described area within the City of Saginaw, County of Saginaw, State
of Michigan:



      Beginning at the northwesterly corner of Millard St., and S. Park
Ave., thence southeasterly along the western line of S. Park Ave. to the
southerly line of Burt St. to the easterly line of S. Fourth St., thence
northwesterly along the easterly line of S. Fourth St. to the southerly line
of Thompson St., thence northeasterly along the southerly line of Thompson
St. to the northerly line of Janes St. thence westerly along the northerly
line of Janes St. to the southeasterly corner of Lot 1, Block 56 Glasby, and
Gallagher’s Addition, thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 1 to
the northerly line of Lot 1, thence westerly along the northerly line of Lot
1 and Lot 1 extended to the northeasterly corner of Lot 2, Block 55 Glasby
and Gallagher’s Addition, thence westerly along the northerly line of Lot
3, Lot 2, Lot 1 and Lot 1 extended to the northeasterly corner of Lot 4,
Block 44 of Glasby and Gallagher’s Addition, thence westerly along the
northerly line of Lot 4 and Lot 3 to the centerline of Block 44, thence
northerly along the centerline of Block 44 and the centerline extended to the
centerline of Block 45 Glasby and Gallagher’s Addition, thence northerly
along the centerline of Block 45 and the centerline extended to the
centerline of Block 46 Glasby and Gallagher’s Addition which is also the
easterly line of Lot 1, thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 1 and
Lot 2 to the northerly line of Lot 2, thence westerly along the northerly
line of Lot 2 and Lot 2 extended to the westerly line of S. Second St. and N.
Second St., to the southerly line of Carroll St., thence westerly along the
southerly line of Carroll St. to the westerly line of N. Franklin St., thence
northerly along the westerly line of N. Franklin St. to the northerly line of
Astor St., thence easterly along the northerly line of Astor St. to the
easterly line of N. Second St., thence southerly along the easterly line of
N. Second St. to the northerly line of Lot 6, Block 109 Hoyt’s Northern
Addition, thence easterly along the northerly line of Lot 6 and Lot 14, Block
109 Hoyt’s Northern Addition to the western line of N. Third Ave., thence
easterly across N. Third Ave. to the northerly line of Lot 6, Block 114,
Hoyt’s Northern Addition thence northerly along the westerly line of Lots
13, 12, and 11, Block 114, Hoyt’s Northern Addition to the centerline of
the main track of the C & O Railroad, thence westerly along the centerline of
the main track of the C & O Railroad (being the track crossing the Saginaw
River) to the northerly limits of the City of Saginaw, thence westerly along
the northern limits of the City of Saginaw, thence westerly along the
northerly city limits to the centerline of the main track of the Grand Trunk
Railroad, thence southerly along the centerline of the main track of the
Grand Trunk Railroad to the southerly line of Davenport St., to the easterly
line of Schaefer St., thence southerly along the easterly line of Schaefer
St. to the southerly line of Congress Ave., thence westerly along the
southerly line of Congress St. to the westerly line of Stone St., thence
southerly along the westerly line of Stone St. to the southerly line of
Cooper St., thence westerly along the southerly line of Cooper St. to the
westerly line of N. Bond St. thence southerly and southwesterly along the
westerly line of N. Bond St. to the southerly line  of Remington St., thence
southeasterly along the southerly line of Remington St. to the westerly line
of N. Fayette St., thence southwesterly along the westerly line of N. Fayette
St., to the northwesterly line of Court St., thence northwesterly along the
northwesterly line of Court St. to the westerly line of S. Harrison St.,
thence southwesterly along the westerly line of S. Harrison St. to the
southerly line of Cass St., thence southeasterly along the southerly line of
Cass St. to the westerly line of S. Fayette St., thence southwesterly along
the westerly line of S. Fayette St. to the southern line of Stephens St.,
thence southeasterly along the southerly line of Stephens St. to the
southerly line of Rust Ave., thence easterly along the southerly line of Rust
Ave. to the easterly line of S. Washington Ave., thence northeasterly along
the easterly line of S. Washington Ave. to the southerly line of E. Holland
Ave., thence southeasterly along the southerly line of E. Holland Ave. to the
easterly line of S. Jefferson Ave., thence northeasterly along the easterly
line of S. Jefferson Ave. to the southerly line of Holden St., thence
easterly along the southerly line of Holden St. to the easterly line of Owen
St., thence northeasterly along the easterly line of Owen St. to the
southerly line of Meredith St. thence easterly along the southerly line of
Meredith St. to the easterly line of Howard St., thence northeasterly along
the easterly line of Howard St. to the northerly line of Hoyt St., thence
northwesterly along the northerly line of Hoyt St. to the easterly line of
Owen St., thence northeasterly along the easterly line of Owen St. to the
northerly line of Millard St., thence northeasterly along the northerly line
of Millard St. to the westerly line of S. Park St. which is the point of
beginning. Excepting from the above description Lot 1, Joseph Campau Farm
lying west of Michigan Ave. and south of Houghton Ave., Lots 2, 3, and 4,
Joseph Campau Farm lying west of Michigan Ave. also known as Bliss Park.



   (D)   Taxing power. The Authority may, with the approval of the City
Council, levy an ad valorem tax on the real and tangible personal property
not exempt by law and as finally equalized in the Downtown Development
Authority district described in division (C) above.



   (E)   Director; bond. Pursuant to the Downtown Development Authority
Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L. § 125.1655, as amended, the
Director of the City of Saginaw Downtown Development Authority shall, before
entering upon or performing any of the duties of the office, post a bond in
the penal sum of $20,000 payable to the Authority for the use and benefit of
the Authority, approved by the Board of the Authority, and filed with the
City Clerk. The premium on the bond shall be deemed an operating expense of
the Authority, payable from funds available to the Authority for expenses of
operation.



   (F)   Bylaws. The Board of the Authority shall develop and approve
bylaws for its operation. The bylaws and any amendments thereto shall be
filed with the City Council and if the City Council takes no action on said
bylaws or amendments thereto within 30 days after filing same, said bylaws or
amendments thereto shall be deemed approved.



(Prior Code, § 12.50)  (Ord. D-1376, passed 7-13-1981, effective 7-23-1981;
Ord. D-1703, passed 10-25-1993, effective 11-5-1993)



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION



§ 12.070  APPLICATION APPROVED.



   That the above mentioned application (see Council Proceedings p. 339,
1975) of Joseph P. Day and others dated June 10, 1975, and proposed Articles
of Incorporation attached thereto are amended by changing the name of the
corporation to “The Economic Development Corporation of the City of
Saginaw” and by providing that the appointments of Directors by the Mayor
of the city shall be with the advice and consent of the City Council and, as
amended, are hereby approved and shall read as follows.



(Prior Code, § 12.60)  (Ord. D-1163, passed 7-2-1975, effective 8-7-1975;
Ord. D-1289, passed 1-22-1979, effective 2-1-1979)



§ 12.071  ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION (NON-PROFIT).



   These Articles of Incorporation are signed and acknowledged by the
incorporators for the purpose of forming a non-profit corporation under the
provisions of the General Corporation Statute, Public Act 327 of 1931, being
M.C.L. §§ 450.98 et seq., and the Economic Development Corporations Act,
Public Act 338 of 1974, being M.C.L.§§ 125.1601 et seq., as follows.



   (A)   Article I. The name of the corporation is “The Economic
Development Corporation of the City of Saginaw”.



   (B)   Article II. The corporation is organized pursuant to the
Economic Development Corporations Act, Public Act 338 of 1974, being M.C.L.
§§ 125.1601 et seq. Its purposes will be to alleviate and prevent
conditions of unemployment, to assist and retain local industries and
commercial enterprises, to strengthen and revitalize the economy of the city,
to provide means and methods for the encouragement and assistance of
industrial and commercial enterprises in locating and expanding in the city,
to encourage the location and expansion of commercial enterprises in the
city, to more conveniently provide needed services and facilities of the
commercial enterprises to the city and its residents, and to accomplish the
foregoing to do the following:



      (1)   To take, accept, hold, and acquire by bequest, devise,
gift, purchase, loan, or lease any property, real, personal, or mixed,
whether tangible or intangible, without limitation as to kind, amount, or
value;



      (2)   To sell, convey, lease, rent, or make loans, grants, or
pledges of any such property, or any interest therein or proceeds therefrom,
and to invest and reinvest the principal thereof and receipts therefrom, if
any;



      (3)   To borrow money and to issue, sell, or pledge its
obligations and evidences of indebtedness and to mortgage its property to
secure the payment thereof;



      (4)   To aid, assist, and participate in clearing, rebuilding,
and rehabilitating blighted, deteriorated areas, or structures;



      (5)   To encourage, assist, and participate in the preparation
of plans, services, studies, and recommendations;



      (6)   To guarantee undertakings, contracts, or performances of
others;



      (7)   To encourage citizen participation in housing and
community improvements and improvement programs and to disseminate
information to the general public concerning the objectives and purposes of
the corporation;



      (8)   To hold, improve by construction or otherwise, develop,
clear, prepare, and dispose of real property;



      (9)   To aid, assist, and participate in the acquisition,
rehabilitation or construction of improvements upon real estate, dwelling
units, or other structures or matters incident thereto;



      (10)   To enter into contracts with public authorities,
individuals, corporations, and other organizations in connection therewith;



      (11)   To carry on any activity for the purposes above stated,
either directly or as agent, for or with public authorities, individuals,
corporations or other organizations, or in whole or in part through or by
means of public authorities, individuals, corporations, or other
organizations; and



      (12)   In general, and subject to such limitations and
conditions as are or may be prescribed by law, to exercise such other powers
which now are or hereafter may be conferred by law upon a corporation
organized under the above statutes and for the above purposes.



   (C)   Article III.



      (1)   Location of the first registered office is:



      (2)   The post office address of the first registered office
is:



   (D)   Article IV. The name of the first resident agent is:



   (E)   Article V.



      (1)   Said corporation is organized upon a non-stock basis.
The amount of assets which said corporation possesses is:



         (a)   Real property: none; and



         (b)   Personal property: none.



      (2)   The corporation will be financed from donations, gifts,
grants, and devises, either solicited or unsolicited, obtained from public
authorities, individuals, corporations, and other organizations, by earnings
from its activities, borrowings, and issuance of revenue bonds.



   (F)   Article VI. The names and places of business of each of the
incorporators are as follows:



   (G)   Article VII. The first Board of Directors shall be appointed
by the Mayor of the city, with the advice and consent of the City Council.



   (H)   Article VIII. The term of the corporate existence is perpetual.



   (I)   Article IX. The regulation of the internal affairs of the
corporation, including the distribution of assets on dissolution or final
liquidation, is placed entirely with the Board of Directors or their
successors, as provided in the bylaws of this corporation, subject, however,
to the provisions of the Economic Development Corporations Act, Public Act
338 of 1974, being M.C.L. §§ 125.1601 et seq.



   (J)   Article X.



      (1)   No part of the net earnings of the corporation shall
inure to the benefit of any member, trustee, officer, or director of the
corporation, or any private individual (except that reasonable compensation
may be paid for services rendered to or for the corporation affecting one or
more of its purposes), and no member, trustee, officer, or director of the
corporation or any private individual shall be entitled to share in the
distribution of any of the corporate assets on dissolution of the
corporation. No substantial part of the activities of the corporation shall
be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence
legislation, and the corporation shall not participate in or intervene in
(including the publication or distribution of statements) any political
campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office.



      (2)   Upon the dissolution of the corporation or the winding
up of its affairs, all property and assets of the corporation shall be
distributed exclusively to the city or its successor.



      (3)   We, the incorporators, sign our names this ______ day of
June, 1975.



STATE OF MICHIGAN



COUNTY OF SAGINAW ss.



   On this ______ day of June, 1975, before me personally appeared to me
known to be the persons described in and who executed the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged that they executed the same as their free act
and deed.



                                       �
�     Notary Public, Saginaw County, MI



                                       �
�     _____________________________



   My Commission Expires:



   (K)   Article XI.



      (1)   Officers. The officers of the corporation shall be
elected or appointed by the Board of Directors and shall consist of a
President, Secretary, Treasurer, and, if desired, a Chairperson of the Board,
one or more Vice Presidents, and such other officers as may from time to time
be determined by the Board of Directors. Two or more offices may be held by
the same person but an officer shall not execute, acknowledge, or verify an
instrument in more than one capacity if the instrument is required by law or
the articles or bylaws to be executed, acknowledged, or verified by two or
more officers.



      (2)   Election and term of office. The officers of the
corporation shall be elected or appointed annually by the Board of Directors.
If the election or appointment of officers shall not be held or made at such
meeting, such election or appointment shall be held or made as soon
thereafter as is convenient. Each officer so elected or appointed shall hold
office for the term of which he or she is elected or appointed and until his
or her successor is elected or appointed and qualified, or until his or her
resignation or removal.



      (3)   Removal. Any officer or agent elected or appointed by
the Board of Directors may be removed by the Board of Directors with or
without cause whenever in its judgment the best interests of the corporation
would be served thereby, but such removal shall be without prejudice to the
contract rights, if any, of the person so removed.



      (4)   Vacancies. A vacancy in any office because of death,
resignation, removal, disqualification, or otherwise may be filled at any
meeting of the Board of Directors for the unexpired portion of the term of
such office.



      (5)   President. The President shall be the chief executive
officer of the corporation, but he or she may from time to time delegate all
or any part of his or her duties to the Executive Vice President, if one is
elected or appointed, or to any Vice President; he or she shall preside at
all meetings of the Directors unless a Chairperson of the Board shall have
been elected or appointed; he or she shall have general and active management
of the business of the corporation, and shall see that all orders and
resolutions of the Board are carried into effect. He or she shall execute by
manual or facsimile signature all bonds, mortgages, conveyances, and other
instruments entered into pursuant to the powers of the corporation as set
forth in the Articles of Incorporation with the authority of the Board of
Directors. He or she shall be ex officio a member of all standing committees,
and shall have the general powers and duties of supervision and management of
the corporation.



      (6)   Chairperson of the Board. The Chairperson of the Board,
if one is elected, shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Directors,
and shall have and exercise such other authority as specifically granted to
him or her from time to time by a resolution of the Board of Directors.



      (7)   Vice Presidents. The Vice President shall perform such
duties as are delegated to him or her by the President, and he or she and the
other Vice Presidents in order of their seniority shall, in the absence or in
the event of the disability of the President, perform the duties and exercise
the powers of the President, and shall perform such other duties as the Board
of Directors shall prescribe.



      (8)   Secretary. The Secretary shall attend all meetings of
the Board and record all votes and the minutes of all proceedings in a book
to be kept for that purpose; and shall perform like duties for the standing
committees when required. He or she shall give, or cause to be given, notice
of all meetings of the Board of Directors, and shall perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors under whose supervision
he or she shall be. He or she shall keep in safe custody the seal of the
corporation, and when authorized by the Board affix the same to any
instrument requiring it, and when so affixed it shall be attested by his or
her manual or facsimile signature or by the manual or facsimile signature of
the Treasurer. He or she shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of his or
her duties. The Assistant Secretary, if one is elected, shall perform the
duties and exercise the power of the Secretary in his or her absence or in
the event of his or her disability.



      (9)   Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have the custody of the
corporate funds and securities and shall keep full and accurate accounts of
receipts and disbursements in books belonging to the corporation and shall
deposit all monies and other valuable effects in the name and to the credit
of the corporation in such depositories as may be designated by the Board of
Directors. He or she shall disburse the funds of the corporation as may be
ordered by the Board, taking proper vouchers for such disbursements, and
shall render to the President and Director, at the regular meetings of the
Board, or whenever they may require, an account of all his or her
transactions as Treasurer and of the financial condition of the corporation.
He or she shall give the corporation a bond if required by the Board of
Directors in a sum, and with one or more sureties satisfactory to the Board,
for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office, and for the
restoration to the corporation, in case of his or her death, resignation,
retirement, or removal from office, of all books, papers, vouchers, money,
and other property of whatever kind in his or her possession or under his or
her control belonging to the corporation. The Assistant Treasurer, if one is
elected, shall perform the duties and exercise the power of the Treasurer in
his or her absence or in the event of his or her disability.



      (10)   Delegation of duties of officers. In the absence of any
officer of the corporation, or for any other reason that the Board may deem
sufficient, the Board may delegate, from time to time and for such time as it
may deem appropriate, the powers or duties, or any of them, of such officer
to any other officer, or to any director, provided a majority of the Board
then in office concurs therein.



      (11)   Salaries. The officers of the corporation shall serve
without salary; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
preclude any officer from serving the corporation in any other capacity and
receiving compensation therefor.



(Prior Code, § 12.61)  (Ord. D-1163, passed 7-2-1975, effective 8-7-1975;
Ord. D-1289, passed 1-22-1979, effective 2-1-1979)



§ 12.072  INCORPORATION AUTHORIZED.



   A certified copy of these Articles of Incorporation are directed to be
filed with the Secretary of State in accordance with the Economic Development
Corporations Act, Public Act 338 of 1974, being M.C.L. §§ 125.1601 et seq.,
and the applicants in said above mentioned application are thereafter
authorized to complete Articles III, IV, and VI of said Articles of
Incorporation and to execute the same and to incorporate The Economic
Development Corporation of the City of Saginaw as a non-profit corporation
pursuant to the General Corporation Statute, Public Act 327 of 1931, being
M.C.L. §§ 450.98 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 12.62)  (Ord. D-1163, passed 7-2-1975, effective 8-7-1975)



§ 12.073  TIME LIMITATION FOR INCORPORATION.



   If incorporation of The Economic Development Corporation of the City of
Saginaw is not accomplished within 90 days from and after the effective date
of this subchapter, then in accordance with the Act, this subchapter shall be
of no further force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 12.63)  (Ord. D-1163, passed 7-2-1975, effective 8-7-1975)



URBAN REDEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS



§ 12.085  DESIGNATION OF SUPERVISORY AGENCY.



   The Director of Finance is designated as the person to exercise the
powers and perform the duties held by or incumbent upon a supervisory agency
pursuant to the Urban Redevelopment Corporations Law, Public Act 250 of 1991,
being M.C.L. §§ 125.901 et seq., as amended (hereinafter in this subchapter
referred to as “the statute”).



(Prior Code, § 12.75)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.086  PUBLIC SERVICES.



   The Department of Public Services shall assist officers and agents of
urban redevelopment corporations (hereinafter in this subchapter referred to
as redevelopment corporations) preparing development plans for areas within
the corporate limits of the city by:



   (A)   Preparing and furnishing appropriate checklists for
development plans;



   (B)   Furnishing a copy of any general standards of city and
neighborhood planning to which a development plan should conform, if any such
standards have been stated by the Planning Commission, pursuant to § 4 of
the statute (the Urban Redevelopment Corporations Law, Public Act 250 of
1941, being M.C.L. § 125.904), as necessary for its approval of a
development plan;



   (C)   Preparing and furnishing appropriate forms for application to
the City Planning Commission for approval of development plans and for
approval of amendments to approved development plans; and



   (D)   Advising as to the need of the proposed area for
rehabilitation or other action authorized by the statute and conformance of
the proposed development plan with the master plan of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.76)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.087  FILING OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   Application for approval of a development plan or an amendment to an
approved development plan shall be on the forms approved by the Department of
Public Services, filed with the City Planning Commission, and accompanied by
such fees as have been established pursuant to § 4 of the statute (the Urban
Redevelopment Corporations Law, Public Act 250 of 1941, being M.C.L. §
125.904).



(Prior Code, § 12.77)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.088  REPORT TO PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Department of Public Services shall review all development plans
and amendments filed by urban redevelopment corporations and report thereon
to the City Planning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 12.78)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.089  REVIEW AND APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The City Planning Commission shall review each development plan or
amendment filed with it and shall approve it if it shall determine:



   (A)   The area within which the development area is included is
substandard or insanitary or is polluted or neglected and that redevelopment
of the development area in accordance with the development plan is necessary
or advisable to effectuate the public purposes declared in § 2 of the
statute (the Urban Redevelopment Corporations Law, Public Act 250 of 1941,
being M.C.L. § 125.902);



   (B)   The development plan is in accord with the master plan of the
city;



   (C)   The development area is of sufficient size to allow its
redevelopment in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner;



   (D)   The various stages, if any, by which the development is
proposed to be constructed or undertaken, as stated in the development plan,
are practicable and in the public interest;



   (E)   Public facilities, including, but not limited to, school,
fire, police, transportation, park, playground, and recreation, are presently
adequate, or will be adequate, at the time that the development is ready for
use, to service the development area;



   (F)   The proposed changes, if any, in zoning ordinances or maps and
in streets and street levels, or any proposed street closings, are necessary
or desirable for the development and its protection against blighting
influences and for the city as a whole; and



   (G)   Upon data submitted by or on behalf of the redevelopment
corporation, or upon data otherwise available to the Planning Commission that
there will be available for occupation by families, if any, then occupying
dwelling accommodations in the development area similar accommodations at
substantially similar rentals in the development area or elsewhere in a
suitable location in the city, and that the carrying into effect of the
development plan will not cause undue hardship to such families.



(Prior Code, § 12.79)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.090  REVIEW BY DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.



   (A)   After a development plan or an amendment to a plan has been
approved by the City Planning Commission, it shall attach its certificate of
approval and file the plan or amendment with the Director of Finance,
together with any comments it may desire to make concerning it.



   (B)   The Director of Finance shall review the development plan or
amendment and shall attach his or her certificate of approval thereof if he
or she shall determine:



      (1)   The proposed method of financing the development is
feasible and that it is probable that the redevelopment corporation will be
able to finance or arrange to finance the development; and



      (2)   The persons who it is proposed will be active in or
associated with the management of the redevelopment corporation during a
period of at least one year from the date of the approval of the development
plan have sufficient ability and experience to cause the development to be
undertaken, consummated, and managed in a satisfactory manner.



(Prior Code, § 12.80)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.091  TRANSMISSION OF PLAN TO COUNCIL.



   After approval by the Director of Finance, a development plan or
amendment, with the attached certificates of approval, shall be transmitted
to the City Council together with any recommendations of the Director of
Finance.



(Prior Code, § 12.81)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



§ 12.092  ORDINANCE GRANTING TAX BENEFITS.



   Real property held by a redevelopment corporation may be granted the
tax benefits authorized by the statute, by ordinance adopted by Council.



(Prior Code, § 12.82)  (Ord. D-1139, passed 3-31-1975, effective 4-10-1975)



CHAPTER 13:  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE



Section



   13.01   Duties of officers



   13.02   General responsibilities of department and office heads



   13.03   Departmental records and reports



   13.04   Preservation of public records



   13.05   Cooperation between departments



   13.06   Delegation of duties



   13.07   Administrative staff



   13.08   Administrative committees



   13.09   Administrative Manual



   13.10   Payment of monies



   13.11   Approval of legal documents



   13.12   Safekeeping of securities



§ 13.01  DUTIES OF OFFICERS.



   Each officer shall perform all duties required of his or her office by
state law and the Charter and ordinances of the city, and such other duties
not in conflict therewith as may be required by the Manager.



(Prior Code, § 13.01)



§ 13.02  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT AND OFFICE HEADS.



   The heads of administrative departments and offices shall be ultimately
responsible to the City Manager for the effective activities assigned
thereto. The Manager may set aside any action taken by a department or office
head and may supersede the department or office head in the functions of the
office. In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any
department or office head, the Manager may designate an interim acting head
or perform personally the functions of the office. All department and office
heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular
field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the Manager, such new
practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public.



(Prior Code, § 13.02)  (Ord. D-1387, passed 3-22-1982, effective 4-1-1982)



§ 13.03  DEPARTMENTAL RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the
Manager at the end of each quarterly period, and an annual report shall also
be filed with the Manager within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year. A
summary of all such reports shall be made by the Manager and submitted to the
Council. Each department head shall establish a system of records and reports
in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control
of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to
the Manager.



(Prior Code, § 13.03)



§ 13.04  PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.



   Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of
all public records under his or her jurisdiction and shall provide a system
of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence,
or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed
or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of
the Manager.



(Prior Code, § 13.04)



§ 13.05  COOPERATION BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of every department, subject to such rules as the
Manager may prescribe, to furnish to any other department such service,
labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such department,
and as its own facilities permit, through the same procedure and subject to
the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred.



(Prior Code, § 13.05)



§ 13.06  DELEGATION OF DUTIES.



   The Manager may direct any department, division, or bureau to perform
the work for any other department, division, or bureau or may delegate to any
officer or employee any duties other than those established for the
department, division, or bureau to which he or she may be assigned.



(Prior Code, § 13.06)



§ 13.07  ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF.



   The heads of all departments and such other officers and employees as
the Manager may designate shall compose the administrative staff. The staff
shall meet at the call of the Manager and shall advise and consult with him
or her upon all matters affecting the welfare of the city or relating to any
or all departments.



(Prior Code, § 13.07)



§ 13.08  ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEES.



   The Manager is authorized to designate from the administrative service
such committees and the officers thereof as he or she may deem necessary for
the proper consideration of administrative problems. Such committees shall
meet at the request of the Manager and make such recommendation on matters
referred to them as they may deem to be for the best interest of the city.
Minutes of the meetings of any such committee shall be kept and filed by and
with the committee secretary.



(Prior Code, § 13.08)



§ 13.09  ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL.



   The Manager is authorized to issue such administrative regulations in
addition to those embodied in the Charter and this code as are necessary to
provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. The regulations so
issued shall comprise the Administrative Manual.



(Prior Code, § 13.09)



§ 13.10  PAYMENT OF MONIES.



   (A)   Generally. All monies belonging to the city shall be paid out
as authorized by the City Charter or action of the City Council by electronic
means or checks drawn by the Finance Director or his or her designee
authorized in writing to draw such checks or make payment by electronic means.



   (B)   Dishonored payments. Acceptance of any payment by check or
other means, including electronic transfer, is upon the condition that if the
payment is for any reason dishonored after being duly presented for payment,
there shall be an added service charge for any and all dishonored payments
made payable to the city and other remedies as allowed by law. The service
charge shall be established by City Council and posted in the Treasury
Division.



(Prior Code, § 13.10)  (Ord. D-1693, passed 5-3-1993, effective 5-13-1993;
Ord. D-1765, passed 5-15-1996, effective 5-25-1996; Ord. D-1813, passed
12-8-1997, effective 12-15-1997; Ord. D-1909, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001; Ord. D-1929, passed 8-12-2002, effective 8-22-2002; Ord. O-137,
passed 6-25-2012, effective 7-5-2012; Ord. O-168, passed 10-19-2015,
effective 10-29-2015)



§ 13.11  APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.



   The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to, and the City
Manager shall approve as to substance, and the City Attorney shall approve as
to form all legal instruments requiring the assent of the City unless
otherwise provided for by law, the Charter or ordinance, or by specific
authorization of the Council. In the absence or inability to act by any of
the above named persons, the Mayor Pro Tem may sign on behalf of the Mayor,
the Deputy Clerk may attest on behalf of the City Clerk, the Deputy City
Manager may approve as to substance on behalf of the City Manager, and the
Chief Assistant City Attorney may approve as to form on behalf of the City
Attorney. The approval of the City Manager and Attorney need not appear on
the instrument if the fact of such approval is reported in written
communication to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 13.12)  (Ord. D-1014, passed 1-3-1972, effective 1-13-1972;
Ord. D-1913, passed 2-25-2002, effective 3-7-2002)



§ 13.12  SAFEKEEPING OF SECURITIES.



   Securities owned by the city shall be kept in a deposit box in a
designated depository and admission to said box shall be in the presence of
any two of the following: the Mayor; the Mayor Pro Tem; the City Manager or
the Finance Director.



(Prior Code, § 13.13)  (Ord. D-1584, passed 2-20-1989, effective 3-2-1989)



CHAPTER 14:  FINANCE AND PURCHASING



Section



General Taxation Assessment Procedure



   14.01   Completion and review of roll



   14.02   Housing tax exemption not applicable



Purchasing, Contracting, and Selling Procedure



   14.30   Definitions



   14.31   General policy



   14.32   Written contract policy



   14.33   Vendors



   14.34   Bids and bonds



   14.35   Purchases under $2,000



   14.36   Preference for local bidders



   14.37   Sole source



   14.38   “Brand name or equal”



   14.39   Recycling



   14.40   Cooperative purchasing



   14.41   Emergency purchases



   14.42   Approval of purchase orders



   14.43   Inspection of materials



   14.44   Sale of property



   14.45   Validity of contracts



GENERAL TAXATION ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE



§ 14.01  COMPLETION AND REVIEW OF ROLL.



   (A)   On or before the second Monday in March of each year, the
Assessor shall make and certify an assessment roll of all property in the
city liable to taxation in accordance with the general tax laws of the state.



   (B)   The Board of Review shall meet on the second Monday in March
of each year to review and correct the assessment roll and shall be in
session for a minimum of 12 hours during the week.



   (C)   Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of
Review shall be published by the City Clerk at least ten days prior to the
second Monday in March. On or before the first Monday in April, the Board of
Review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided by general law.



(Prior Code, § 14.10)  (Ord. D-1241, passed 10-3-1977, effective 10-13-1977)



§ 14.02  HOUSING TAX EXEMPTION NOT APPLICABLE.



   (A)   The tax exemption established in M.C.L. § 125.1415A(1), as
amended, shall not apply to all or any class of housing projects, within the
city boundaries, to which the State Housing Development Authority Act, Public
Act 346 of 1966, being M.C.L. § 125.1415a applies.



   (B)   This section shall be effective as of December 31, 1968, to
all housing projects to which the State Housing Development Authority Act,
Public Act 346 of 1966, being M.C.L. § 125.1415a applies, whether or not
said project had heretofore been granted tax exemption.



(Prior Code, § 14.12)  (Ord. D-849, passed 12-23-1968, effective 1-2-1969)



PURCHASING, CONTRACTING, AND SELLING PROCEDURE



§ 14.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A situation that arises when an employee or
officer, or any member of his or her immediate family, his or her partner, or
an organization which employs or is about to employ any such individuals, has
a financial or other interest in or a tangible personal benefit from a firm
considered for a contract.



   EMERGENCY PURCHASE or EMERGENCY CONTRACT. An immediate public
improvement and purchase or contract of goods, professional or
non-professional services, supplies, materials, equipment, or construction
projects, whose immediate procurement is essential to the continuation of the
work of the department concerned.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. A vocation or occupation usually requiring
advanced education, special knowledge and skill, such as, but not limited to,
law or medical professions. The labor and skill involved in such a profession
is predominantly mental or intellectual, rather than physical or manual.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES include consultants hired for employee training.



   PROJECT. An endeavor undertaken with any and all goods, professional or
non-professional services, materials, and/or equipment necessary to obtain
full operation of any repair, replacement, or construction to the extent that
it is considered complete.



   PURCHASE OF $2,000 OR MORE. Any public improvement and purchase or
contract of goods, professional or non-professional services, supplies,
materials, equipment and constructions projects, whose procurement and/or
complete installation for intended use will exceed a cost of $2,000. Whenever
possible, purchases of items whose individual cost is less than $2,000, but
the extended cost of which is $2,000 or more, when purchased in quantity, is
considered a PURCHASE OF $2,000 OR MORE. Whenever possible, purchases of
items whose individual cost is less than $2,000, but when combined with other
items as part of the same project exceed $2,000, is considered a PURCHASE OF
$2,000 OR MORE.



   PURCHASE ORDER. A document authorizing a seller to deliver goods with
payment to be made later or a written authorization calling on the vendor or
supplier to furnish goods to the person ordering such. It constitutes an
offer, which is accepted when the vendor supplies the quantity and quality
ordered.



   PURCHASE ORDER CONTRACT. A standardized form contract on a form
acceptable to the Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, and City
Attorney, or his or her designee, for the acquisition of goods,
non-professional services, supplies, materials, equipment and the like,
whereby no bid specifications are required, or where the bid specifications
are so precisely detailed and defined that it is the purchaser’s belief
that such goods, non-professional services, supplies, materials, and
equipment will be provided without the necessity of a formal written contract.



   SAGINAW-BASED BUSINESS.



      (1)   The physical and economic relationship to Saginaw
determined by evidence of a building or office physically located in the city
and the payment of:



         (a)   City income taxes on the contractors’ net
profits; and



         (b)   City property taxes on a plant or office and
equipment such as is ordinarily required for the performance of the contract
bid.



      (2)   Any business physically located in the city which
operates under a city-authorized tax abatement or forgiveness program, or any
other city-authorized tax credit program, is still considered a SAGINAW-BASED
BUSINESS for purposes of this section.



   TRANSACTION. The act of conducting or carrying out a request for public
improvements, purchases, or contracts for goods, professional and
non-professional services, supplies, materials, equipment, and construction
projects.



   WRITTEN CONTRACT. An agreement in writing between two or more parties
for legal consideration, which creates an obligation to do or not to do a
particular thing and is enforceable by law. It is within the discretion of
the department head as to whether a formal written contract or a standardized
written purchase order contract is necessary for the purchase of supplies,
materials, and equipment or for professional or non-professional services to
be provided by the contractor. When considering the necessity of a formal
WRITTEN CONTRACT, the following may be considered:



      (1)   The contract is for a large sum of money;



      (2)   The city will incur obligations beyond the payment of
the purchase price;



      (3)   There is a need for a more detailed accountability or
description of scope of services by the contractor;



      (4)   The city may incur certain liability which needs
specific insurance requirements; and



      (5)   More detailed remedies are necessary in the event the
contractor breaches any of the terms and conditions of the contract.



(Prior Code, § 14.20)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.31  GENERAL POLICY.



   (A)   (1)   Procurement transactions shall be conducted in a
manner providing full and open competition. Competitive bids and/or quotes
for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained where practicable
and purchase orders and/or written contracts awarded to the lowest responsive
and responsible best bidders. Sealed bids shall be asked for in all
transactions involving the expenditure of $2,000 or more and the transaction
submitted to and approved by Council; provided that in cases where it is
clearly to the city’s advantage to contract without competitive bidding,
the Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, may so authorize.



      (2)   Acquisition of unnecessary or duplicative items must be
avoided. Consideration should be given to consolidating or breaking out
procurements to obtain more economical purchases.



   (B)   Professional services as defined in § 14.30 are not subject
to competitive bidding. Administrative Regulation No. 4-7 shall govern the
securing of professional services.



(Prior Code, § 14.21)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.32  WRITTEN CONTRACT POLICY.



   (A)   All contracts $2,000 or more must be in writing as required by
the Saginaw City Charter, Chapter 5, § 33.



   (B)   All contracts less than $2,000 concerning the purchase of
goods and services which cannot be fulfilled within one year of the contract,
because of the Statute of Frauds, must be in writing and signed by an
authorized signature by the party to be charged in order to be legally
enforceable.



   (C)   All written contracts must be approved by the City Attorney,
or his or her designee, as to form and the City Manager as to substance.



   (D)   All contracts $2,000 or more must be approved by City Council.
City Council may approve the contract in the annual budget as long as there
is a specific category line item and dollar amount listed in the annual
budget.



   (E)   All contracts less than $2,000 for professional services shall
be approved by the City Manager.



   (F)   All contracts less than $2,000 for goods, non-professional
services, supplies, materials, equipment, and construction projects shall be
purchased pursuant to § 14.34.



   (G)   Contracts involving the expenditure of federal funds shall,
where applicable, include those provisions set forth in 2 C.F.R. Part 200,
Appendix II, and pertaining to the following:



      (1)   Administrative, contractual, or legal remedies,
including possible sanctions and penalties, in instances where vendors
violate or breach contract terms;



      (2)   Termination for cause and convenience by the city,
including the manner by which it will be effected and the basis for any
settlement;



      (3)   Compliance with federal equal employment opportunity
laws and regulations;



      (4)   Compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act, being 40 U.S.C.
§§ 276a et seq., as supplemented by U.S. Department of Labor regulations,
and the Copeland “Anti-Kickback” Act, being 18 U.S.C. § 874;



      (5)   Compliance with the Contract Work Hours and Safety
Standards Act, being 40 U.S.C. Ch. 37;



      (6)   Compliance with federal rights to inventions laws and
regulations;



      (7)   Compliance with the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§
74.01, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.;



      (8)   Compliance with federal debarment and suspension laws
and regulations;



      (9)   Compliance with federal anti-lobbying laws and
regulations; and



      (10)   Compliance with § 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6962 with regard to the procurement of recovered
materials.



(Prior Code, § 14.22)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.33  VENDORS.



   (A)   Applications to be placed on city vendor database will be
submitted on a standardized form acceptable to the Purchasing Officer, or his
or her designee.



   (B)   Vendor application forms shall contain a statement requiring
that the applying vendor affirms that they do not discriminate against any
subcontractor, employee, or applicant on the basis of religion, race, creed,
color, age, national origin, sex, height, weight, disability, familial
status, or marital status.



   (C)   The Purchasing Office will be responsible for maintaining
vendor applications and for affirming that such completed applications are
subsequently added to the city’s vendor database. The city will approve
applications to be placed on the city’s vendor database without prejudice,
provided the aforementioned application form is complete.



   (D)   Vendors must be in the vendor database prior to issuance of a
purchase order, purchase order contract, written contract, and/or
professional or non-professional service.



   (E)   Any vendor entering into a purchase order, purchase order
contract, or written contract with the city who will be performing a
professional or non-professional service must also have provided to the
Purchasing Office, in advance of such services, certificates of insurance in
the types and amounts specified in the bid proposal. When such proof of
insurance is required, it is to be carried out within the following
parameters:



      (1)   Limits of liability and types of coverage required will
vary depending on the specifications involved in the project and the
indemnification needs of the city as set forth in such individual project
specifications;



      (2)   All certificates of insurance submitted to the
Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, must list the city as the
certificate holder, and be delivered, either by facsimile transmission or
mail, directly from the issuing agent;



      (3)   It is the responsibility of the insured contractor to
confirm that such proofs of insurance are on file with, and their form
acceptable to, the City Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee,
respective of the individual project specifications, prior to the issuance of
any purchase order, purchase order contract, written contract, or
professional service;



      (4)   Contracts will be awarded only to responsible vendors
possessing the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions
of the proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to such matters as
vendor integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past performance,
and financial and technical resources;



      (5)   Upon reward of a contract to a vendor, the department
head and/or his or her designee shall be responsible for maintaining an
updated certificate of insurance from the vendor for the length and/or term
of the contract or until completion of the project;



      (6)   The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall
ensure that all prequalified lists of vendors are current and include enough
qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition; and



      (7)   The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall
take affirmative steps to assure that small and minority businesses and
women’s business enterprises are in the vendor database and solicited
whenever they are potential sources.



(Prior Code, § 14.23)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.34  BIDS AND BONDS.



   (A)   Notices inviting sealed bids.



      (1)   Notices inviting sealed competitive bids in all cases
where required by this section, state or federal law or regulation, shall be
posted and publicly advertised at least five calendar days prior to the final
date for submitting bids in the City Clerk’s office, on the city’s cable
channel and website and/or through other alternative electronic bidding
resources as deemed by the Purchasing Officer to provide sufficient
notification to prospective bidders.



      (2)   Such notice shall indicate the goods, non-professional
services, supplies, materials, or equipment desired, or the construction
project to be undertaken, the place where bid specifications are available to
be obtained, and the date, time, and place the bids are due. Bid
specifications shall incorporate a clear and accurate description of the
technical requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured,
as well as identify all requirements which the bidders must fulfill and all
other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.



      (3)   In all cases where sealed bids are invited, the
Purchasing Office shall mail, and/or make available copies of bid forms,
sealed bid instructions, and specifications to at least three qualified
vendors or contractors where possible in order to obtain competitive bidding.
Bid lists shall be maintained by the Purchasing Officer, or his or her
designee, and shall be available for public inspection.



   (B)   Items not subject to competitive bidding.



      (1)   The City Council has determined that the following list
of goods, services, materials and supplies need not be subject to the
competitive bidding process, as it may not be to the city’s advantage to
contract these services through competitive bidding:



         (a)   Advertisements in periodicals;



         (b)   Payments to arbitrators;



         (c)   Firms providing deposition and court transcript
services;



         (d)   Dues and subscriptions;



         (e)   Medical services;



         (f)   Publications and copyrighted materials;



         (g)   Conferences, seminars, and classes;



         (h)   Travel expenses;



         (i)   Purchases covered by use of petty cash checks;



         (j)   Utility bills, including gas, electric, water,
sewage, and local telephone service;



         (k)   Television and radio advertisements;



         (l)   Fuel purchases;



         (m)   Employee benefits payments, including, but not
limited to, health, dental, vision, and life insurance, pension, and the
like; and



         (n)   U.S. Postal, United Parcel Service, Federal
Express, Airborne, or other delivery services; and



         (o)   Software license renewals.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (B), the City Manager
may recommend and approve payment and purchase of the above items without
submitting proposed invoices for such services to City Council as long as the
amounts are a specific category line item in the annual budget approved by
City Council, and the City Attorney, or his or her designee, and City Manager
have approved the contract as to form and substance.



   (C)   Bid, performance and labor and material bonds.



      (1)   Except as otherwise required by any applicable law or
regulation, any bid in excess of $100,000 shall be accompanied by a bid bond,
bank money order, certified check, or cashier’s check in the amount of 5%
of the total amount bid.



      (2)   Except as otherwise required by any applicable law or
regulation, a performance bond and a labor and material bond shall be
furnished with the contract documents executed by the bidder prior to the
award of each contract exceeding $50,000 for the construction, alteration, or
repair of any public building or public work or improvement as provided by
the Contractor’s Bond for Public Buildings or Works Act, Public Act 213 of
1963, being M.C.L. §§ 129.201 et seq., and each such bond shall be in an
amount equal to the total amount of the contract and executed by the
contractor and a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the
state.



   (D)   Disqualification of bidders.



      (1)   In addition to any other remedies authorized by law, a
bidder may be disqualified from bidding on any city contracts for up to three
years by the City Manager if it has been determined that the bidder, after an
award of a contract:



         (a)   Failed to provide the service or supplies required;



         (b)   Provided the service or supplies in an untimely
manner causing delays and interference;



         (c)   Lacked financial resources and the ability to
satisfactorily perform the contract or provide the services or supplies;



         (d)   Exhibited poor quality of performance in
delivering the service;



         (e)   Delivered poor quality of goods;



         (f)   Failed to comply with laws and ordinances relating
to contract performance;



         (g)   Defaulted on its quotations; and/or



         (h)   Such other action that leads the city to believe
that the contractor’s duties will not comport or comply with the bid
requirements.



      (2)   The City Manager may determine that the bidder has good
cause not to abide by the bid for reasons such as, but not limited to, honest
and reasonable mistake, contractual impossibility, or fraud or
misrepresentation by another.



      (3)   When the City Manager believes grounds for
disqualification exist, a notice shall be sent to the vendor of the proposed
disqualification indicating the grounds for disqualification and procedure
for requesting a hearing. If the vendor does not respond with a written
request for a hearing within 20 calendar days, the City Manager will issue a
final disqualification order without a hearing. If a hearing is requested,
the City Manager will select a designee for the purpose of taking testimony
from the contractor, or any other witnesses, concerning the decision to
disqualify said contractor. The recommendation of the designee shall be sent
to the City Manager for approval or denial. The decision of the City Manager
is final.



      (4)   Any contractor disqualified a second time for any of the
reasons set forth in division (D)(1) above may be permanently disqualified.



      (5)   Any contractor disqualified for fraudulent actions,
theft, or other similar criminal behavior may not be reinstated and may be
permanently disqualified.



      (6)   Such disqualification of a bidding contractor, company,
corporation, partnership, or firm, shall also apply to its successors,
assigns, officers, and/or principals.



      (7)   In addition to the foregoing, a bidder’s bid on any
city contract will be disqualified if at the time the bid is received by the
city, such bidder is in default to the city. A DEFAULT is defined as when the
city has placed the bidder on notice that monies are due and owing and the
bidder has failed to pay said debt or enter into a payment plan with the
city. Failure to file yearly income tax returns for taxable income under
$1,000 or file an income tax affidavit or failure to file corporate income
tax for city-based businesses, is considered to be a default. A debt that is
a subject of an administrative appeal or contested court case is not
considered to be in default.



   (E)   Form of bids.



      (1)   Bids submitted in response to any such notice shall be
submitted according to the following instructions or the bid may be
disqualified.



         (a)   Bids must be submitted on printed forms furnished
by the City Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee. Voluntary alternates
may be attached to the bid form, if necessary.



         (b)   Bids must be in ink or typewritten.



         (c)   Bids must contain bidder’s complete name,
address, and telephone number.



         (d)   Bids must be signed in ink by an authorized agent
of the bidder and dated.



         (e)   Bids must include delivery or completion time.



         (f)   If an addendum is issued, it must be signed,
dated, and returned with the bid.



         (g)   A bid bond, bank money order, certified check or
cashier’s check in the amount of 5% of the total amount bid must be
submitted with any bid in excess of $100,000, unless any applicable law or
regulation requires a different percentage.



         (h)   All erasures or corrections to pricing information
must be initialed and dated in ink by the same individual signing the bid.



         (i)   In case of a discrepancy between a unit price and
its extension, the unit price will be considered correct and the bid will be
recalculated to determine the amount bid. All addition errors will be
corrected and the total bid will be adjusted to reflect the corrections. All
unit prices must be stated where requested.



         (j)   All bids must be in the city purchasing office by
the date and time specified on the bid form.



         (k)   Each bid must be enclosed in a separate sealed
envelope with the bid number marked on the front.



      (2)   The city reserves the right to accept or reject any and
all bids, or parts thereof, and to waive any irregularities which do not
materially affect the bid document or otherwise conflict with statute or
ordinance. Any rejections of bids shall be made only if there is a sound
documented reason for same.



      (3)   By signature, the bidder acknowledges that the signer
has complete authority to execute the bid on behalf of the bidder and that
the bid is genuine and not collusive in any manner; and that no other bidders
were improperly induced to refrain from bidding or induced to submit a sham
bid; and that the bidder agrees to have withheld from any payment due them,
any amounts owed for taxes or other charges due the city; and that successful
bidders are subject to mandatory city income tax withholdings.



      (4)   All bids for supplies, materials, or other commodities
necessary for the regular operation of city functions must contain the
following language: “The vendor hereby agrees to maintain the bid price for
one year from the date of this bid, and the city reserves the right, in its
sole discretion, to purchase such additional supplies as it deems necessary
at said rate in an amount not to exceed the total contract price of the
original bid.”



   (F)   Opening of bids. Sealed bids shall be opened in public at the
time and place indicated on the bid form in the presence of an administrative
committee known as the Purchasing Committee, consisting of the Purchasing
Officer or his or her designee, City Manager or his or her designee, and the
City Clerk or his or her designee. The head of the department, or a
designated representative, shall also attend the bid opening when a bid is
opened which affects his or her department or division. At least three of
these persons shall be present at every bid opening.



   (G)   Review of bids.



      (1)   After opening the sealed bids, the Purchasing Officer,
or his or her designee, shall refer the bids to the affected department head
and/or his or her designee for tabulation and review. The Purchasing Officer,
or his or her designee, may require a reference check for suitability prior
to referring the bids to the affected department head.



      (2)   Upon review, the department head, or his or her
designee, shall complete a bid evaluation form and electronically submit the
tabulation to the Purchasing Committee for review and approval.



         (a)   The form must contain the following:



            1.   The bid number and date of opening;



            2.   The department name;



            3.   A brief description of each of the item(s) as
it appeared on the actual bid document;



            4.   The quantity requested, unit cost of each
item (where applicable), and extended cost;



            5.   The total amount submitted;



            6.   The name of the company submitting the bid;
and



            7.   The company the department head, or his or
her designee, recommends with an explanation for the recommendation.



         (b)   The city, where applicable, shall perform a cost
or price analysis in connection with every procurement involving the
expenditure of federal funds, as well as negotiate profit as a separate
element of the price for each such contract. Estimated costs for contracts
are allowable only to the extent such estimations are allowed under federal
regulation. In no case, may the cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage
of construction cost methods of contracting be used.



      (3)   The members of the Purchasing Committee will review the
recommended bid(s), and electronically give its approval/disapproval response
to the Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, or request further
clarification. In the event such explanation cannot be satisfied by
electronic means, the Purchasing Committee will formally meet to further
discuss the recommendation. A majority vote of the Purchasing Committee is
needed for approval.



      (4)   Upon approval of the recommended bid(s), the Purchasing
Officer, or his or her designee, shall instruct the department head, or his
or her designee, to prepare the appropriate Council Communication, which
shall be transmitted to the City Manager with his or her recommendation for
Council approval.



      (5)   The bids and the tabulation shall be available for
public inspection in the city purchasing office.



   (H)   Council action on sealed bids.



      (1)   Upon receipt of the tabulation of bids and the
recommendation from the City Manager, the Council may reject the bids or
determine the lowest and best bidder or bidders and award the transaction or
transactions accordingly.



      (2)   In case the Council determines that it is not possible
to choose between two or more suppliers of a commodity purchased regularly
because the bids are equal, the transaction may be awarded to the bidder who
was awarded the last transaction for the same commodity.



   (I)   Execution of transaction.



      (1)   Upon the approval of a transaction as hereinbefore
provided, the Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall execute the
transactions in the manner set forth in §§ 14.42 and 14.32 (where
applicable).



      (2)   (a)   All forms of acceptable cash, including bank
money orders, certified checks, or cashier’s checks accepted in accordance
with division (C)(1) above will be processed as follows.



            1.   Funds received from the top three
companies/bidders shall be deposited by the Finance Director’s office.



            2.   Funds received from all other bidders shall
be promptly returned to the respective companies following the opening of the
bid(s).



            3.   Upon approval by City Council of the
transaction/bid award, the Finance Director’s office will refund all funds
held and deposited by way of city check.



         (b)   If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter
into the transaction as herein provided, the deposit accompanying the bid
shall be forfeited and the Council may award the transaction to the next
lowest and best bidder, or reject all bids and re-advertise.



      (3)   All transactions shall be executed by the vendor and
Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee. For all transactions $2,000 or
more, the Purchasing Officer or his or her designee, must first have
Council’s approval before execution of the transaction.



      (4)   An executed copy of all written contracts shall be filed
with the City Clerk, or his or her designee. An executed copy of all purchase
order contracts shall be filed with the Purchasing Officer, or his or her
designee.



      (5)   The department head or his or her designee, with the
approval of the Finance Director and/or Budget Director, may allow for an
increase or decrease in cost not to exceed 10% of the total purchase order
contract for goods, non-professional services, supplies, materials,
equipment, and the like, due to unforeseen circumstances, necessity or
redundancy not contemplated in the bid. Such increase or decrease shall be
mutually agreed upon in writing between the department head or his or her
designee (with the approval of the Finance Director and/or Budget Director)
and the contractor. Upon such authorization, a change order shall be
processed by the purchasing office to effectuate the increase or decrease.
Any and all bids/purchase order contracts for goods, non-professional
services, supplies, materials, equipment, and the like, shall contain the
following language:



“The Department Head or his or her designee, with the approval of the
Finance Director and/or Budget Director, may allow for an increase or
decrease of this purchase order contract/written contract by 10% of the total
purchase order due to unforeseen circumstances, necessity or redundancy not
contemplated in the bid. Such increase or decrease shall be mutually agreed
upon in writing with the contractor. In no event, however, will this purchase
order contract/written contract be increased over 10% of the total purchase
order without the prior approval of City Council.”



      (6)   The City Engineer or his or her designee, with the
approval of the Finance Director and/or Budget Director, may allow for an
increase or decrease in cost not to exceed 20% of the total contract for
construction projects for building, altering, repairing, improving, or
demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public property due to unforeseen circumstances, necessity or
redundancy not contemplated in the bid, or an expansion or reduction of the
scope of services due to unforeseen conditions. Such increase or decrease
shall be mutually agreed upon in writing between the City Engineer or his or
her designee (with the approval of the Finance Director and/or Budget
Director) and the contractor. Upon such authorization, a change order shall
be processed by the purchasing office to effectuate the increase or decrease.
Any and all bids shall contain the following language:



“The City Engineer or his or her designee, with the approval of the Finance
Director and/or Budget Director, may allow for an increase or decrease of
this purchase order contract/written contract by 20% of the total purchase
order due to unforeseen circumstances, necessity, or redundancy not
contemplated in the bid. Such increase or decrease shall be mutually agreed
upon in writing with the contractor. In no event, however, will this purchase
order contract/written contract be increased over 20% of the total purchase
order without the prior approval of City Council.”



   (J)   Records. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall
maintain records sufficient to detail the history of the procurement.



   (K)   Conflict of interest. No employee or officer of the city may
participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract if he or
she has a real or apparent conflict of interest.



(Prior Code, § 14.24)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-132, passed 10-24-2011, effective 11-3-2011; Ord. O-193, passed
7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.35  PURCHASES UNDER $2,000.



   (A)   All public improvements and purchases for goods,
non-professional services, professional services, supplies, materials,
equipment and construction projects, the cost of which is less than $2,000,
may be made in the open market, without official notice and irrespective of
the procedure prescribed for purchases over $2,000.



   (B)   All open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based
on at least three competitive bids solicited by telephone, fax, electronic
mail, or by direct mail request from prospective vendors. The Purchasing
Officer, or his or her designee, shall award open market purchases to the
lowest and/or best bidder and shall keep a record of all such purchases and
the bids submitted in competition thereon. These records shall be available
for public inspection in the city purchasing office.



   (C)   To the extent practicable, such purchases shall be distributed
equitably among qualified vendors.



(Prior Code, § 14.25)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.36  PREFERENCE FOR LOCAL BIDDERS.



   (A)   (1)   If the lowest bidder is not a Saginaw-based bidder,
as defined above, any Saginaw-based bidder with a bid within 5% of the lowest
bid shall be deemed the lowest bidder if it agrees to reduce its bid to match
the bid of the lowest bidder.  Such a bidder will remain bound to all other
terms of their original bid.



      (2)   A lowered bid by a Saginaw-based business which is
premised upon, in whole or in part, changes to or variances to the bid
specifications, contract requirements, or scope of work, shall be considered
non-responsive and will not be considered.



   (B)   If such a Saginaw-based business refuses to reduce its bid to
match the lowest bid, then the next lowest responsive and responsible
Saginaw-based business with a bid within 5% of the lowest bid shall be deemed
the lowest bidder, if it agrees to reduce its bid to match the bid of the
lowest bidder. Such a bidder will remain bound to all other terms of their
original bid.



   (C)   If no responsive and responsible Saginaw-based businesses
within 5% of the lowest bid agree to reduce their bids then the contract
shall be awarded to the person or business with the lowest, most responsive,
and responsible bid.



   (D)   In the event of a tie between two or more Saginaw-based
businesses, where all other factors are equal, the award of the bid shall be
by coin toss conducted by the Purchasing Officer or his or her designee.



   (E)   No contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet
in any manner that permits 50% or more of the dollar value of the contract to
be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not meet the
definition of “Saginaw-based business”.



   (F)   The section shall not waive or constrain, in any manner, the
right and prerogative of the city to reject any and all bids or proposals
from any Saginaw-based business which fails to meet the requirements of any
other division of this section, or to reject a bid which is in any way
incomplete, irregular, not responsive or not responsible.



   (G)   Local preferences shall not be applied in cases of
procurements funded, even in part, with federal dollars, unless such
procurement is for architectural and engineering services. When contracting
for architectural and engineering services, local preference may be a
selection criterion provided its application leaves an appropriate number of
qualified vendors, given the nature and size of the project, to complete the
contract.



(Prior Code, § 14.26)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-132, passed 10-24-2011, effective 11-3-2011; Ord. O-193, passed
7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017; Ord. O-208, passed 3-18-2019, effective
3-28-2019)



§ 14.37  SOLE SOURCE.



   In the event there is only one vendor capable of providing a particular
product or service, then the competitive bidding procedures outlined in this
subchapter may be waived by the Purchasing Committee. Whenever a department
head or his or her designee determines that he or she must purchase goods or
services from a “sole source” vendor, he or she must document why only
one company or individual is capable of providing the goods or services
required. This documentation will then be forwarded to the Purchasing
Committee for approval. Purchasing Committee approval is not required for
purchases under $2,000; purchases over $2,000 must have Purchasing Committee
approval.



(Prior Code, § 14.27)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.38  “BRAND NAME OR EQUAL”.



   (A) The use of “brand name or equal” specifications may be used
when the department head or his or her designee determines that use of a
“brand name or equal” specification is in the city’s best interest.



   (B)   (1)   The department head or his or her designee shall seek
to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be
obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price
competition is practicable.



      (2)   If only one source can supply the requirement, the
procurement shall be made under § 14.37.



(Prior Code, § 14.28)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.39  RECYCLING.



   In recognition of the continuing need to be environmentally
responsible, recycled goods should be considered when deemed appropriate and
fiscally responsible.



(Prior Code, § 14.29)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.40  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The City Manager or his or her designee, upon City Council approval, is
authorized to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing
plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby.



(Prior Code, § 14.30)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.41  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   In the case of an emergency, any department head or his or her designee
may purchase or contract directly for any public improvements, goods,
non-professional services, supplies, materials, equipment, and construction
projects, whose immediate procurement is essential to the continuance of the
work of the department concerned. Wherever possible, the department head or
his or her designee shall contact the purchasing office for authorization
prior to making any emergency purchases. A record of emergency purchase order
authorizations shall be available for public inspection in the purchasing
office. All purchases or contracts shall be submitted to City Council after
the fact for subsequent ratification and/or approval for all purchases $2,000
or more.



(Prior Code, § 14.31)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.42  APPROVAL OF PURCHASE ORDERS.



   The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall approve and
execute all purchase orders, purchase order contracts, and emergency
purchases.



(Prior Code, § 14.32)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.43  INSPECTION OF MATERIALS.



   The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all goods,
materials, supplies, and equipment shall rest with the ordering department.



(Prior Code, § 14.33)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.44  SALE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   Whenever any city property, real or personal, is not needed
for corporate or public purposes, the same may be sold.



   (B)   Real and personal property not exceeding $1,500 in value may,
upon approval of the City Manager, either be sold for cash by the Purchasing
Officer or his or her designee, after receiving quotations or competitive
bids therefore for the best price obtainable, or traded to the vendor of new
equipment replacing it.



   (C)   Personal property with a value in excess of $1,500, may be
sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids, as provided in §
14.34, inclusive, of this subchapter, and after approval of the sale has been
given by the City Council; or such personal property may be traded to the
vendor of the new equipment replacing it, upon approval of the City Manager.



   (D)   In addition to the provisions above made for the sale of
personal property, in general, the City Manager may:



      (1)   Authorize the sale of goods or supplies which have
become obsolete, worn out or scrapped, unsuitable for use by the city, or
otherwise lawfully acquired by the city and having no value or use to the
city at private or public auction, including on-line auction services. In
this regard, the department head, and/or his or her designee, with the
assistance of the Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall explore
the various services available and select a public auction service which
shall dispose of such personal property in the most efficient and cost
effective means for the city. All such sales under this section shall be made
to the highest bidder, subject, however, to the published terms of such sale;



      (2)   Authorize the donation of goods or supplies which have
become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped, unsuitable for use by the city, or
otherwise having no value or use, to one or more charitable organizations
having need and/or use of the defunct item(s), giving first preference to
those Saginaw-based organizations; and



      (3)   Authorize the transfer of surplus supplies or equipment
within any department in order to maximize the use and benefit thereof.



   (E)   (1)   Real property exceeding $1,500, shall be sold in the
same manner as personal property over $1,500 in value, unless the Council
shall determine that it is clearly to the city’s advantage either to sell
such property without competitive bidding or to exchange the same for other
land required by the city.



      (2)   The sale of land which shall have been approved by
three-fifths of the city electors voting thereon at any general or special
election, and property sold pursuant to federal and state statute and
regulations, shall not be subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (F)   Any and all tax reverted properties may be acquired and
disposed of pursuant to state law and administrative regulation established
by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 14.34)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 14.45  VALIDITY OF CONTRACTS.



   The foregoing provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to
establish, in general, the procedure to be followed in purchases and
contracts by the city, but shall not be held to be mandatory, except those
provisions which may be contained in state or federal law or in the Charter.
Any contract approved by the Council and not prohibited by state or federal
law or the provisions of the Charter, shall be valid even though one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter may not have been observed. Only a
majority of City Council can authorize and bind the city for any contract
$2,000 or more.



(Prior Code, § 14.35)  (Ord. O-82, passed 6-1-2009, effective 6-11-2009;
Ord. O-193, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



CHAPTER 15:  PERSONNEL



Section



   15.01   Departmental authority over employees



   15.02   Adherence to merit principle



   15.03   Criminal history investigation of applicants for city
employment



§ 15.01  DEPARTMENTAL AUTHORITY OVER EMPLOYEES.



   Each department shall have authority to appoint and remove, subject to
the personnel regulations, all subordinates under him or her.



(Prior Code, § 15.01)



§ 15.02  ADHERENCE TO MERIT PRINCIPLE.



   All employees are required to strictly adhere to the personnel
regulations in order that the merit principle of employment, as provided for
in the Charter, shall be maintained.



(Prior Code, § 15.02)



§ 15.03  CRIMINAL HISTORY INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   The city police shall be allowed to run a complete criminal
history on the final candidate for a position for city employment after the
candidate has met all other qualifications for the position prior to being
hired. The criminal history shall be seen only upon request by the City
Personnel Administrator and upon the candidate’s written authorization to
release such information to the city.



   (B)   As used in this section, CITY EMPLOYMENT shall mean any
position whereby the individual, if hired, would be an employee of the city
or any of its agencies, commissions, boards, or departments, as the term
“employee” is used or defined within the meaning of the Worker’s
Disability Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L. §§
418.101 et seq., as amended.



(Prior Code, § 15.03)  (Ord. D-1590, passed 5-1-1989, effective 5-11-1989)



CHAPTER 16:  POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM



Section



   16.01   Retirement system established; name



   16.02   Definitions



   16.03   Retirement system continued



   16.04   Board of Trustees; generally



   16.05   Records; annual report



   16.06   Experience tables; regular interest; adoption of



   16.07   Membership of retirement system



   16.08   Credited service



   16.09   Voluntary retirement



   16.10   Normal retirement



   16.11   Deferred retirement



   16.12   Retirement pension



   16.13   Certain retirement pension adjustments



   16.14   Pension options



   16.15   Non-duty disability retirement



   16.16   Non-duty disability pension



   16.17   Duty disability retirement



   16.18   Duty disability pension



   16.19   Non-duty death



   16.20   Death occurring in the line of duty



   16.21   Re-examination of disability retirants



   16.22   Worker’s compensation offset



   16.23   Refund of accumulated contributions



   16.24   Member’s Deposit Fund



   16.25   Pension Reserve Fund



   16.26   Expense Fund



   16.27   Management of funds



   16.28   Income Fund



   16.29   Method of making payments



   16.30   Assignments prohibited



   16.31   Errors



   16.32   Protection against fraud



   16.33   One-time increase in annual pension benefit for certain
retirants and beneficiaries



 



   16.99   Penalty



§ 16.01  RETIREMENT SYSTEM ESTABLISHED; NAME.



   (A)   The City of Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters
Retirement System is hereby established under this chapter.



   (B)   All business of the retirement system shall be transacted in
the name of the City of Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters Retirement
System.



(Prior Code, § 16.01)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Interpretation. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine gender and words of the singular number with respect to persons
shall include the plural number, and vice versa.



   (B)   Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this
chapter, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context,
shall have the following meanings:



      ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from
the compensation of a member and credited to his or her individual account in
the Member’s Deposit Fund, together with regular interest thereon.



      ACTUARIAL AGE. The chronological whole number age nearest the
actual chronological age of the individual, e.g., a person who is in the age
range of 49 years, six months and one day to 50 years and six months has an
actuarial age of 50 years.



      BENEFICIARY. Any person except a retiree who is in receipt of or
who has entitlement to a pension or other benefit payable or to be paid by
the retirement system.



      BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD. The Board of Trustees provided for in
this chapter.



      CITY. The City of Saginaw.



      COMPENSATION. The salary paid a member by the city for services
rendered by him or her as a police officer or firefighter.



      COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Saginaw.



      CREDITED SERVICE. The service credited to a member by the Board
of Trustees to the extent provided in this chapter.



      FINAL AVERAGE SALARY.



         (a)   The average of the annual compensations paid a
member during any three years he or she may select within the period of ten
consecutive years of his or her credited service immediately preceding the
date of termination of his or her last employment with the city as a police
officer or firefighter; provided, however, that effective (July 1, 1979, in
the case of a firefighter member) (January 1, 1982, in the case of a member
who is a police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, or police
chief); or (July 1, 1982, in the case of a member who is a police patrol
officer) there shall be included in the computation of final average salary
the value of accumulated vacation only and not the value of accumulated sick
leave; and further provided that effective January 1, 1985, through March 31,
1985, in the case of a member who is a police sergeant, police lieutenant, or
police captain there shall be included in the computation of final average
salary the value of accumulated sick leave up to 90 days and accumulated
vacation. In the case of a Police Chief who is employed on January 1, 1996
and retires on January 2, 1996, there shall be included in the computation of
final average salary, the value of accumulated sick leave up to 60 days and
accumulated vacation. In the case of a Deputy Police Chief who is employed
September 14, 1997 and retires September 15, 1997, there shall be included in
the computation of final average salary, the value of one-half of the
accumulated sick leave up to 90 days and accumulated vacation. If he or she
has less than three years of credited service, his or her final average
salary shall be the average of his or her annual rates of compensation for
his or her total period of credited service. If a member is forced to retire
because of an injury arising out of the performance of his or her duties, and
if he or she has received less than his or her full salary at any time during
his or her final three years of employment due to said injury, his or her
full annual compensation rate shall be used in computing his or her final
average salary if this is to his or her advantage.



         (b)   If a firefighter member retires on or after July
1, 1983, or a police sergeant, lieutenant, or police captain member retires
on or after September 19, 1984, or a police patrol officer member retires on
or after July 1, 1990, and if he or she has received less than his or her
full salary at any time during the three years chosen for computation of his
or her final average salary due to an on-the-job injury, his or her full
annual compensation rate shall be used in computing his or her final average
salary if this is to his or her advantage.



      FINAL COMPENSATION. A member’s annual rate of compensation at
the time his or her employment with the city as a police officer or
firefighter last terminates.



      FIREFIGHTER.



         (a)   Any employee in the Fire Department of the city
who holds the rank of firefighter or higher rank.



         (b)   The term FIREFIGHTER shall not include:



            1.   Any person who is privately employed as a
firefighter;



            2.   Any person who is temporarily employed as a
firefighter for an emergency;



            3.   Any civilian employee in the Fire Department,
provided however that on or after July 1, 1988, civilians in the position of
Fire Mechanic and Fire Apparatus Supervision shall be included in the term
FIREFIGHTER; and



            4.   Any member of the fire auxiliary corps or its
equivalent.



      MEMBER. Any person who is included in the membership of the
retirement system.



      NEW MEMBER. Any member who first entered or enters the employ of
the city as a police officer or firefighter after June 30, 1947.



      ORIGINAL MEMBER. Any member who first entered the employ of the
city as a police officer or firefighter prior to July 1, 1947.



      PENSION. An annual amount payable by the retirement system
throughout the future natural life of a person or for a temporary period as
provided in this chapter. All PENSIONS shall be payable in equal installments
as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time determine.



      PENSION RESERVE. The present value of all payments to be made on
account of any pension. Such PENSION RESERVE shall be computed upon the basis
of such mortality and other tables of experience and regular interest as the
Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt.



      POLICE OFFICER.



      (1)   Any employee of the Police Department of the city who
holds the rank of patrol officer or higher rank.



      (2)   The term POLICE OFFICER shall not include:



         (a)   Any person who is privately employed as a police
officer;



         (b)   Any person who is temporarily employed as a police
officer or firefighter for an emergency;



         (c)   Any civilian employee in the Police Department; or



         (d)   Any member of the police auxiliary corps or its
equivalent.



      REGULAR INTEREST. Such rate or rates of interest per annum,
compounded annually as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt.



      RETIREMENT. Any member who retires with a pension payable by the
retirement system.



      RETIREMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM. The City of Saginaw Police Officers
and Firefighters Retirement System, established in this chapter.



      SERVICE. Service rendered to the city as a police officer or
firefighter.



      SPOUSE. The person to whom the retiree was legally married on
both the effective date of his or her retirement and the date of his or her
death.



      TOTAL ACTUARIAL COST. Defined and calculated as follows.



         (a)   Section 16.08(A)(3) of the Saginaw Code of
Ordinances states that, “Effective July 1, 1996, any police officer who was
a member on or after this date shall be allowed to purchase prior law
enforcement service time up to five years with such member paying the total
actuarial cost.” The following procedure shall be used to calculate the
total actuarial cost of service purchased under this section.



            1.   The present value of the expected benefits to
be paid to the member from the system shall be calculated as of the
member’s service credit purchase date, without regard to the purchase of
service.



            2.   The present value of the expected benefits to
be paid to the member from the system shall be calculated as of the
member’s service credit purchase date, including the effect of the purchase
of service. The additional service credit will be used in both calculating
the amount of benefit and in determining the earliest date benefits will
commence.



            3.   The cost of the service credit purchase to
the member, as of the service credit purchase date, shall be the difference
between divisions (a)2. and (a)1. above.



         (b)   The calculation of the above amounts shall be
based on the benefit formula in effect as of the service credit purchase
date, and the following assumptions:



            1.   Interest discount factor: the investment
return (net of expenses) used in the most recently published annual actuarial
valuation of the system;



            2.   Mortality table: a blend of 50% of the male
rates and 50% of the female rates of the mortality table used in the most
recently published annual actuarial valuation of the system;



            3.   Benefit commencement date: the date of
earliest retirement, assuming continuous accrual of eligibility service from
the service credit purchase date;



            4.   Amount of expected benefit: calculated as of
the earliest retirement date. If the member is not eligible to retire at the
service purchase date the expected benefit will be based on service and final
average salary (FAS) projected to the earliest retirement date. FAS for this
purpose will be projected from FAS as of the service purchase date using the
base (economic) annual rate of pay increase from the most recently published
annual actuarial valuation of the system. If the member is eligible to retire
as of the service purchase date, actual service and FAS as of the service
purchase date shall be used; and



            5.   Form of payment: 60% joint and survivor.
Actual spousal birth date will be used if available. If unavailable, or the
participant is unmarried at the time of service purchase, the female spouse
is assumed to be three years younger than the male spouse.



         (c)   Two examples of the service credit purchase
calculation are shown in the following divisions:



            1.   Example 1. In this example, the benefit
formula is 2.6% times final average salary (FAS) times the first 25 years of
service, plus 2.75% times FAS service in excess of 25 years. A member can
retire after 20 years of service, regardless of age.



 

Data as of Service Credit Purchase Date


Member’s date of birth
 
12-1-1963


Spouse’s date of birth
 
2-1-1964


Service purchase date (SPD)
 
2-1-2007


Member’s age at SPD
 
43.13


Service at SPD
 
16.00


Final average salary at SPD:
 
$62,000



 



               a.   The member wishes to purchase five
years of prior law enforcement time.



 



Step 1: Calculate Expected Benefit at Earliest Retirement Age Before Service
Purchase


Assuming continuous employment, the earliest date the member can retire is
2-1-2011.


Earliest retirement date (ERD)
 
2-1-2011


Age at ERD
 
47.13


Service at ERD
 
20.00


FAS at ERD
 
$74,646.22


Bi-weekly benefit at ERD
 
$1,492.92


Present value as of SPD
 
$402,754




 



 



Step 2: Calculate Expected Benefit at Earliest Retirement Age After Service
Purchase


By purchasing five years, the member is eligible to retire on the service
purchase date.


Earliest retirement date (ERD)
 
2-1-2007


Age at ERD
 
43.13


Service at ERD
 
21.00


FAS at ERD
 
$62,000


Bi-weekly benefit at ERD
 
$1,302


Present value as of SPD
 
$468,251




 



 

Step 3: Calculate the Cost of the Service Purchase


$468,251 minus $402,754 = $65,497



 



               b.   Comment: in this example, the benefit
calculated at ERD before the service purchase is larger than the bi-weekly
benefit calculated after the service purchase (due to the projected increase
in the FAS). However, the present value in Step 2 is larger than in Step 1
because benefits are expected to be paid out four years longer than in Step 1.



            2.   Example 2: In this example, the benefit
formula is 2.6% times final average salary (FAS) times the first 25 years of
service, plus 2.75% times FAS service in excess of 25 years. A member can
retire after 20 years of service, regardless of age.



 

Data as of Service Credit Purchase Date


Member’s date of birth
 
1-1-1961


Spouse’s date of birth
 
8-1-1960


Service purchase date (SPD)
 
5-1-2004


Member’s age at SPD
 
43.33


Service at SPD
 
20.00


Final average salary at SPD
 
$68,000



 



               a.   The member wishes to purchase five
years of prior law enforcement time.



 



Step 1: Calculate Expected Benefit at Earliest Retirement Age Before Service
Purchase


The member is eligible to retire on the SPD, so this is the ERD for this
calculation.


Earliest retirement date (ERD)
 
5-1-2004


Age at ERD
 
43.33


Service at ERD
 
20.00


FAS at ERD
 
$68,000


Bi-weekly benefit at ERD
 
$1,360


Present value as of SPD
 
$444,815




 



 



Step 2: Calculate Expected Benefit at Earliest Retirement Age After Service
Purchase


Since SPD = ERD the purchased service increases the annuity but does not
change the retirement date.


Earliest retirement date (ERD)
 
5-1-2004


Age at ERD
 
43.33


Service at ERD
 
25.00


FAS at ERD
 
$68,000


Bi-weekly benefit at ERD
 
$1,700


Present value as of SPD
 
$556,019




 



 

Step 3: Calculate the Cost of the Service Purchase


$556,019 minus $444,815.00 = $111,204



 



               b.   Comment: in this example, the member
was eligible to retire on the service purchase date before the purchase of
service.



      VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE.



      (1)   Age 52 years for firefighters and age 52 years for
police officers; provided, that in the case of an original member, VOLUNTARY
RETIREMENT AGE means age 52 years for firefighters and age 52 years for
police officers or the age at which he or she acquires 25 years of credited
service, whichever occurs first.



         (a)   1.   The above-stated VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE
notwithstanding, from July 1, 1985, through June 30, 1990, firefighter
members may elect “voluntary retirement” at age 50 years and receive a
pension calculated in all respects as if they had retired at age 52 years.



            2.   “In all respects” does not include
anticipated salary increases after date of retirement to age 52. Provided,
however, that from July 1, 1990, onward VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE for
firefighters shall again become age 52 years as hereinbefore defined.



         (b)   This stated VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE
notwithstanding, from July 1, 1988, a firefighter may elect voluntary
retirement at actuarial age 50 and the acquirement of 20 years of credited
service.



         (c)   The above-stated VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE
notwithstanding, from July 1, 1985, a member who is a police patrol officer
may elect “voluntary retirement” at the age at which he or she acquires
20 years of credited service.



         (d)   The above-stated VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE
notwithstanding, from December 12, 1984, a member who is a police sergeant,
police lieutenant, or police captain on December 12, 1984, but not a member
who becomes a member of the police command officers bargaining group after
December 12, 1984, may elect “voluntary retirement” at the age at which
her or she acquires 20 years of credited service.



         (e)   The above-stated VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE
notwithstanding, a member who is a Deputy Police Chief on October 10, 2002
and who retires on October 11, 2002 shall be allowed to retire with 16 years
and 11 months of service, and a member who is a Deputy Police Chief on
January 20, 2005 and who retires on January 21, 2005 shall be allowed to
retire with 19 years and one month of service.



(Prior Code, § 16.02)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006; Ord. O-77, passed
3-9-2009, effective 3-19-2009)



§ 16.03  RETIREMENT SYSTEM CONTINUED.



   (A)   The City of Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters
Retirement System, established by Chapter XVI of the Charter of the city, as
amended, and since maintained and now existing pursuant to said chapter is
hereby, in this chapter, designated and continued as the City of Saginaw
Police Officers and Firefighters Retirement System including, except as
otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the continuing of the existing
membership, service credits, funds, powers, and obligations.



   (B)   As of January 1, 2016, or as soon thereafter as the transfer
to the Michigan Employee Retirement System (“MERS”) of all assets takes
place, the Board of Trustees established by the aforesaid Chapter XVI, as
amended, and now existing pursuant thereto shall cease to exist. The previous
authority to administer the retirement system established by this chapter for
all active police and firefighter employees and police and firefighter
retirees, both past and future, and all other active employees previously
covered by this chapter will be administrated and managed by MERS effective
January 1, 2016. Any reference in this chapter to the duties of the Board of
Trustees shall be performed by MERS.



   (C)   The balance of the assets currently held by the Trustees
belonging to the City of Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters Retirement
System established by the aforesaid Chapter XVI, as amended, shall be
transferred to MERS on or before January 1, 2016, but remain the assets of
the City of Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters Retirement System and
shall be administered by MERS as established under this chapter. When
transferred, MERS shall credit said assets to the various funds and accounts
provided for in this chapter, according to the purpose for which such assets
were held and credited in the retirement system created under the aforesaid
Chapter XVI, as amended.



   (D)   All service credits allowed members prior to February 1, 1965,
under the aforesaid Chapter XVI, as amended, to the extent such service
credits are in force January 31, 1965, shall continue to the credit of the
said members, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (E)   Each retiree and beneficiary in receipt of a pension January
31, 1965, under the aforesaid Chapter XVI, as amended, shall continue to
receive the same pension under the terms provided in the aforesaid Chapter
XVI, as the said chapter was in force January 31, 1965. The payment of such
pensions shall become obligations of the City of Saginaw Police Officers and
Firefighters Retirement System established by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 16.03)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-161, passed 6-8-2015, effective
6-18-2015; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective 11-12-2015)



§ 16.04  BOARD OF TRUSTEES; GENERALLY.



   (A)   The MERS shall have the responsibility for the general
administration and management of the system, and for making effective and
construing the provisions of this chapter. It shall have the power to
negotiate and execute legal documents provided that any such legal document
be approved by the city.



   (B)   The Board shall cease to exist as of January 1, 2016, or as
soon thereafter as all of the assets are transferred to MERS, as provided
herein.



(Prior Code, § 16.04)  (Ord. D-1763, passed 3-4-1996, effective 3-5-1996;
Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006; Ord. O-161, passed 6-8-2015,
effective 6-18-2015; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective 11-12-2015)



§ 16.05  RECORDS; ANNUAL REPORT.



   (A)   The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, such data as
shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities
of the retirement system.



   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall annually render a report to the
Council showing the fiscal transactions of the system for the year ended the
preceding June 30, and a balance sheet showing the financial condition of the
system by means of an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities.



(Prior Code, § 16.05)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.06  EXPERIENCE TABLES; REGULAR INTEREST; ADOPTION OF.



   The Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt such mortality and
other tables of experience, and a rate or rates of regular interest, as are
required in the operation of the retirement system on an actuarial basis.



(Prior Code, § 16.06)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.07  MEMBERSHIP OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Membership of retirement system.



      (1)   The membership of the retirement system shall consist of
all the defined benefit police officers and firefighters who are in the
employ of the city.



      (2)   In any case of doubt, the Board of Trustees shall decide
who is a member of the retirement system within the meaning of the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   Termination of membership.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, should any
member cease to be a police officer or firefighter in the employ of the city,
for any reason except his or her retirement, he or she shall thereupon cease
to be a member and his or her credited service at that time shall be
forfeited. If he or she is re-employed by the city as a police officer or
firefighter, he or she shall again become a member. Should his or her said
re-employment occur within a period of five years from and after the date his
or her employment with the city as a police officer or firefighter last
terminated his or her credited service last forfeited by him or her shall be
restored to his or her credit; provided, that he or she returns to the
Member’s Deposit Fund the amount, if any, he or she withdrew therefrom,
together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of
repayment. Upon a member’s retirement or death, he or she shall thereupon
cease to be a member.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a police officer member
who is a patrol officer in the employ of the city and who is laid off on or
after July 1, 1985, shall have restored to his or her credit his or her
credited service last forfeited by him or her upon his or her recall to
employment as a patrol officer by the city provided that he or she returns to
the Member’s Deposit Fund the amount, if any, he or she withdrew therefrom,
together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of
repayment.



(Prior Code, § 16.07)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1508, passed 2-17-1986, effective 2-27-1986; Ord. D-1592, passed
6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed 3-20-1995, effective
3-30-1995; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.08  CREDITED SERVICE.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The Board of Trustees shall fix and determine by
appropriate rules and regulations the amount of service to be credited each
member; provided, that in no case shall less than ten days of service
rendered by him or her in any calendar month be credited as a month of
service; nor shall less than ten months of service rendered by him or her in
any calendar year be credited as a year of service; nor shall more than one
year of service be credited any member for all service rendered by him or her
in any calendar year.



      (2)   The following adjustments are made.



         (a)   A member who is a Police Chief on January 1, 1996
and retires on January 2, 1996, shall be credited with five years of service
upon payment to the pension system of an amount equal to 5% of the members
full-time or equated full-time annual compensation (last full four quarters
gross compensation) multiplied by the five years of service time.



         (b)   A member who is an Assistant Fire Chief on
December 27, 2002 and who retires on December 28, 2002 shall be credited with
three years and five months of service upon payment to the pension system of
an amount equal to 5% of the members full-time or equated full time annual
compensation (last full four quarters gross compensation) multiplied by the
three years and five months of service time.



         (c)   A member who is a Police Chief on August 13, 2004
and who retires on August 14, 2004 shall be credited with seven years and
four months of service upon payment to the pension system of $38,459.99.



         (d)   A member who is a Deputy Police Chief on January
20, 2005 and who retires on January 21, 2005 shall be credited with 11 months
of service upon payment to the pension system of $4,441.33.



      (3)   Effective July 1, 1996, any police officer who was a
member on or after this date shall be allowed to purchase prior law
enforcement service time up to five years with such member paying the total
actuarial cost.



   (B)   Federal service credit.



      (1)   In the event a police officer or firefighter, who while
employed by the city, entered or enters any armed service of the United
States Government during any period of compulsory military service, he or she
shall have such armed service actually required of him or her credited him or
her as city service; provided, that:



         (a)   He or she is re-employed by the city as a police
officer or firefighter within one year from and after the date of termination
of such armed services actually required of him or her;



         (b)   He or she returns to the Member’s Deposit Fund
the amount, if any, he or she withdrew therefrom at the time he or she
entered or while in such armed service, together with regular interest from
the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment; and



         (c)   In no case shall more than five years of such
armed service be credited any member for all such armed service rendered by
him or her after February 1, 1965. In any case of doubt as to the period, of
such armed service to be credited any member, the Board of Trustees shall
have final power to determine such period.



      (2)   During the period of such armed service and until his or
her return to city employment as a police officer or firefighter, his or her
contributions to the retirement system shall be suspended and any balance
standing to his or her credit in the Member’s Deposit Fund shall be
accumulated at regular interest.



      (3)   After July 1, 1983, any firefighter member who was a
member of the retirement system on July 1, 1983, or after September 19, 1984,
any member who was a police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain on
September 19, 1984, or assistant police chief on or after January 1, 1984, or
police patrol officer member after July 1, 1988, may elect to receive
credited service for not more than four years of active military service in
the armed service of the United States; to be used only in calculating his or
her pension at retirement regardless of when this service occurred, provided,
the firefighter, police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, or
assistant police chief was employed as a firefighter or police officer
subsequent to such military service. A firefighter, police patrol officer,
police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, or assistant police chief
who elects to claim this service credit must already have ten years of
credited service as a firefighter or police officer in force and shall pay to
the retirement system an amount equal to 10.75% of the member’s full-time
or equated full-time annual compensation (last four full calendar quarters’
gross compensation) for the year in which the payment is to be made,
multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of credited
service the member elects to purchase, up to the maximum. Service shall not
be credited if the service is or would be credited under another federal,
state, or local publicly supported retirement system.



      (4)   Any person who becomes a firefighter member of the
retirement system after July 1, 1983, or any person who becomes a member of
the police command officers bargaining group after September 19, 1984;
however, effective January 1, 1990, any police command officer, assistant
police chief and effective July 1, 1988, any police patrol officer, who
entered the armed services of the United States during a time of war or
national emergency, or who served in the armed service during a time of
peace, may elect to receive credited service for not more than four years of
active military service; to be used only in calculating their pension at
retirement regardless of when this service occurred (military service time
for police officer members cannot be added to retirement eligibility
requirements); provided, the firefighter or member of the police command
officers bargaining group was employed as a firefighter or police officer
subsequent to such military service. However, only completed years and months
of armed service shall be credited. In the case of a person who becomes a
firefighter member after July 1, 1983, credit for military service shall be
given upon request and payment to the retirement system of an amount equal to
8% of the member’s full-time or equated full-time annual compensation or in
the case of a member of the police command officers bargaining group after
September 19, 1984; however, effective January 1, 1990, any police command
officer, assistant police chief and effective July 1, 1988, any police patrol
officer credit for military service shall be given upon request and payment
to the retirement system of an amount equal to the percent required by the
MERS Act; however, effective July 1, 1994, in the case of a firefighter
member, military service shall be given upon request and payment to the
retirement system an amount equal to the percent required by the MERS Act,
however, effective July 1, 1994, in the case of a firefighter military
service shall be given upon request and payment to the retirement system an
amount equal to 5% of the member’s full-time or equated full-time annual
compensation (last four full calendar quarters’ gross compensation) for the
year in which payment is made multiplied by the number of years, and fraction
of a year, of credited service the member elects to purchase up to the
maximum. Service shall not be credited if the service is or would be credited
under any other federal, state, or local publicly supported retirement
system. Service shall not be credited under this section until the member has
ten working years of credited service in force.



(Prior Code, § 16.08)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.09  VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.



   Any member may retire upon or after attaining his or her voluntary
retirement age upon his or her written application filed with the Board of
Trustees setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days nor more than 90
days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he or she desires to be
retired. Upon his or her retirement, he or she shall be entitled to a pension
provided in § 16.12.



(Prior Code, § 16.09)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.10  NORMAL RETIREMENT.



   Any member who has attained or attains age 60 years shall be retired
forthwith by the Board of Trustees; provided, that upon the written
application of such member, approved by his or her department head and the
City Manager, such member may be continued in the employ of the city for
periods not to extend beyond his or her attainment of age 65 years. Upon his
or her retirement, he or she shall be entitled to a pension provided in §
16.12.



(Prior Code, § 16.10)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.11  DEFERRED RETIREMENT.



   Should any member who has ten or more years of credited service in
force leave the employ of the city as a police officer or firefighter prior
to the attainment of age 52 years, for any reason except retirement, or
should any police officer member who was a police patrol officer on July 1,
1988, leave the employ of the city after 18 years of service, such person
shall be entitled to a pension computed according to § 16.12 as the section
is in force at the time the member terminates his or her employment with the
city as a police officer or firefighter; provided, that the member does not
withdraw the member’s accumulated contributions from the Member’s Deposit
Fund. The said pension shall begin the first day of the calendar month in
which the member’s application for same is filed with the Board of Trustees
on or after the member’s attainment of age 52 years, or in the case of a
police officer member who was a police patrol officer on July 1, 1988, his or
her said pension shall begin on the first day of the calendar month his or
her application is filed with the Board of Trustees after he or she would
have had 20 years of service regardless of age.



(Prior Code, § 16.11)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1362, passed 1-5-1981, effective 1-15-1981; Ord. D-1592, passed
6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed 3-20-1995, effective
3-30-1995)



§ 16.12  RETIREMENT PENSION.



   (A)   Pensions.



      (1)   Straight-life pension.



         (a)   Firefighters. Upon a firefighter member’s
retirement, as provided in this chapter, on or after July 1, 1976, he or she
shall receive a straight life pension equal to the sum of 2% or 2.25% for a
firefighter member who retires on or after July 1, 1979, or 2.4% for a
firefighter member who retires on or after July 1, 1988, however a Fire Chief
and Assistant Fire Chief who retires on or after May 1, 1992, shall receive
2.5%; effective July 1, 1991, firefighters who retire on or after that date
shall receive 2.5% and all firefighters through the rank of Fire Chief who
retire on or after January 1, 1994, shall receive 2.6% and firefighters who
retire on or after July 1, 1997 shall receive 2.6% of the first 25 years of
service and 2.75% for all service over 25 years, however the Firefighter
Union may request a modification in the multiplier to 2.8% for all years of
service provided that any increased cost in the city’s contribution to the
pension system shall be borne by members of the unit and there shall be no
additional cost to the city. The increased costs in the city’s contribution
may be offset by an increase in the employee’s pension contributions or by
other changes to the pension plan resulting in cost reductions to the
city’s contribution rate as determined by the plans actuaries, however a
Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief who retires on or after March 25, 1999,
shall receive 2.6% for the first 25 years of service and 2.75% for all years
thereafter of his or her final average salary multiplied by the number of
years and fraction of a year of his or her credited service.



         (b)   Police. Upon a police officer member’s
retirement, as provided in this chapter, he or she shall receive a straight
life pension equal to 2% or 2.25% for a police officer member who is a police
sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, assistant police chief, or
police chief who retires on or after January 1, 1982; however, 2.4% for any
such member who retires on or after January 1, 1985, for the first 25 years
of credited service and 2.25% thereafter or 2.5% for any such member who
retires on or between January 1, 1985, and March 31, 1985, for the first 25
years of credited service and 2.25% thereafter); however, after January 1,
1990, 2.5% for the first 25 years of credited service and 2.25% thereafter;
however, effective May 1, 1992, 2.5% for all years of service for an
assistant police chief; however on or after January 1, 1994, 2.6% for the
first 25 years of service and 2.75% thereafter for a police officer member
who is a police sergeant, lieutenant, assistant police chief, or police chief
(2.25% for a police officer member who is a police patrol officer and who
retires on or after July 1, 1982; however, 2.4% for any such member who
retires on or after July 1, 1985, for the first 25 years of credited service
and 2.25% thereafter; however, any such member who retires on or after July
1, 1989, 2.5% for the first 25 years of service and 2.25% for each year of
service thereafter or for such member who retires on or after July 1, 1993,
2.6% for the first 25 years of service and 2.75% for years of service
thereafter) of his or her final average salary multiplied by the number of
years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited service; provided that
all POAM and COAM police officer members who retire on or after July 1, 2004
will receive a 2.5% non-compounded annual cost of living adjustment
(“COLA”) on all pensions payable at the later of the attainment of age 55
or one year following the employee’s actual retirement date, provided that
upon death of the retiree the original COLA will be reduced by the
appropriate percentage as elected by the pensioner at the original time of
retirement; provided, that the straight life pension of both firefighters and
police officers shall be subject to division (B) below.



      (2)   Optional plans. Upon the retirement of either a
firefighter or a police officer, he or she shall have the right to elect, in
lieu of his or her straight life pension, to receive his or her pension under
an option provided for in § 16.14.



   (B)   Benefit limitations. The Saginaw Police Officers and
Firefighters Retirement System shall not pay any benefit that would exceed
the benefit limitations for governmental plans as set forth in § 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code, being 26 U.S.C. § 415 and regulations, as amended.



   (C)   Retirement prior to age 52. In the event an original member
retires prior to the attainment of age 52 years, the straight life pension
provided for in division (A) above shall be reduced to the applicable amount
shown in the following table, for the member’s age (nearest birthday) at
the date the member elects to have his or her pension begin.



 

Table for Police Officer and Firefighter Members


Member’s Age*
 
Percent of Pension Contributed**




47
 
72.7%


48
 
77.3%


49
 
82.2%


50
 
87.6%


51
 
93.6%


52
 
100.0%


*   Member’s age (nearest birthday) at beginning date of retirement
pension


**   Percent of pension computed according to § 16.12(A)




 



   (D)   Death of employee leaving accumulated contributions. Effective
July 1, 1986 under changes in the Federal Tax Codes, should a retirant die
before the member has received in straight life pension payments a prorated
non-federally taxed amount equal to the member’s credit in the Member’s
Deposit Fund at the time of the member’s retirement, the difference between
the said accumulated contribution and the said prorated non-federally taxed
amount of straight life pension payments received by the member shall be paid
to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees. If there be
no such designated person or persons surviving the said retirant, such
difference, if any, shall be paid to the member’s estate. No benefits shall
be paid under this division (D) on account of the death of a retirant if any
benefits are paid or will become payable under division (E) below or if the
retirant elected to receive a pension under either Option A or B provided for
in § 16.14.



   (E)   Surviving spouse benefits. Upon the death of a retiree who
retired on or after November 1, 1968, the retiree’s surviving spouse shall
receive a pension equal to 60% of the straight life pension the deceased
retiree was receiving. No benefits shall be paid under this division (E) on
account of the death of a retiree if the member elected to receive a pension
under either Option A or B provided for in § 16.14.



(Prior Code, § 16.12)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1833, passed 4-1-1999, effective
4-1-1999; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective 8-3-2000; Ord. O-51,
passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.13  CERTAIN RETIREMENT PENSION ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   In the event the annual pension benefit of a retiree with a
spouse and who retires on or after: March 1, 1978, in the case of a
firefighter member; or July 1, 1978, in the case of a member who is a police
sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, assistant police chief, or
police chief; or January 1, 1980, in the case of a member who is a police
patrol officer, as the case may be, should fall below the total budget costs
for a retired couple as stated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics “Annual
Costs of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget” based upon total budget
costs for the metropolitan United States, a married retiree’s pension
benefits shall be increased to 100% of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
“Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget” provided the
retiree retired with 25 years or more credited service and retired as
provided for in §§ 16.09, 16.10, 16.15, or 16.17 or when a member becomes
covered as provided in § 16.18(B) of the Saginaw Police Officers and
Firefighters Retirement System.



   (B)   If a member is without a spouse or has a sole surviving spouse
and if the retirement entitling the member to pension benefits occurred on or
after: March 1, 1978, in the case of a firefighter member; July 1, 1978, in
the case of a member who is a police sergeant, police lieutenant, police
captain, assistant police chief, or police chief; January 1, 1980, in the
case of a member who is a police patrol officer; or July 1, 1992 in the case
of a member who is a firefighter, as the case may be, and otherwise meets the
applicable requirements set forth in division (A) above, then the member’s
annual pension benefit shall be adjusted so as never to fall below 60% or
100% for a firefighter member who retires on or after July 1, 1992, of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s
Lower Budget.”



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) below, the adjustments
provided in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be made prospectively only in
the first pension check issued in which the adjustment can practically be
made after the release of the Bureau of Labor Statistics “Annual Costs of
the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget”. The aforesaid adjustments shall
be made annually and shall under no circumstances cause a retiree’s annual
pension to exceed the latest released “Annual Costs of the Urban Retired
Couple’s Lower Budget” except as provided in division (E) below.



   (D)   In the event that the Bureau of Labor Statistics does not
publish the “Annual Costs of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget”
within 13 months of the publication of the last such figures, the adjustment
provided in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be made in the first check in
which it can practically be made after the release of the new “Annual Costs
of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget” and this adjustment shall be
retroactive to the twelfth month following the month in which the last such
adjustment was made.



   (E)   In the event that the Bureau of Labor Statistics terminates
publication of the “Annual Costs of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower
Budget”, the next annual adjustments provided in divisions (A) and (B)
above shall be made based upon a figure derived by increasing the last
published “Annual Costs of the Urban Retired Couple’s Lower Budget” by
the percentage of increase in the Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban
Consumers Index in the last 12 monthly releases of that Index prior to the
annual adjustment date. Each subsequent annual adjustment provided in
divisions (A) and (B) above shall be made based upon a figure derived by
increasing the previous adjustment figure by the percent of increase in the
Bureau of Labor Statistics All Consumers Index in the last 12 monthly
releases of that Index prior to each annual adjustment date.



   (F)   In no event shall any retiree’s pension be reduced below the
original amount as allowed in § 16.12.



   (G)   The guaranteed living standard contained in this division (G)
shall not apply to police patrol officer members.



      (1)   (a)   In the event the annual pension benefit of a
retiree with a spouse and who retires on or after: January 1, 1980, for a
member who is a police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain or
assistant police chief; or July 1, 1980, for a firefighter member, should
fall below the total budget cost for a retired couple as stated by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s
Intermediate Budget” based upon total budget cost for the metropolitan
United States, a married retiree’s pension benefit shall be increased to
100% of the Bureau of Labor Statistics “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired
Couple’s Intermediate Budget” provided the retiree retired with 25 years
or more credited service and retired as provided for in §§ 16.09, 16.10,
16.16, or 16.17, or when a member becomes covered as provided in § 16.18(B)
of the Saginaw Police Officers and Firefighters Retirement System.



         (b)   July 1, 1985, through June 30, 1990, the aforesaid
benefits will be granted to firefighter members who elect to retire during
this time period if they retire with 20 years or more of credited service;
provided, however, that from July 1, 1990, onward, retiring firefighter
members will again be required to have 25 years or more of credited service
to receive this benefit.



      (2)   (a)   If a member is without a spouse or has a sole
surviving spouse and if the retirement entitling the member to pension
benefits occurred on or after: January 1, 1980, for a member who is a police
sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, or assistant police chief; or
July 1, 1980, for a firefighter member, and otherwise meets the applicable
requirements set forth in division (G)(1) above, then the member’s annual
pension benefit shall be adjusted so as never to fall below 60% of the Bureau
of Labor Statistics “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s
Intermediate Budget”.



         (b)   From July 1, 1985, the aforesaid benefits will be
granted to firefighter members who retire with 20 years or more of credited
service provided that they have attained the actuarial age of 50 years.



      (3)   Except as provided in division (G)(4) below, the
adjustments provided in divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) above shall be made
prospectively only in the first pension check issued in which the adjustment
can practically be made after the release of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
“Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s Intermediate Budget”. The
aforesaid adjustments shall be made annually and shall under no circumstances
cause a retiree’s annual pension to exceed the latest released “Annual
Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s Intermediate Budget” except as
provided in division (G)(5) below.



      (4)   In the event that the Bureau of Labor Statistics does
not publish the “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s Intermediate
Budget” within 13 months of the publication of the latest such figures, the
adjustment provided in divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) above shall be made in the
first check in which it can practically be made after the release of the new
“Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s Intermediate Budget” and
this adjustment shall be retroactive to the twelfth month following the month
in which the last such adjustment was made.



      (5)   In the event that the Bureau of Labor Statistics
terminates publication of the “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s
Intermediate Budget”, the next annual adjustments provided in divisions
(G)(1) and (G)(2) above shall be made based upon a figure derived by
increasing the last published “Annual Cost of the Urban Retired Couple’s
Intermediate Budget” by the percentage of increase in the Bureau of Labor
Statistics All Urban Consumers Index in the last 12 monthly releases of that
Index prior to the annual adjustment date. Each subsequent annual adjustment
provided in divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) above shall be made based upon a
figure derived by increasing the previous adjustment figure by the percent of
increase in the Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban Consumers Index in the
last 12 monthly releases of that Index prior to each annual adjustment date.



      (6)   In no event shall any retiree’s pension be reduced
below the original amount as allowed in § 16.12.



   (H)   The foregoing guaranteed living standards contained in this
section shall not apply to police patrol officer members who retire on or
after July 1, 1983, or members who are a police sergeant, police lieutenant,
or police captain who retire on or after January 1, 1985.



   (I)   The foregoing guaranteed living standards contained in this
section shall not apply to firefighter members who retire on or after July 1,
1997.



(Prior Code, § 16.13)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000)



§ 16.14  PENSION OPTIONS.



   (A)   Prior to the effective date of the member’s retirement, but
not thereafter, a member may elect to receive his or her pension as a
straight life pension payable throughout his or her life, or he or she may
elect to receive the actuarial equivalent of his or her straight life pension
in a reduced pension payable throughout his or her life, and nominate a
beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of Option A or B set forth
below:



      (1)   Option A. Upon the death of a retiree who elected Option
A, a reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to
such person, having an insurable interest in the member’s life, as the
member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed
with the Board of Trustees prior to the date of his or her retirement; or



      (2)   Option B. Upon the death of a retiree who elected Option
B, one-half of his or her reduced pension shall be continued throughout the
life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his or her
life, as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed
and filed with the Board of Trustees prior to the date of his or her
retirement.



   (B)   Effective January 15, 1992, a police patrol officer member’s
initial election between duty disability pension or regular retirement
pension shall be binding upon these members. However, in the case of a duty
disability election, pending Pension Board determination, the member will be
allowed a normal retirement until such determination is made by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 16.14)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.15  NON-DUTY DISABILITY RETIREMENT.



   (A)   A member with five or more years of credited service who
becomes physically or mentally totally and permanently incapacitated for duty
as a police officer or firefighter in the employ of the city may be retired
by the Board of Trustees, upon written application filed with the Board by
the said member or the member’s department head, if the Medical Director,
after a physical examination of such member, certifies to the Board that:



      (1)   Such member is physically or mentally totally
incapacitated to perform the duties of police officer or firefighter in the
employ of the city; and



      (2)   Such incapacity will probably be permanent. If said
member does not concur in the report of the Medical Director, he or she shall
be entitled to be examined by a medical committee consisting of three
physicians, one of whom shall be the Medical Director, one a physician
selected by the member, and the third a physician selected by the other two
physicians named to the medical committee.



   (B)   If the medical committee certifies to the Board, by majority
opinion:



      (1)   Such member is physically or mentally totally
incapacitated for duty as a police officer or firefighter in the employ of
the city; and



      (2)   Such incapacity will probably be permanent, such member
may be retired by the Board upon written application filed with the Board by
said member or his or her department head.



   (C)   Upon his or her retirement he or she shall be entitled to a
pension provided in § 16.16.



(Prior Code, § 16.15)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.16  NON-DUTY DISABILITY PENSION.



   A member who retires on account of disability, as provided in § 16.15
hereof, shall receive a disability pension computed according to § 16.12(A)
and (D). If said member retires prior to his or her attainment of age 55
years, or 50 years in the case of a firefighter member on or after June 7,
1999, his or her credited service shall be increased, for the exclusive
purpose only of computing his or her disability pension, by the number of
years and fraction of a year, not to exceed ten years, in the period from the
date of his or her disability retirement to the date he or she would attain
age 55 years, or 50 years in the case of a firefighter member on or after
June 7, 1999; however, if a police officer member retires on or after July 1,
2004, his or her credited service shall instead be increased by a number of
years, and fraction of a year, not to exceed ten years so that his or her
years of service shall equal 20 years. His or her disability pension shall be
subject to §§ 16.21 and 16.22. Upon his or her retirement he or she shall
have the right to elect, in lieu of a straight life disability pension, to
receive his or her disability pension under an option provided for in §
16.14.



(Prior Code, § 16.16)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.17  DUTY DISABILITY RETIREMENT.



   A member who becomes physically or mentally totally incapacitated for
duty as a police officer or firefighter in the employ of the city by reason
of a personal injury or disease which the Board of Trustees finds to have
occurred as the natural and proximate result of causes arising out of and in
the course of the member’s employment with the city, and the Medical
Director, after a physical examination of such member, certifies to the Board
that such member is physically or mentally totally incapacitated to perform
the duties of a police officer or firefighter in the employ of the city,
shall be retired by the Board upon written application filed with the Board
by the said member or the member’s department head. If said member does not
concur in the report of the Medical Director, he or she shall be entitled to
be examined by a medical committee consisting of three physicians, one of
whom shall be the Medical Director, one a physician selected by the member,
and the third a physician selected by the other two physicians named to the
medical committee; however, effective January 1, 1990, a member who is a
police sergeant or lieutenant will require that all examining physicians on
the medical committee be specialized in the nature of the injury being
examined and be board certified, and one of whom shall be the Medical
Director or his or her designee. Effective January 15, 1992, a member who is
a police patrol officer, “the medical committee will consist of three
physicians, one of whom shall be the Medical Director, one a physician
selected by the member, and the third a physician selected by the other two
physicians of the medical committee. The third physician must be specialized
in the nature of the injury and be Board certified.” If the medical
committee certifies to the Board, by majority opinion, that such member is
physically or mentally totally incapacitated for duty (effective January 1,
1990, in the case of a member who is a police sergeant or lieutenant; such
member’s award of a duty disability retirement pension will be under the
standards of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of
1969, M.C.L. §§ 418.101 et seq.) as a police officer or firefighter in the
employ of the city, and the Board finds the disability to have occurred as
the natural and proximate result of causes arising out of and in the course
of employment with the city, such member shall be retired by the Board upon
written application filed with the Board by said member or his or her
department head. Upon the member’s retirement, he or she shall be entitled
to a pension provided in § 16.18.



(Prior Code, § 16.17)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.18  DUTY DISABILITY PENSION.



   (A)   A member who retires at or after his or her attainment of age
55 years, or 52 years for a firefighter member on or after July 1, 1993, or
50 years for a firefighter member on or after June 7, 1999, on account of
disability, as provided in § 16.17, shall receive a disability pension
computed according to § 16.12. Upon the member’s retirement, he or she
shall have the right to elect, in lieu of his or her straight life disability
pension, to receive his or her disability pension under an option provided
for in § 16.14.



   (B)   A member who retires prior to his or her attainment of age 55
years on account of disability, or a member who is a firefighter on or after
July 1, 1993, upon attainment of age 52 years on account of disability or a
member who is a firefighter on or after June 7, 1999 upon attainment of age
50 years on account of disability, as provided in § 16.17, shall receive a
disability pension computed according to § 16.12(A) and (C). For the
exclusive purpose only of computing his or her disability pension, his or her
credited service shall be increased by the number of years, and fraction of a
year, in the period from the date of his or her disability retirement to the
date he or she would attain age 55 years, or 52 years for firefighter members
who retired on or after July 1, 1993. Upon the member’s attainment of age
55 years, or age 52 years for a firefighter member, or 50 years for
firefighter members who retired on or after June 7, 1999, and with the
exception of a member who is a police sergeant or lieutenant on or after
September 9, 1984, his or her disability pension shall be recomputed using a
final average salary determined according to the salaries at the time the
member attains age 55 years, or age 52 years for a firefighter member on or
after July 1, 1993, or age 50 years for a firefighter member on or after June
7, 1999, for the ranks used in computing his or her final average salary at
the time of his or her disability retirement. In no event shall such
recomputed disability pension be less than the disability pension the member
received prior to his or her attaining age 55 years, or 52 years for a
firefighter member who retires on or after July 1, 1993, or 50 years for a
firefighter member who retires on or after June 7, 1999. Upon the member’s
retirement he or she shall have the right to elect, in lieu of a straight
life disability pension, to receive his or her disability pension under an
option provided for in § 16.14. To his or her attainment of age 55 years, or
52 years for a firefighter member who retires on or after July 1, 1993, or
age 50 years for a firefighter member who retires on or after June 7, 1999,
his or her disability pension shall be subject to §§ 16.21 and 16.22. If a
police officer member retires on or after July 1, 2004, and he or she has 25
or more years of credited service, the pension shall be calculated as a
regular retirement. If a police officer member retires on or after July 1,
2004 and has less than 25 years of regular service, his or her credited
service shall be increased to 25 years, provided that in the first year of
retirement, the benefits are limited to 65% of the final average pay. This
pension amount will not be recomputed or readjusted, except for changes made
by cost of living adjustments (“COLA”). His or her disability pension
shall be subject to §§ 16.21 and 16.22. Upon his or her retirement he or
she shall have the right to elect, in lieu of a straight life disability
pension, to receive his or her disability pension under an option provided
for in § 16.14.



   (C)   Effective January 15, 1992, for police patrol officer members,
the recomputation of duty disability pension pursuant to division (B) above
is eliminated. Duty disability pension, when granted by the Police and Fire
Pension Board of Trustees, shall be calculated in the following manner:



      (1)   If the police member has less than 25 years of credited
service at time of disability.



         (a)   For the exclusive purpose only of computing his or
her disability pension, the police member’s credited service shall be
increased by the number of years and fraction of a year in the period from
the date of the member’s disability retirement to the date he or she would
obtain the age of 55.



         (b)   1.   Should the member, as determined by the
Medical Director, be employable (able to perform other than police work), he
or she will be limited to earn annually, through gainful employment, one-half
of his or her annual pension dollar amount. This employable member must, on a
calendar year basis, submit a copy of his or her federal income tax returns
to the Secretary of the Board for determination of compliance with this
provision. Those retirees who fail to comply will have their pension
suspended until such time as they do comply.



            2.   Those retirees who, through employment, earn
more than one-half of their annual pension dollar amount will have the option
of reimbursing this overage to the pension system by a one-time lump sum
dollar amount, or have their subsequent annual pension reduced by the dollar
amount of the overage.



         (c)   Upon receipt of duty disability pension, should
the member, as determined by the Medical Director, not be employable in any
capacity, he or she shall be granted for life a guaranteed living standard
(GLS). Prior to receipt of the GLS, § 16.21 shall be utilized to re-examine
the duty disability retiree. This GLS shall be based on the total budget
costs for a retired couple as stated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
“Annual Costs of the Urban Retired Couple’s Intermediate Budget”. In
the event the annual pension benefit falls below this budget, said pension
will be adjusted to 100% of the Urban Retired Couples Intermediate Budget in
effect at that time. Should the Bureau of Labor Statistics cease publishing
the Urban Retired Couples Budget, subsequent adjustments shall be made by
measuring the percentage change in the past year in the Consumer Price Index,
U.S. City Average for all urban consumers (CPI-U) during the month of
September. For those police members who retire on duty disability and are
employable in non-police work, should they so desire, the city will seek
and/or make efforts to employ them in accordance with the conditions of their
disability retirement.



         (d)   Upon the member’s attainment of what would have
been 25 years of credited service, the member shall have a choice between the
manner as that of a regular retirement or the manner described as follows:
upon recomputation, the member’s duty disability pension will become a
regular pension. This pension shall be calculated using a final average
salary based on the average salary in effect at that time for a patrol
officer with four years or more of service. Included in this calculation will
be the maximum amount of vacation and compensatory time allowed to be earned
along with an average (for the patrol officer group) of overtime earned in
the year prior to the year of recomputation. The multiplier used will be that
which was in effect at the time of initial retirement. At the time of
recomputation for the member who is employable, there shall be no restricting
to the amount of outside employment earnings.



      (2)   If the police member has 25 years or more of credited
service at time of disability.



         (a)   1.   Within seven days of the date of the award
by the Police and Fire Pension Board of duty disability, the member’s duty
disability pension shall become a regular pension. This member will retain,
if awarded, worker’s compensation benefits which shall include
rehabilitation and medical benefits under the Worker’s Disability
Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L. §§ 418.101 et seq.



            2.   The method of pension calculation for this
member will be a choice between the manner as that of a regular retirement or
the manner described in division (C)(1)(d) above. This member will have no
restrictions placed on them regarding outside employment earnings.



         (b)   Should this member be deemed unemployable in any
capacity by the Medical Director, he or she shall receive the guaranteed
living standard as outlined for members with less than 25 years of service in
division (C)(1)(c) above.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 16.03(E), a duty
disability retiree who:



      (1)   Had not attained age 55 years at January 31, 1965; and



      (2)   Was receiving a duty disability pension under § 25 of
Chapter XVI of the Charter of the City as the section was in effect January
31, 1965, shall upon the member’s attainment of age 55 years have his or
her pension recomputed according to division (B) above as division (B) is in
effect at the date he or she attains age 55 years.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, a police officer member
who retires on or after July 1, 2004, and has less than 25 years of regular
service, shall have his or her credited service increased to 25 years,
provided that in the first year of retirement, the benefits are limited to
65% of the final average pay. There will be no earning limitation.



(Prior Code, § 16.18)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.19  NON-DUTY DEATH.



   (A)   Non-duty death; application of Option A.



      (1)   (a)   Any member who continues in the employ of the
city as a police officer or firefighter on or after the date the member
either:



            1.   Acquires 25 years of credited service; or



            2.   Attains age 55 years may elect, prior to the
effective date of his or her retirement by written declaration filed with the
Board of Trustees in the manner and form prescribed by the Board, Option A
provided for in § 16.14, and nominate a beneficiary whom the Board finds to
be dependent upon the said member for at least 50% of his or her financial
support.



         (b)   Prior to the effective date of the member’s
retirement, said member may revoke his or her election of Option A and
nomination of beneficiary and the member may again, prior to the effective
date of his or her retirement, elect the said Option A and nominate a
beneficiary as provided in this division (A)(1)(b). In the event a member who
has an Option A election in force dies while in the employ of the city as a
police officer or firefighter, his or her beneficiary shall immediately
receive a pension computed in the same manner in all respects as if the said
member had retired pursuant to the provisions of this chapter the day
preceding the date of his or her death. In the event a member who has an
Option A election in force under the provisions of this division (A)
subsequently retires pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
member’s said election of Option A and nomination of beneficiary shall take
effect as of the effective date of his or her retirement; provided, that the
member shall have the right prior to the effective date of his or her
retirement, but not thereafter, to elect, in lieu of Option A, to take his or
her pension as a straight life pension or under Option B provided for in §
16.14. No pension shall be paid under division (A) on account of the death of
a member if any pensions are paid or become payable under § 16.20 on account
of the member’s death.



      (2)   Any member who continues in the employ of the city as a
police officer or firefighter on or after the date the member either:



         (a)   Acquires 25 years of credited service; or



         (b)   Attains the age of 55 years, and does not have an
Option A election in force as provided in division (A) above; and



            1.   Dies while in the employ of the city as a
police officer or firefighter; and



            2.   a.   Leaves a widow, or in the case of a
female member, leaves a widower whom the Board of Trustees finds to be
totally and permanently disabled and to have been dependent upon the said
female member for at least 50% of his financial support, the said widow or
widower shall immediately receive a pension computed in the same manner in
all respects as if the said member had:



                  i.   Retired pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter the day before the date of the member’s death;



                  ii.   Elected Option A provided in §
16.14; and



                  iii.   Nominated his or her said widow
or widower as beneficiary.



               b.   No pension shall be paid under this
division (A)(2) on account of the death of member if any pensions are paid
under § 16.20 on account of the member’s death.



      (3)   Effective July 1, 1983, and thereafter, the foregoing
provisions of this division (A) shall not be applicable to a firefighter
member, or effective September 19, 1984, and thereafter to a police sergeant,
police lieutenant, police captain, or assistant police chief who was a prior
city command officer bargaining unit member or their beneficiaries. Any
benefits granted to a firefighter member or any of his or her beneficiaries
prior to July 1, 1983, or to a police sergeant, police lieutenant, or police
captain member, or his or her beneficiaries prior to September 19, 1984,
shall remain in full force and effect.



   (B)   Non-duty death; survivor pensions.



      (1)   If a member dies while in the employ of the city, the
applicable pensions provided for in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b),
(B)(1)(c), and (B)(1)(d) below shall be paid; provided, that the member has
neither elected Option A nor nominated a beneficiary under division (A)(1)
above; provided further, that the member has paid into the Member’s Deposit
Fund all amounts due the fund by the member.



         (a)   The widow or widower of a deceased member shall
receive a pension of 25% of final compensation. The widow’s or widower’s
pension shall begin the first day of the calendar month next following the
month in which the member died and shall terminate upon the widow’s or
widower’s remarriage, or death, whichever occurs first. The widow or
widower of a member whose death occurs on or after the member’s attainment
of age 55 years may elect to take his or her pension under either this
division (B)(1) or under division (A)(2) above.



         (b)   If, in addition to a widow or widower, the
deceased member leaves an unmarried child or children under age 21 years, or
the member’s mentally or physically totally and permanently disabled child
whom the Board of Trustees finds to be a least 50% dependent for his or her
financial support upon the deceased member, each such child shall receive a
pension of an equal share of 30% of final compensation; provided, that in no
case shall the pension payable to any one such child exceed 20% of final
salary. The pension payable to a child, except such a totally and permanently
disabled child, shall terminate upon his or her attainment of age 21 years.
The pension payable to any child shall terminate upon said child’s
adoption, marriage, or death, whichever occurs first. Upon termination of a
child’s pension there shall be a redistribution by the Board to the
member’s remaining eligible children. The pensions provided in this
division (B)(1)(b) shall be in addition to the pension provided in division
(B)(1)(a) above or division (A)(2) above.



         (c)   If the deceased member does not leave a widow or
widower eligible to a pension provided in this chapter, or if a pension
payable to a widow or widower terminates on account of remarriage or death,
and there be surviving the said deceased member’s unmarried child or
children under age 21 years, or a mentally or physically totally and
permanently disabled child whom the Board of Trustees finds to be at least
50% dependent upon the deceased member for financial support, each such child
shall receive a pension of 20% of final compensation; provided, that if there
be more than two such children each such child shall receive a pension of an
equal share of 40% of final compensation. The pension payable to a child,
except such a totally and permanently disabled child, shall terminate upon
the child’s attainment of age 21 years; the pension payable to any child
shall terminate upon the child’s adoption, marriage, or death, whichever
occurs first. Upon termination of a child’s pension there shall be a
redistribution by the Board to the deceased member’s remaining eligible
children; provided that the pension payable to any one child shall not exceed
20% of final compensation.



         (d)   If there be no widow, widower, nor children
eligible to receive pensions provided in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), or
(B)(1)(c) above or division (A)(2) above surviving the said deceased member,
and the member leaves either or both a dependent mother or dependent father
whom the Board of Trustees finds to be dependent upon the said member for at
least 50% of that parent’s financial support, each such parent shall
receive a pension of 15% of final compensation. Upon a parent’s remarriage
or death the member’s pension shall terminate.



      (2)   Effective July 1, 1983, and thereafter, if a firefighter
member; September 19, 1984, and thereafter, if a police sergeant, police
lieutenant, police captain, or assistant police chief who was a prior city
command officer bargaining unit member; or July 1, 1988, if a police officer
member who is a police patrol officer, dies while in the employ of the city,
the applicable pensions provided for in divisions (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b),
(B)(2)(c), or (B)(2)(d) below shall be paid; provided that the member has
paid into the Member’s Deposit Fund all amounts due to the fund by the
member. Any pensions paid under this provision shall be subject to §§ 16.22
and 16.13(G)(1) through (G)(6).



         (a)   The widow or widower of a deceased member shall
receive a pension of 80% of the pension that would have been due and payable
to the deceased member, computed as if the member had retired the day
immediately preceding death. Computation of the pension shall be made using
the multiplier set forth in § 16.12(A) times the average of the member’s
last three years compensation, including the value of any unused vacation
time paid to the surviving spouse, multiplied by the number of years, and
fraction of a year, of credited service. If said member should die prior to
the attainment of age 55 years, the credited service shall be increased, for
the exclusive purpose only of computing the pension, by the number of years,
and fraction of a year, not to exceed ten years, in the period from the date
of the member’s death to the date the member would have obtained age 55
years. The surviving spouse’s pension shall begin the first day of the
calendar month next following the month in which the member died and shall be
terminated upon the surviving spouse’s remarriage or death, whichever
occurs first.



         (b)   If a deceased member does not leave a widow or
widower eligible to a pension provided in this chapter, or if a pension
payable to a widow or widower terminates on account of remarriage or death,
and there be surviving the said deceased member’s unmarried child or
children under age 21 years, or mentally or physically totally and
permanently disabled child whom the Board of Trustees finds to be at least
50% dependent upon the deceased member for his or her financial support, each
such child shall receive a pension of 25% of the pension that would have been
due and payable to the deceased member calculated as set forth in division
(B)(2)(a) above. Providing, that if there be more than two such children each
such child shall receive a pension of an equal share of 50% of the pension
that would have been due and payable to deceased member calculated as set
forth in division (B)(2)(a) above. The pension payable to a child, except
such a totally and permanently disabled child, shall terminate upon his or
her attainment of age 21 years; the pension payable to any child shall
terminate upon said child’s adoption, marriage, or death, whichever occurs
first. Upon termination of a child’s pension there shall be a
redistribution by the Board to the deceased member’s remaining eligible
children; provided, that the pension payable to any one child shall not
exceed 25% of the pension that would have been due and payable to the
deceased member calculated as set forth in division (B)(2)(a) above.



         (c)   If there be no widow, widower, nor children
eligible to receive pensions provided in division (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b)
above surviving the said deceased member, and the member leaves either or
both a dependent mother or a dependent father whom the Board of Trustees
finds to be dependent upon said member for at least 50% of the parent’s
final support, each such parent shall receive a pension of 15% of the pension
that would have been due and payable to the deceased member calculated as set
forth in division (B)(2)(a) above. Upon a parent’s remarriage or death,
this pension shall terminate.



         (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
division (B)(2)(a) above, a widow or widower may elect to receive benefits as
provided in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) above, if this is to their
advantage. Should such an election of benefits under divisions (B)(1)(a) and
(B)(1)(b) above terminate on account of the remarriage or death of the widow
or widower, any surviving children shall receive benefits as defined in
division (B)(2)(b) above.



      (3)   Effective January 15, 1992, police patrol officer
members who leave a pension for surviving children, shall, unless the child
is totally and permanently disabled, have said pension terminate at the time
the surviving child reaches age 21, becomes deceased, is adopted, or marries,
whichever comes first.



(Prior Code, § 16.19)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1573, passed 3-28-1988, effective 4-7-1988; Ord. D-1592, passed
6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed 3-20-1995, effective
3-30-1995)



§ 16.20  DEATH OCCURRING IN THE LINE OF DUTY.



   (A)   If a member dies as the result of illness contracted or
injuries received arising out of and in the course of the member’s
employment with the city, and such death, illness, or injuries resulting in
death be found by the Board of Trustees to have been the natural and
proximate result of the member’s actual performance of duty as a police
officer or firefighter in the employ of the city, the applicable benefits
provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) below shall
be paid; provided, that the widow or widower of such deceased member shall
have the right to elect to take benefits under § 16.19 in lieu of this
section, in which case the accumulated contributions shall not be refunded.



      (1)   The accumulated contributions standing to the member’s
credit in the Member’s Deposit Fund at the time of the member’s death
shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of § 16.23.



      (2)   A pension of one-third of the final compensation of such
deceased member shall be paid to the surviving spouse. Such pension shall
terminate upon the surviving spouse’s remarriage or death, and shall be
subject to § 16.22.



      (3)   If, in addition to a surviving spouse, the said deceased
member leaves an unmarried child or children under age 21 years, or leaves a
mentally or physically totally and permanently disabled child whom the Board
of Trustees finds to be at least 50% dependent for his or her financial
support upon the deceased member, each such child shall receive a pension of
an equal share of one-fourth of the deceased member’s final compensation.
The pension payable to a child, except such a totally and permanently
disabled child, shall terminate upon said child’s attainment of age 21
years; the pension payable to any child shall terminate upon his or her
adoption, marriage, or death, whichever occurs first. Upon termination of a
child’s pension there shall be a redistribution by the Board to the
deceased member’s remaining eligible children. Any pension payable under
this division (A)(3) shall be subject to § 16.22.



      (4)   If there be no widow or widower surviving the deceased
member, or if the pension payable to a widow or widower terminates on account
of his or her remarriage or death, and there be surviving said deceased
member’s unmarried child or children under age 21 years, or a mentally or
physically totally and permanently disabled child whom the Board of Trustees
finds to be at least 50% dependent for his or her financial support upon the
said deceased member, each such child shall receive a pension of one-fourth
of the final compensation of such deceased member; provided, that if there be
more than two such children each such child shall receive a pension of an
equal share of one-half of said final compensation. The pension payable to a
child, except such a totally and permanently disabled child, shall terminate
upon said child’s attainment of age 21 years; the pension payable to any
child shall terminate upon his or her adoption, marriage, or death, whichever
occurs first. Upon termination of a child’s pension there shall be a
redistribution by the Board to the deceased member’s remaining eligible
children, provided that in no case shall any such child’s pension exceed
one-fourth of the deceased member’s final compensation. Any pension payable
under this division (A)(4) shall be subject to § 16.22.



      (5)   If there be neither a surviving spouse nor children
eligible to receive pensions under this section surviving the said deceased
member, there shall be paid to each the member’s dependent father and
dependent mother a pension of one-sixth of the deceased member’s final
compensation; provided, that the Board of Trustees, after investigation,
shall find such parent to have been actually dependent upon the deceased
member for at least 50% of his or her financial support due to absence of
earning power due to physical or mental disability. Any pension payable under
this division (A)(5) shall be subject to § 16.22.



   (B)   Effective July 1, 1983, and thereafter, if a firefighter
member; September 19, 1984, and thereafter, if a police sergeant, police
lieutenant, police captain, or an assistant police chief who was a prior city
command officer bargaining unit member; or July 1, 1988, if a police officer
member who is a police patrol officer, dies as the result of illness
contracted or injuries received arising out of and in the course of his or
her employment with the city, and such death, illness, or injuries resulting
in death be found by the Board of Trustees to have been the natural and
proximate result of the member’s actual performance of duty as a
firefighter or police sergeant, police lieutenant, police captain, or an
assistant police chief who was a prior city command officer bargaining unit
member in the employ of the City, the applicable benefits provided in
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) below shall be paid; in addition to the
applicable benefits provided in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(3), the
accumulated contributions standing to the member’s credit in the Member’s
Deposit Fund at the time of his or her death shall be paid in accordance with
the provisions of § 16.23; provided, that the member has paid into the
Member’s Deposit Fund all amounts due the fund by the member. Any pension
paid under this section shall be subject to § 16.22 and shall qualify the
person for the benefits of § 16.13(G)(1) through (G)(6), years of credited
service notwithstanding.



      (1)   The widow or widower of a deceased member shall receive
a pension of 80% of the pension that would have been due and payable to the
deceased member computed as if the member had retired the day immediately
preceding the day of death. Computation of the pension shall be made using
the multiplier set forth in § 16.12(A) times the average of the member’s
last three years’ compensation, including the value of any unused vacation
time paid to the surviving spouse, multiplied by the number of years, and
fraction of a year, of his or her credited service. If the said member should
die prior to the attainment of age 55 years, the member’s credited service
shall be increased, for the exclusive purpose only of computing the pension,
by the number of years, and fraction of a year, in the period from the date
of death to the date the member would have attained the age 55 years. The
surviving spouse’s pension shall begin the first day of the calendar month
next following the month in which the member died and shall terminate upon
the surviving spouse’s remarriage or death, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   If there be no widow or widower surviving the deceased
member, or if the pension payable to the surviving spouse terminates on
account of remarriage or death, and there be surviving the said deceased
member’s unmarried child or children under age 21 years, or a mentally or
physically totally and permanently disabled child whom the Board of Trustees
finds to be at least 50% dependent for financial support upon the said
deceased member, each such child shall receive a pension of 25% of the
pension that would have been due and payable to the deceased member
calculated as set forth in division (B)(1) above. Provided, that if there be
more than two such children, each such child shall receive a pension of an
equal share of 50% of the pension that would have been due and payable to the
deceased member calculated as set forth in division (B)(1) above. The pension
payable to a child, except such a totally and permanently disabled child,
shall terminate upon the child’s attainment of age 21 years; the pension
payable to any child shall terminate upon the adoption, marriage, or death of
the child, whichever occurs first. Upon termination of a child’s pension,
there shall be a redistribution by the Board to the deceased member’s
remaining eligible children, provided that in no case shall any such
child’s pension exceed 25% of the pension that would have been due and
payable to the deceased member calculated as set forth in division (B)(1)
above.



      (3)   If there be neither a widow, widower, nor children
eligible to receive pensions provided in divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above
surviving the said deceased member, and the member leaves either or both a
dependent mother or dependent father whom the Board of Trustees finds to be
dependent upon said member for at least 50% of the dependent parent’s
financial support, each such parent shall receive a pension of one-sixth of
the pension that would have been due and payable to the deceased member
calculated as set forth in division (B)(1) above. Upon a parent’s
remarriage or death, the parent’s pension shall terminate.



   (C)   Effective January 15, 1992, police patrol officer members who
leave a pension for surviving children, shall, unless the child is totally
and permanently disabled, have said pension terminate at the time the
surviving child reaches age 21, becomes deceased, is adopted, or marries,
whichever comes first.



(Prior Code, § 16.20)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.21  RE-EXAMINATION OF DISABILITY RETIRANTS.



   (A)   At least once each year during the first five years following
the retirement of a member with a disability pension, and at least once in
every three-year period thereafter, the Board of Trustees may, and upon the
member’s application shall, require any disability retiree who has not
attained age 55 years to undergo a medical examination to be made by or under
the direction of the Medical Director. Should any such disability retiree
refuse to submit to such medical examination in any such period, the
member’s disability pension may be discontinued by the Board until his or
her withdrawal of such refusal. Should such refusal continue for one year all
the member’s rights in and to his or her pension may be revoked by the
Board. If upon such medical examination of a disability retiree, the Medical
Director reports to the Board that such retiree is physically able and
capable of resuming employment with the city as a police officer or
firefighter, he or she shall be restored to duty, except in the case of a
police officer, upon certification by the state, in a rank at least
equivalent to the rank he or she held at the time of his or her retirement
and his or her disability pension shall terminate.



   (B)   A disability retiree who returns to the employ of the city as
a police officer or firefighter shall again become a member of the retirement
system. The member’s credited service at the time of the member’s
retirement shall be restored to his or her credit. The member shall be given
service credit for the period he or she was receiving a disability pension
provided for in § 16.18(B); the member shall not be given service credit for
the period he or she was receiving a disability pension provided for in §
16.16.



   (C)   (1)   Retirees in the following groups are subject to
earnings limitations:



         (a)   Police non-duty disability retirees less than age
55 who retired before July 1, 2004;



         (b)   Police duty disability retirees less than age 55
who retired on or after January 15, 1992 and before July 1, 2004;



         (c)   Firefighter non-duty disability retirees less than
age 55 who retired before June 7, 1999; and



         (d)   Firefighter non-duty disability retirees less than
age 50 who retired on or after June 7, 1999.



      (2)   In the event a retiree subject to earnings limitations
becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business, or employment, paying him
or her more than the difference between the current rate of compensation
being paid by the city for the rank last held by him or her and his or her
disability pension, his or her disability pension shall be reduced to an
amount which together with the amount so earned by him or her shall equal
such current rate of compensation for the rank last held by him or her. For
purposes of this section, the rate of compensation shall be the base pay for
the rank last held and not inclusive of any fringe benefits or expected
overtime payments. Retirees subject to this section shall provide income
documentation to the Board each year, and failure to do so shall result in
the suspension of benefits. If overpayment of benefits has been made, the
Board may suspend benefits or take such other action to collect the
overpayment as it deems appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 16.21)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective
8-17-2006)



§ 16.22  WORKER’S COMPENSATION OFFSET.



   (A)   Any worker’s compensation which may be paid or payable to a
member retiree or beneficiary on account of the member’s city employment
shall be offset against any pensions payable to such member, retiree, or
beneficiary. In case the present value of the worker’s compensation is less
than the pension reserves for the pensions payable under this chapter, the
present value of such worker’s compensation shall be deducted from such
pension reserves and such pensions as may be provided by the pension reserves
so reduced shall be payable under the provisions of this chapter. Effective
January 1, 1990, police command officers, sergeants, and lieutenants who
receive any worker’s compensation which may be paid or payable to a member
based on an injury date prior to March 31, 1982, shall be offset against any
pensions payable to such member, retiree, or beneficiary.



   (B)   Effective January 15, 1992, this section shall no longer be in
effect for police patrol officers, however, for injuries after March 31,
1982, the coordination of pension and worker’s compensation benefits will
be subject to the provisions of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act,
Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L. §§ 418.101 et seq. Further, pursuant
to § 161 of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of
1969, being M.C.L. § 418.161), the initial election between duty disability
pension and worker’s compensation will find such worker’s compensation
benefit not falling below the July 1990 level.



   (C)   Effective January 1, 2016, this section shall no longer be in
effect for firefighters both currently receiving benefits and those who
retire in the future, however, the coordination of pension and worker’s
compensation benefits will be subject to the provision of the Worker’s
Disability Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L. § 418.161).



(Prior Code, § 16.22)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective
11-12-2015)



§ 16.23  REFUND OF ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Should any member cease to be employed by the city as a police
officer or firefighter before attainment of the voluntary retirement age such
member shall be paid the accumulated contributions standing to the member’s
credit in the Member’s Deposit Fund upon the member’s demand in writing
on forms furnished by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Should any member die and no pension becomes payable by the
retirement system on account of the death, except as provided in § 16.20,
the accumulated contributions standing to the member’s credit in the
Member’s Deposit Fund at the time of death shall be paid to such person or
persons as the member shall have nominated by written designation duly
executed and filed with the Board of Trustees. If there be no such person or
persons surviving such deceased member the said accumulated contributions
shall be paid to the member’s estate.



   (C)   If any member dies intestate, without heirs and without having
nominated a beneficiary, the member’s accumulated contributions standing to
the member’s credit in the Member’s Deposit Fund at the time of his or
her death may be used to pay his or her burial expenses, not to exceed a
reasonable sum to be determined by the Board of Trustees, provided the member
leaves no other estate sufficient for such purposes.



   (D)   Payments of refunds of accumulated contributions, as provided
in this section, may be made in installments according to such rules and
regulations as the Board of Trustees may from time to time adopt.



(Prior Code, § 16.23)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.24  MEMBER’S DEPOSIT FUND.



   (A)   The Member’s Deposit Fund is hereby created. It shall be the
fund in which shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions
made by members to the retirement system, and from which shall be made
refunds and transfers of accumulated contributions, as provided in this
chapter.



   (B)   The contributions of a member to the retirement system to
February 1, 1965, shall be 5% of the member’s compensation. From and after
January 31, 1965, to November 1, 1968, the contributions of a member shall be
6% of the member’s compensation. From and after October 31, 1968, the
contributions of a firefighter member shall be 7% of the firefighter
member’s compensation; from and after July 1, 1980, the contributions of a
firefighter member shall be 7.5% of that member’s compensation. From and
after July 1, 1981, the contributions of a firefighter member shall be 8% of
his or her compensation. From and after October 31, 1968, to June 22, 1973,
the contributions of a police officer member shall be 7% of his or her
compensation; and from and after June 21, 1973, the contributions of a police
officer member shall be 8% of his or her compensation. From and after January
1, 1980, the contribution of a police officer member who is a police
sergeant, police lieutenant, or police captain shall be 9.5% of his or her
compensation and 8% of his or her compensation effective January 1, 1982.
From January 1, 1984, through December 31, 1984, the contribution of a
firefighter member shall be 6% of his or her compensation; provided, however,
from and after January 1, 1985, the contribution of a firefighter member
shall be 8% of his or her compensation. From and after July 1, 2004 the
contribution of a police officer member shall be figured as a pre-tax
contribution. From and after July 1, 2004, a police officer member shall pay
13% to the pension fund. From and after July 1, 2005, a police officer member
shall pay 11.5% to the pension fund. From and after July 1, 2004, the
contribution of a firefighter member shall be figured as a pre-tax
contribution. From and after September 1, 2004, the contribution of a
firefighter member shall be 9% of his or her compensation. The officer or
officers responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the contribution
to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll
period, so long as he or she remains a member of the system.



   (C)   The contributions provided for herein shall be made
notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member
shall be changed thereby. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree
to the deductions made and provided for herein. Payment of the member’s
compensation less said deduction for the member’s contribution shall be a
full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands
whatsoever for the service rendered by the member during the period covered
by such payment, except as to benefits provided by this chapter. The
contributions provided for herein shall be credited to the individual
Member’s Deposit Fund account of the member from whose compensation said
deduction was made.



   (D)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the
compensation of a member, as hereinbefore provided, he or she shall deposit
in the Member’s Deposit Fund, by a single contribution or by an increased
rate of contribution as approved by the Board of Trustees, the amount or
amounts the member might have withdrawn therefrom, together with regular
interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case
shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior to the date the
member withdrew his or her accumulated contributions until there is repaid to
the Member’s Deposit Fund all amounts due the fund by him or her.



   (E)   Upon a member’s retirement, his or her accumulated
contributions shall be transferred from the Member’s Deposit Fund to the
Pension Reserve Fund. At the expiration of a period of four years from and
after the date an employee ceases to be a member, any balance of accumulated
contributions standing to his or her credit in the Member’s Deposit Fund,
unclaimed by the member or his or her estate, shall be transferred to the
Income Fund.



   (F)   Effective July 1, 1983, and thereafter, division (D) above
shall cease to apply to firefighter members. From and after July 1, 1983,
should any firefighter member cease to be employed by the city as a
firefighter and withdraw his or her accumulated contributions from the
Member’s Deposit Fund and later be re-employed by the city as a firefighter
as provided by this chapter, he or she shall within four years from the date
of his or her re-employment with the city, deposit in the Member’s Deposit
Fund, by a single contribution only, the amount or amounts he or she might
have withdrawn therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of
withdrawal to the date of repayment; subsequent changes to the contrary
notwithstanding. Failure to repay withdrawn accumulated contributions within
four years of re-employment shall constitute a permanent forfeiture of
credited service represented by the withdrawn accumulated contributions.
Effective July 1, 1994, and thereafter for firefighter members and July 1,
1996, and thereafter for patrol members, there shall be no time limit for
repayment to the Member’s Deposit Fund. Said contribution shall be in
addition to the contributions deducted from the compensation of a member as
hereinbefore provided. In no case shall any member be given credit for
service rendered prior to the date he or she withdrew his or her accumulated
contributions until there is repaid to the Member’s Deposit Fund all
amounts due the fund by him or her.



   (G)   Effective September 19, 1984, the foregoing provisions of
division (F) above shall apply to a police officer member who was a police
sergeant, police lieutenant, or police captain on September 19, 1984.



(Prior Code, § 16.24)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1856, passed 7-24-2000, effective
8-3-2000; Ord. O-51, passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006)



§ 16.25  PENSION RESERVE FUND.



   (A)   The Pension Reserve Fund is hereby created. It shall be the
fund in which shall be accumulated reserves for all pensions and other
benefits payable from contributions made by the city; and from which shall be
paid all pensions as provided in this chapter. Upon the basis of such
mortality and other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the Board
of Trustees shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute
the pension reserves: for service rendered and to be rendered by members; and
pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries. The said pension reserves
shall be financed by annual appropriations, to be made by the Council,
determined according to divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3) below.



      (1)   The annual appropriation for members’ current service
shall be a percent of their annual compensations which will produce an amount
which, if paid annually by the city during their periods of future service,
will be sufficient to provide the pension reserves at the time of their
retirements for the portions of the pensions to be paid them based upon their
future service.



      (2)   The annual appropriation for members’ accrued service
shall be a percent of their annual compensations which will produce an amount
which, if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined
by the Council, will amortize, at the regular interest, any unfunded pension
reserves for the portions of the pensions to be paid them based upon their
accrued service.



      (3)   The annual appropriation for pensions being paid
retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensations of
members which will produce an amount which, if paid annually by the city over
a period of years, to be determined by the Council, will amortize, at regular
interest, any unfunded pension reserves for pensions being paid retirants and
beneficiaries.



   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall report to the Council in each
fiscal year the amounts of contributions, determined in accordance with the
provisions of this section, to be made by the city to the retirement system
in the next ensuing fiscal year. The Council shall appropriate the required
contributions each year and the city shall pay such amounts to the system in
the ensuing fiscal year. When paid, such amounts shall be credited to the
Pension Reserve Fund.



(Prior Code, § 16.25)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.26  EXPENSE FUND.



   The Expense Fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited all money
provided by the city to pay the administrative expenses of the retirement
system and from which such expenses shall be paid.



(Prior Code, § 16.26)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



§ 16.27  MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   MERS shall be the trustee of the respective assets of the
retirement system and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such
assets subject to the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions
imposed by law of the state upon domestic life insurance companies in the
making and disposing of their investments, and by law pertaining to the
investments of public employee retirement system assets. MERS shall have full
power to hold, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any securities and
investments in which any of the respective monies under the management of the
system have been invested as well as the proceeds of such investments and any
monies belonging to the system.



   (B)   MERS shall keep on deposit available cash, not to exceed 5% of
the total assets of the retirement system. All assets of the system shall be
held for the sole purpose of meeting disbursements authorized by this chapter
and shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever.



   (C)   The description of the various funds of the retirement system
shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the system and not
to the segregation of the assets within the funds of the system.



(Prior Code, § 16.27)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-161, passed 6-8-2015, effective
6-18-2015; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective 11-12-2015)



§ 16.28  INCOME FUND.



   (A)   The Income Fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund to
which shall be credited all interests, dividends, and other income from
investments of the retirement system, all transfers from the Member’s
Deposit Fund by reason of lack of claimant, and all other money received by
the system, the disposition of which is not specifically provided for in this
chapter. MERS may accept gifts and bequests and the same shall be credited to
the Income Fund. There shall be paid from the Income Fund all amounts
required to credit regular interest to the Member’s Deposit Fund and
Pension Reserve Fund. Whenever MERS determines the balance in the Income Fund
is more than sufficient to cover the current charges to the fund MERS may, by
resolution, provide for contingency reserves, or for the transfer of such
excess or portions thereof to cover the needs of the other funds of the
system, except the Expense Fund.



   (B)   At the end of each fiscal year, MERS shall allow and credit
regular interest: on each member’s individual balance in the Member’s
Deposit Fund at the beginning of such fiscal year; and on the main balance
for the year in the Pension Reserve Fund. The interest so allowed and
credited shall be charged to the Income Fund. If the balance in the Income
Fund is insufficient to cover such interest charges, the insufficiency shall
be transferred from the Pension Reserve Fund to the Income Fund.



(Prior Code, § 16.28)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective
11-12-2015)



§ 16.29  METHOD OF MAKING PAYMENTS.



   All payments by the retirement system shall be made according to
Charter and ordinance provisions relating to the disbursements of monies from
city funds. No disbursement shall be made from funds of the system unless
approved by a specific or continuing motion adopted by MERS.



(Prior Code, § 16.29)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective
11-12-2015)



§ 16.30  ASSIGNMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The right of a person to a pension, to the return of
accumulated contributions, or to any benefit, the pension itself, any
optional benefit, and any other right accrued or accruing to any member,
retiree, or beneficiary under the provisions of this chapter, and the monies
belonging to the retirement system, shall be unassignable and shall not be
subject to execution, garnishment, the operation of insolvency or bankruptcy
law, or any other process of law whatsoever; provided, that if a member is
covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the city,
and should the member be permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage
as a retiree, the member may authorize MERS to have deducted from his or her
pension the payments required of him or her to continue such group insurance
or prepayment plan; provided further, that the city shall have the right of
set off for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member,
retiree, or beneficiary.



   (B)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Eligible domestic relations orders issued pursuant to
the Eligible Domestic Relations Orders Act, Public Act 46 of 1991, being
M.C.L. §§ 38.1701 et seq., as amended from time to time, or other domestic
relations orders; or



      (2)   Income withholding orders issued pursuant to the
Supporting and Parenting Time Enforcement Act, Public Act 295 of 1982, being
M.C.L. §§ 552.601 et seq.), as amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 16.30)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. D-1885, passed 2-19-2001, effective
3-1-2001; Ord. D-1918, passed 5-6-2002, effective 5-16-2002; Ord. O-51,
passed 8-7-2006, effective 8-17-2006; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective
11-12-2015)



§ 16.31  ERRORS.



   Should any change or error in the records result in any person
receiving from the retirement system any more or less than the member would
have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, MERS shall
correct such error in such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the
benefit to which such person was correctly entitled shall be paid.



(Prior Code, § 16.31)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995; Ord. O-169, passed 11-2-2015, effective
11-12-2015)



§ 16.32  PROTECTION AGAINST FRAUD.



   Whoever with intent to deceive shall make any statement or report
required under this chapter which is untrue, or shall falsify or permit to be
falsified any record of the retirement system, or who shall otherwise violate
the provisions of this chapter, with intent to deceive, shall upon conviction
thereof be fined.



(Prior Code, § 16.32)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)  Penalty, see § 16.99



§ 16.33  ONE-TIME INCREASE IN ANNUAL PENSION BENEFIT FOR CERTAIN RETIRANTS
AND BENEFICIARIES.



   (A)   Effective December 2, 1977, there is hereby granted a one-time
increase in the annual pension benefit rate for retirants who retired on or
before December 31, 1966, and their beneficiaries and for beneficiaries who
first became entitled to pension benefits on or before December 31, 1966,
equal to 2% times the number of full years retired to December 2, 1977, or,
in the case of a beneficiary, the number of full years since the retirement
or death of the member for whose service the beneficiary’s pension is paid,
to December 2, 1977. No pension augmented under this section, after applying
the increase, shall exceed the sum of $4,500 annually.



   (B)   Effective July 1, 1982, and November 27, 1989, with a
corrective adjustment effective July 30, 1990, and effective July 1, 1994,
there is hereby granted a one-time increase in the annual pension benefit
rate for all retirants and their beneficiaries who fall into the following
eligibility categories.



      (1)   The annual pension benefits for retired members with a
spouse shall be adjusted so as to provide a minimum of $6,000 per year July
1, 1982, and $9,000 per year November 27, 1989, and $11,153 per year July 1,
1994, provided the member retired with 25 or more credited years of service.
This benefit does not change upon the death of the retiree’s spouse.



      (2)   The annual pension benefit for a sole surviving member
or spouse shall be adjusted so as to provide a minimum of $3,600 per year
July 1, 1982, and $5,250 per year November 27, 1989, and a corrective
adjustment of $5,400 effective July 30, 1990, and $6,692 per year July 1,
1994, provided the member retired with 25 or more credited years of service.



      (3)   No adjustment shall be made for any member who is on
deferred retirement or non-duty disability status with less than 25 years of
service or for any retired member or sole surviving spouse who has not or
will not attain age 52 during the year 1981 for the July 1, 1982, adjustment,
or age 52 during the year 1989 for the November 27, 1989, adjustment, or age
52 during the year 1993 for the July 1, 1994, adjustment.



      (4)   Benefits for widows receiving duty death benefits shall
be adjusted to provide a minimum of $3,600 per year July 1, 1982, and $5,250
per year November 27, 1989, and a corrective adjustment of $5,400 effective
July 30, 1990, and $6,692 per year July 1, 1994. No adjustment shall be made
to benefits paid to surviving children under the duty death benefits section
of the chapter.



      (5)   Any duty disability retiree who has attained age 52
during the year 1981 for the July 1, 1982, adjustment or age 52 during the
year 1989 for the November 27, 1989, adjustment or age 52 during the year
1993 for the July 1, 1994, adjustment, the sole surviving spouse of such a
retiree, provided said spouse has attained age 52 during the year 1981, for
the July 1, 1982, adjustment and attainment of age 52 during the year 1989
for the November 27, 1989, adjustment or age 52 during the year 1993 for the
July 1, 1994, adjustment shall receive the pension adjustment set forth in
divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above regardless of the number of credited years
of service with which the member retired; provided, however, the amount of
such increase when combined with any worker’s compensation benefits due and
payable shall not cause the total annual compensation to be received to
exceed the maximum amount provided in this section.



(Prior Code, § 16.33)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1244, passed 11-14-1977, effective 11-24-1977; Ord. D-1592, passed
6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed 3-20-1995, effective
3-30-1995)



§ 16.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)    Whoever with intent to deceive shall make any statement or
report required under this chapter which is untrue, or shall falsify or
permit to be falsified any record of the retirement system, shall be fined
not to exceed $500 or 90 days imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the
court.



(Prior Code, § 16.32)  (Ord. D-678, passed 1-18-1965, effective 2-1-1965;
Ord. D-1592, passed 6-19-1989, effective 6-29-1989; Ord. D-1737, passed
3-20-1995, effective 3-30-1995)



CHAPTER 17:  MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM



Section



   17.01   Participation in the Municipal Employees Retirement System



   17.02   Creation and duties of City MERS Pension Board



§ 17.01  PARTICIPATION IN THE MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city acknowledges that it has been a participating
municipality in the Municipal Employees Retirement System of Michigan (MERS)
since 1946 for all of its employees except for public safety employees who
are covered by a separate City of Saginaw Police Officer and Fire Fighter
Retirement System established by Chapter XVI of the Charter of the City of
Saginaw, as amended; and Chapter 16 of the Saginaw Administrative Code; and
the city hereby acknowledges and confirms its continued participation in MERS
and the City of Saginaw Retirement System for all of its employees, exclusive
of public safety employees.



   (B)   As a participating municipality in MERS, the city shall be
solely responsible for and shall make all contributions determined from time
to time by the MERS and MERS’ actuaries to comprise the employer
contribution component of all contributions that are required to fund future
pension benefits payable to all participants in the city’s defined benefit
plan under MERS.



   (C)   The city shall hold all MERS divisional market assets on an
equal funded basis so that as an aggregate there will be one funding level as
a percentage of its actuarial liabilities as of December 31, 2001 and each
December 31 thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 17.01)  (Ord. D-1919, passed 5-20-2002, effective 5-30-2002)



§ 17.02  CREATION AND DUTIES OF CITY MERS PENSION BOARD.



   (A)   The city shall create a City MERS Pension Board, which shall
be a recommending body to City Council overseeing this pension. The Board’s
responsibilities shall include, but not to be limited to, review and
recommend changes to this pension chapter for Council approval, and review
the city’s annual actuarial valuation of the MERS Pension System. The Board
shall consist of seven members, which are as follows:



      (1)   The Mayor by virtue of his or her office;



      (2)   The City Manager by virtue of his or her office;



      (3)   A department head appointed by the City Manager;



      (4)   A Service Employees International Union (SEIU) hourly
member elected by the SEIU hourly employees;



      (5)   A Service Employees International Union (SEIU) salaried
member elected by the SEIU salaried employees;



      (6)   An American Federation of State, County, and Municipal
Employees (AFSCME) member elected by the AFSCME employees; and



      (7)   A MERS retiree member selected by a majority vote of the
other Board members.



   (B)   Board members shall hold office for a term of three years;
such term shall expire on June 30 of each year. Members shall continue in
office until a new member succeeds them. Within ten days of appointment, the
City Clerk shall administer the oath of office.



   (C)   Each Board member shall be entitled to one vote on each
question before the Board. Four Board members shall constitute a quorum and a
majority vote of the Board shall be necessary for a decision by the Board.



   (D)   The SEIU, AFSCME, and retiree members may elect an alternate
for each seat held to serve in their absence. The City Manager shall have the
Deputy City Manager serve as his or her designee in his or her absence. The
alternate member(s), only in the absence of their respective elected Board
member, shall be entitled to one vote on each question before the Board and
be counted for purposes of constituting a Board quorum. An alternate member
shall not be entitled to serve as a retirement system member.



   (E)   The Board shall meet regularly on an annual basis or at any
time when there is a need for Board action. All meetings of the Board shall
be public. There shall be records kept of each meeting.



   (F)   The Board shall select from its members a Chairperson. The
City Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Board. The City Manager shall
designate a city officer to serve as secretary and administrative officer to
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 17.02)  (Ord. D-1919, passed 5-20-2002, effective 5-30-2002;
Ord. D-1930, passed 8-12-2002, effective 8-22-2002; Ord. D-1939, passed
12-16-2002, effective 12-26-2002)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CODE INTERPRETATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   GENERAL REGULATIONS



      32.   JURISDICTION; STREETS



      33.   TAXATION AND ASSESSMENT



      34.   ELECTIONS



      35.   EMERGENCIES



      36.   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE



      37.   CODE ENFORCEMENT



CHAPTER 30:  CODE INTERPRETATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Title



   30.02   Effective date



   30.03   Interpretation



   30.04   Application to future ordinances



   30.05   Captions



   30.06   Definitions



   30.07   Rules of interpretation



   30.08   Severability



   30.09   Reference to other sections



   30.10   Errors and omissions



   30.11   Reasonable time



   30.12   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   30.13   Section histories; statutory references



 



   30.99   General penalty



§ 30.01  TITLE.



   Titles III through XV of this publication may be known and cited as the
“Saginaw General Code”.



(Prior Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940)



§ 30.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This title shall take effect January 1, 1939.



(Prior Code, § 30.02)



§ 30.03  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



(Prior Code, § 30.03)



§ 30.04  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title III compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



(Prior Code, § 30.04)



§ 30.05  CAPTIONS.



   (A)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title,
chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (B)   No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of
deficiency in any chapter, article, or section heading.



(Prior Code, § 30.05)



§ 30.06  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of
Saginaw, Michigan.



      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Saginaw.



      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY. Saginaw County, Michigan.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, co-partnership,
corporation, company, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit and the individuals constituting
such group or unit, and the plural as well as the singular number; and the
singular masculine pronoun shall include the feminine, neuter, and plural;
unless the intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the
context.



      POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the City of Saginaw.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Michigan.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Prior Code, § 30.06)



§ 30.07  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



(Prior Code, § 30.07)



§ 30.08  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   It is the legislative intent that all provisions and sections
of this code be liberally construed, and should any provision or section of
this code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be
construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or
sections, it being the intent that this code shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any provision or section.



   (B)   The provision of division (A) above shall apply to all
amendments of this code whether or not such a provision is re-enacted in the
amendatory ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 30.08)  (Ord. D-1086, passed 10-29-1973, effective 11-8-1973)



§ 30.09  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(Prior Code, § 30.09)



§ 30.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when use of another word or
words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be
corrected and such word or words shall be supplied, omitted, or substituted
as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have
the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text, as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any
question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



(Prior Code, § 30.10)



§ 30.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



(Prior Code, § 30.11)



§ 30.12  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
effective date of the ordinance repealing or modifying it.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



(Prior Code, § 30.12)



§ 30.13  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example:



(Ord. D-645, passed 3-16-1964, effective 3-26-1964; Ord. D-666, passed
9-28-1964, effective 10-8-1964; Ord. D-1416, passed 11-15-1982, effective
1-1-1983; Ord. D-1582, passed 2-13-1989, effective 1-1-1989)



   (B)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:



(M.C.L. § 15.231) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980, effective 1-28-1980; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985, effective 1-12-1985).



(Prior Code, § 30.13)



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published and subsequently amended, the previous code
section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §    
).”



§ 30.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Unless a violation of this code or any ordinance of
the city is specifically designated in the code or ordinance as a municipal
civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Misdemeanors. The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be
a fine not exceeding $500, or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both,
unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation of this
code or any ordinance.



   (C)   Motor vehicle code penalties. The penalties provided by the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being §§ 257.1 et seq. are
adopted by reference, provided however, that the city may not enforce any
provision of the Motor Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days.



   (D)   Municipal civil infractions.



      (1)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil
infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this code or
any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions, as
authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of
1961, being M.C.L. §§ 600.8701 et seq., as amended, and other applicable
laws.



      (2)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular
municipal civil infraction violation by this code or any ordinance, the civil
fines for violations are set forth in Ch. 37.



      (3)   (a)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for
repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this code
or any ordinance. As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second or
any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement
or provision:



            1.   Committed by a person within any six-month
period, unless some other period is specifically provided by this code or any
ordinance; and



            2.   For which the person admits responsibility or
is determined to be responsible.



         (b)   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this
code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation,
the increased fines are set forth in Ch. 37 of this code.



      (4)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city
may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this code or any ordinance.



   (E)   Definition. A VIOLATION includes any act which is prohibited
or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this code or any
ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by
this code or any ordinance.



   (F)   Continuing violations. Each day on which any violation of this
code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be
subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 30.99)  (Ord. D-1086, passed 10-29-1973, effective
11-8-1973; Ord. D-1776, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



CHAPTER 31:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   31.01   Incorporation by reference



   31.02   Responsibility



§ 31.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   No person shall violate any law of the state, nor any rule or
regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state; and no
enumeration of particular laws, rules, or regulations in ordinances of the
city shall be held to be exclusive.



(Prior Code, § 31.01)



§ 31.02  RESPONSIBILITY.



   The prohibition of any act in this code, in any amendment thereof, and
in any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, shall include the causing,
securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act.



(Prior Code, § 31.02)



CHAPTER 32:  JURISDICTION; STREETS



Section



Jurisdiction



   32.01   City boundaries



Streets



   32.15   Street names; vacations of streets and alleys



   32.16   Street numbers



JURISDICTION



§ 32.01  CITY BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the city are as follows, viz.:



      Commencing at the center of the Saginaw River on the east and
west quarter line of Section Thirteen (13), Town Twelve (12) North, Range
Four (4) East, in the County of Saginaw, State of Michigan; thence westerly
on the east and west quarter line of said Section Thirteen (13) to a point at
the intersection of said east and west quarter line with the west street line
of Hermansau Street, which point is eight hundred eighty-seven (887) feet
east of the quarter post between Sections Thirteen (13) and Fourteen (14),
Town Twelve (12) North, Range Four (4) East, on said east and west quarter
line; thence north parallel to the north and south section line between said
Sections Thirteen (13) and Fourteen (14), thirty-three (33) feet; thence west
parallel with the east and west quarter line of said Sections Thirteen (13)
and Fourteen (14), one thousand one hundred thirty-three (1,133) feet; thence
north parallel to the north and south section line between said Sections
Thirteen (13) and Fourteen (14), two hundred ninety-seven (297) feet; thence
west parallel to the east and west quarter (1/4) line of said Section
Fourteen (14), six hundred sixty (660) feet; thence south parallel to the
north and south section line between said Sections Thirteen (13) and Fourteen
(14) to the east and west quarter (1/4) line of said Section Fourteen (14);
thence west on the east and west quarter (1/4) line of Sections Fourteen (14)
and Fifteen (15), Town Twelve (12) North, Range Four (4) East, to the west
section line of said Section Fifteen (15); thence south on the west section
lines of Sections Fifteen (15), Twenty-two (22), Twenty-seven (27), and
Thirty-four (34), in Town Twelve (12) North Range Four (4) East, to the Town
Line between Town Twelve (12) North, Range Four (4) East, Town Eleven (11)
North, Range Four (4) East, thence on the aforesaid Town Line to the
northwest section corner of Section Three (3), Town Eleven (11) North, Range
Four (4) East; thence south on the west section line of said Section Three
(3) to the center of the Tittabawassee River, thence easterly along the
centerline of said River to a point of intersection with a line, said line
being two hundred forty (240) feet southerly of and parallel to the East and
West quarter (1/4) line of Section Two (2), Town Eleven (11) North, Range
Four (4) East; thence easterly, along a line two hundred forty (240) feet
southerly of and parallel to the East and West quarter (1/4) lines of
Sections Two (2) and One (1), Town Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4) East, to
the centerline of the Shiawassee River; thence southwesterly along the
centerline of the Shiawassee River to the west line of Section Two (2), Town
Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4) East; thence south along said west line to
the south line of said Section Two (2); thence east along said south line to
the North and South Quarter (1/4) line of said Section Two (2); thence north
along said North and South quarter (1/4) line to the north line of the south
quarter (1/4) of the south half (1/2) of the Southeast quarter (1/4) of said
Section Two (2); thence east along said line to the east line of said Section
Two (2); thence north along said east line to the east and west eighth (1/8)
line thru the southeast quarter of said Section Two (2); thence west along
said eighth (1/8) line a distance of three hundred (300) feet; thence north
parallel to the east line of said Section Two (2) to a point two hundred
forty (240) feet south of the east and west quarter (1/4) line of said
Section Two (2); thence east on a line two hundred forty (240) feet south of
and parallel to the east and west quarter line of said Section Two (2) and
Section One (1), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4) East to a point
one thousand ninety and twenty hundredths (1,090.20) feet easterly of the
west section line of said Section One (1), said point being six hundred and
six hundredths (600.06) feet southwesterly of the centerline of Washington
Road, measured at right angles to the centerline of said Road; thence
southeasterly one hundred ten and seventy-nine hundredths (110.79) feet along
a line six hundred and six hundredths (600.06) feet southwesterly of and
parallel to the centerline of Washington Road; thence northeasterly six
hundred and six hundredths (600.06) feet at right angles to Washington Road
to the centerline of Washington Road; thence southeasterly two (2) feet along
the centerline of Washington Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline
of the Lull Drain, so called, one hundred nineteen and eighty hundredths
(119.80) feet to the East and West quarter (1/4) line of Section One (1),
Town Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4) East; thence easterly along the East
and West quarter (1/4) line to the center of said Section One (1); thence
southerly along the North and South quarter (1/4) line of Section One (1),
one thousand five hundred eighty-two and twenty-nine hundredths (1,582.29)
feet to the centerline of Washington Road; thence southeasterly along the
centerline of Washington Road five hundred forty-four and ninety-six
hundredths (544.96) feet thence northeasterly at right angles to the
centerline of Washington Road two hundred ninety (290) feet; thence
southeasterly on a line parallel to and two hundred ninety (290) feet
northeasterly of the centerline of Washington Road, four hundred ninety-one
and eighty hundredths (491.80) feet; thence southwesterly at an angle to the
right seventy-four degrees, six minutes, and twenty-one seconds (74°06' 21")
from the last described line, three hundred and one and fifty-three
hundredths (301.53) feet to the centerline of Washington Road; thence
southeasterly along the centerline of Washington Road two hundred forty-one
and eighty-eight hundredths (241.88) feet to the south section line of
Section One (1), Town Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4) East; thence easterly
along said section line one thousand five hundred sixty-one and forty
hundredths (1,561.40) feet to a point on the south section line, said point
being one hundred eighty-eight (188) feet west of the southeast corner of
said Section One (1); thence northerly parallel to the east section line of
said Section One (1), one thousand nine hundred and nineteen (1,919) feet
more or less to the southerly line of Dean Street, so called; thence westerly
at an angle to the left of ninety degrees, five minutes, and forty-three
seconds (90°05'43") from the last described line along the southerly line of
Dean Street, so called, two hundred thirty-seven (237) feet; thence northerly
parallel to the east line of said Section One (1), three hundred sixty-one
(361) feet to the southerly bank of the Lull Drain, so called; thence
northwesterly at an angle to the left of seventy degrees and twenty minutes
(70°20') from the last described line, one hundred (100) feet; thence
southwesterly at an angle to the left of thirty-five degrees and twenty
minutes (35°20') from the last described line, one hundred (100) feet;
thence southwesterly at an angle to the left of twenty-two degrees (22°)
from the last described line, one hundred thirty-one (131) feet; thence
northwesterly at an angle to the right of fifty-four degrees (54°) from the
last described line, forty-one and fourteen hundredths (41.14) feet; thence
northwesterly at an angle to the right of fifty-four degrees (54°) from the
last described line, three hundred five (305) feet; thence northwesterly at
an angle to the left of twenty-one degrees, twenty minutes (21°20') from the
last described line, one hundred (100) feet; thence northwesterly at an angle
to the left of thirty-one degrees and thirty minutes (31°30') from the last
described line, one hundred nine and thirty-five hundredths (109.35) feet to
the East and West quarter (1/4) line of said Section One (1); thence
northerly at right angles to said East and West quarter (1/4) line, one
hundred ninety-eight (198) feet thence westerly, on a line one hundred
ninety-eight (198) feet north of and parallel to the East and West quarter
(1/4) line of Section One (1), to the centerline of Washington Road; thence
southeasterly along the centerline of Washington Road to the northerly line
of Lot 22 of Westlawn Plat extended, being a subdivision of part of the
northwest fraction of Section One (1) Town Eleven (11) North, Range Four (4)
East; thence westerly on the northerly line of Lot 22 as extended to the
westerly line of Lot 22; thence southerly on the westerly line of Lot 22 to
the East and West quarter (1/4) line of said Section One (1); thence westerly
along the East and West quarter (1/4) line of Section One (1) to a point
eight hundred two and fifty hundredths (802.50) feet west of the centerline
of Washington Road; thence southwesterly to a point one hundred eight (108)
feet southerly of and measured at right angles to the East and West quarter
(1/4) line of Section One (1) and six hundred fifty-nine (659) feet easterly
of and measured at right angles to the west section line of said Section One
(1); thence westerly on a line one hundred eight (108) feet south of and
parallel to the East and West quarter (1/4) line of said section to the west
section line of said Section One (1); thence northerly along the west line of
Section One (1) to the northwest section corner of said Section One (1);
thence east on the north section line of Section One (1), in said Town Eleven
(11) North, Range Four (4) East and the north section line of Section Six
(6), Town Eleven (11) North, Range Five (5) East to an intersection with a
line which is seventy-five (75.0) feet East of, measured along the Southerly
line of Bradley St., and parallel to the East line of Lot Seventeen (17),
Sherwill Addition, said Sherwill Addition being Section Six (6), Town Eleven
(11) North, Range Four (4) East; thence southerly along said line to an
intersection with the westerly line of Outer Drive; thence Southerly along
the Westerly line of Outer Drive on an arc of a circle with a radius of nine
hundred fifty-five (955.0) feet to the point of tangency; thence along this
same line, the Westerly line of Outer Drive, South thirty-nine degrees,
twenty seven minutes (39°27'00") West five hundred eighty-seven and forty
hundredths (587.40) feet to an intersection with the Northeasterly line of
Lot Eight (8); thence Northwesterly along said Northeasterly line of Lot
Eight (8) seventy-two and forty-six hundredths (72.46) feet; thence South
fifty-eight degrees and thirty-six minutes (58°36'00") West two hundred
fifty-three and ninety hundredths (253.90) feet; thence south thirty-nine
degrees and twenty-seven minutes (39°27'00") West five hundred thirty-seven
and eighty-eight hundredths (537.88) feet to the centerline of Williamson
Road as established across said Section Six (6); thence South fifty degrees
and thirty-three minutes (50°33'00") east on the centerline of Williamson
Road, four hundred sixty and seventy-five hundredths (460.75) feet; thence
North thirty-nine degrees and twenty-seven minutes (39°27'00") East three
hundred thirty-nine and thirty hundredths (339.30) feet; thence South fifty
degrees and thirty-three minutes (50°33'00") East four hundred fifty-six
(456.0) feet; thence south thirty-nine degrees and twenty-seven minutes
(39°27'00") West three hundred thirty-nine and thirty hundredths (339.30)
feet to the centerline of Williamson Road as established across said Section
Six (6) thence South fifty degrees and thirty-three minutes (50°33'00") East
to the East and West quarter (1/4) line of Section Six (6) thence East along
said East and West Quarter (1/4) line one thousand three hundred fourteen
(1,314.0) feet; thence Northerly one thousand four hundred eighty-five
(1,485.0) feet; thence North eighty-nine degrees and twenty-three minutes
(89°23'00") West six hundred fifty and eighty-nine hundredths (650.89) feet
to the Easterly line of the G.T.R.R. R/W; thence Westerly to a point on the
Westerly line of the G.T.R.R. R/W, said point being eight hundred
seventy-seven (877.0) feet South of the North line of Section Six (6), as
measured along the westerly line of the G.T.R.R. R/W; thence Westerly to a
point on the southeasterly line of the Sherwill Addition, said point being on
the Easterly line of Lot Fifty-Nine of the Sherwill Addition fifty-nine and
eighty-five hundredths (59.85) feet Southerly of the Northeasterly line of
Lot fifty-nine (59); thence North thirty-nine degrees and twenty-seven
minutes (39°27'00") East one hundred ninety-seven and fifty-three hundredths
(197.53) feet; thence North nine degrees and twenty-seven minutes
(09°27'00") East one hundred thirty-one and eighty-seven hundredths (131.87)
feet to an intersection with the Northerly line of Lot Fifty-Six (56); thence
Northwesterly along said Northerly line one hundred seventy-three and thirty
hundredths (173.30) feet to an intersection with the Easterly line of Bagshaw
Drive, thence Northerly along the Easterly line of Bagshaw Drive on an arc of
a circle with a radius of eight hundred fifty-three (853) feet to the point
of tangency; thence North one degree, thirty minutes, and thirty seconds
(01°30'30") West along a line which is perpendicular to the North line of
Section Six (6), two hundred four and forty-five hundredths (204.45) feet to
the North Line of said Section; thence East along the North line of Section
Six (6) Town Eleven (11) North, Range Five (5) East, which is also the South
line of Section Thirty-one (31), Town Twelve (12) North, Range Five (5) East,
to the South quarter (1/4) post of Section Thirty-one (31), Town Twelve (12)
North, Range Five (5) East; thence north on the north and south quarter (1/4)
line of said Section Thirty-one (31), to the east and west quarter (1/4) line
of said Section Thirty-one (31); thence east on the east and west quarter
(1/4) lines of Sections Thirty-one (31) and Thirty-two (32), Town Twelve (12)
North, Range Five (5) East, to the north and south quarter (1/4) line of said
Section Thirty-two (32); thence north on the north and south quarter (1/4)
lines of Sections Thirty-two (32); Twenty-nine (29), Twenty (20), Seventeen
(17), and Eight (8), Town Twelve (12) North, Range Five (5) East, to the
North quarter (1/4) post of said Section Eight (8); thence West on the North
Section line of said Section Eight (8) to the center of the Saginaw River;
thence southerly along the center of said Saginaw River to the place of
beginning.



(Prior Code, § 32.01)  (Ord. D-888, passed 8-11-1969, effective 8-21-1969)



STREETS



§ 32.15  STREET NAMES; VACATIONS OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Name. All streets shall be known and designated by the names
applied thereto, respectively, on the map of the city. The naming of any new
street or the changing of the name of any street shall be done by ordinance,
which ordinance shall amend said city map.



   (B)   Street or alley vacation. A street or alley vacation means
that the public is relinquishing or vacating, the public interest in the
property.  After a street or an alley is vacated, the public, except as
otherwise provided by law, no longer has a right to use the property for
access.



   (C)   Vacated portions of streets and alleys. Vacated portions of
streets and alleys shall be shown on said city map.  The vacating of any
street or alley shall be done by ordinance, which ordinance shall amend said
city map.



   (D)   Petition.  Any request for vacating a street or alley within
the city limits shall be initiated in writing from one or more individuals
who own real property abutting the street or alley proposed to be vacated by
their completion of a petition form and provision of the following
information:



      (1)   Name and contact information of petitioner;



      (2)   A vicinity map showing the general area of the proposed
vacation;



      (3)   Where appropriate, a plat map indicating the specific
parcels abutting the street or alley to be vacated;



      (4)   The name, address, and signatures of at least 51% of the
individuals owning property abutting the street or alley to be vacated, and
within 300 feet of same, indicating their agreement to the proposed vacation.



   (E)   Petition filing.  The petition, and any filing fee
established by Council, shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office.  The
City Clerk will provide copies of the petition and supporting documentation
to the City Engineer, Chief Inspector and City Planning Commission.



   (F)   City department/staff review.  The City Engineer and the
Chief Inspector, or their designees, shall each review the petition and all
supporting documentation and determine an estimate of costs as provided
herein.  Upon payment of that estimate, the City Engineer will conduct any
traffic study that is necessary.  At the discretion of the City Engineer or
the Chief Inspector, the petitioner shall be required to provide the
following:   



      (1)   A survey, containing an exact legal description of the
portion of the road to be vacated; and/or



      (2)   A site or other conceptual plan detailing the proposed
use of the vacated street or alley and the timeframe in which any proposed
improvements are to be accomplished.



Following the completion of their review, the City Engineer and Chief
Inspector shall each submit a report on their review of the petition to the
City Planning Commission.



   (G)   City Planning Commission consideration. 



      (1)   Research. The City Planning Commission will evaluate the
petition and supporting documentation, as well as the reports of the City
Engineer and Chief Inspector, and shall base its recommendation on what is in
the best interest of the city and how the vacation shall affect the abutting
property owners.



      (2)   Public hearing. The City Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing at which time all interested persons will be heard. Notice of
the public hearing shall be mailed via regular mail to all property owners
abutting the affected street or alley, and within 300 feet of same, at least
15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall be posted for the
general public in the City Clerk’s Office, the city’s website and on the
city’s cable network.



      (3)   Recommendation. The City Planning Commission may
recommend approval, denial or approval with conditions of the request. The
written recommendation of the City Planning Commission shall be forwarded to
the City Council for its consideration and shall address, at a minimum, the
following criteria:



         (a)   How the proposed vacation will benefit the public
interest;



         (b)   Whether the proposed vacation will be detrimental
to traffic circulation, access, emergency services, utility facilities, or
other, similar right-of-way purposes;



         (c)   Whether the street or alley is a necessary part of
a long-range circulation, pedestrian/bicycle, or other plan; and



         (d)   Whether the proposed vacation is consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan and adopted street standards.



      (4)   Notice. The petitioner will be given written notice of
the recommendation of the City Planning Commission.



   (H)   Council final action. Upon receipt and review of the
recommendation from the City Planning Commission on the petition, City
Council may sustain the recommendation by introduction and adoption of an
ordinance or may rule otherwise. The decision of City Council is final.



   (I)   Assessment of costs.



      (1)   Upon receipt of petition.  The petitioner shall be
provided an estimate of the cost to be incurred by the city in reviewing the
petition, conducting any necessary traffic study, providing the public
notices required in this section, and conducting the public hearing, which
costs shall be the sole responsibility of the petitioner.  Upon receipt of
payment in full of the estimated costs, the steps set forth in divisions (F)
through (H) shall proceed.  If payment is not received within 30 days of an
estimate being provided, the petition will be considered withdrawn.



      (2)   Petition approval.  If the petition is approved, the
petitioner shall be provided an estimate of the cost determined to implement
the street or alley vacation, including the costs of any utility relocation
or changing of traffic signs or signals, which costs are the sole
responsibility of the petitioner. Upon receipt of payment in full of the
estimated costs, city staff shall implement the recommendation. If payment is
not received within 30 days of an estimate being provided, the petition will
be considered withdrawn.



      (3)   Estimated costs.  Petitioners shall be responsible for
payment of any costs associated with their petition that are in excess of any
estimate provided.  Should the actual costs involved in processing a
petition be less than the estimate paid, any overpayment shall be returned to
the petitioner by the city.



   (J)   Withdrawal. If the petitioner(s) wishes to voluntarily
withdraw their petition, they must do so in writing and file same with the
City Clerk.  Any costs incurred by the city prior to the notice of
withdrawal shall be paid as provided herein.



   (K)   Abandonment. Following approval of a petition to vacate a
street or alley, if the improvements or use proposed in any plan submitted
with said petition are not completed or substantially begun, as determined at
the discretion of the City Engineer and Chief Inspector, in the timeframe set
forth in said petition, the request for the vacation shall be deemed
abandoned, and the city may take any steps necessary to re-open said street
or alley to public use.



(Prior Code, § 32.10)  (Ord. O-203, passed 5-7-2018, effective 5-17-2018)



§ 32.16  STREET NUMBERS.



   (A)   The principal building on each premises fronting on a city
street shall bear a distinctive street number in accordance with the revised
Street Numbering Map on file in the office of the City Engineer, which Map is
hereby adopted and made a part hereof. The Chief Inspector of the Division of
Permits and Inspections of the Department of Engineering of the city shall
designate in accordance with said Map the appropriate street number for each
new building hereafter constructed, which shall require such number, upon
issuance of the building permit therefor.



   (B)   No owner shall fail to place and maintain the correct number
upon the front of each building requiring such number, which said number
shall face the street and be adjacent to the principal entrance and in such
position as to be plainly visible from the street. Numbers shall be not less
than three inches in height and shall contrast in color with the color of the
building or background to which they are attached.



   (C)   As additional streets are established by platting or otherwise
and as existing streets are altered, it shall be the duty of the City
Engineer to add the same to the Street Numbering Map or to revise the same
and to assign to the various blocks and parts of said streets appropriate
numbers in accordance with the existing street numbering plan established by
said Map.



(Prior Code, § 32.11)  (Ord. D-588, passed 10-15-1962, effective
10-15-1962)  Penalty, see § 30.99



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION AND ASSESSMENT



Section



Income Tax



   33.01   Adoption of state law



   33.02   Computation of taxable income



   33.03   Employer to file return



   33.04   Rate of tax



Special Assessments



   33.15   Definitions



   33.16   Special Assessment Board



   33.17   Council authority



   33.18   Preliminary proceedings



   33.19   Council determination



   33.20   Special assessment roll



   33.21   Assessing single lots



   33.22   Assessment roll hearing and confirmation



   33.23   Attachment of liens



   33.24   Handling of assessment roll



   33.25   Deficiency assessments and refunds



   33.26   Reassessment in event of illegality



   33.27   Collection by court action



   33.28   Boulevard lighting



Neighborhood Enterprise Zones



   33.40   Purpose



   33.41   Definitions



   33.42   Designation of zones



   33.43   Application for certificate



   33.44   Inspections



   33.45   Issuance of certificate of approval



   33.46   Inspection fee



Cross-reference:



   Low Income Housing Tax Exemption, see TSO VIII



INCOME TAX



§ 33.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The “Uniform City Income Tax Ordinance,” being Chapter II of the
Michigan Uniform City Income Tax Ordinance, M.C.L. §§ 141.501 through
141.787 (Public Act 284 of 1964, as amended by Public Act 307 of 1968, Public
Act 42 of 1969, Public Act 149 of 1970, and Public Act 169 of 1971) a true
copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, be and the same is
hereby incorporated herein by reference made a part hereof as if fully set
forth herein, and adopted.



(Prior Code, § 33.01)  (Ord. D-645, passed 3-16-1964, effective 3-26-1964;
Ord. D-666, passed 9-28-1964, effective 10-8-1964)



§ 33.02  COMPUTATION OF TAXABLE INCOME.



   (A)   For tax years beginning prior to 1989, an individual taxpayer
in computing his or her taxable income is allowed a deduction of $600 for
each personal and dependency exemption under the rules for determining
exemptions and dependents as provided by the Federal Internal Revenue Code.
The taxpayer may claim his or her spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if
the taxpayer and the spouse are both subject to the tax imposed by this
subchapter, the number of exemptions claimed by each of them when added
together may not exceed the total number of exemptions allowed under this
subchapter.



   (B)   For tax years beginning afer 1988 and prior to 2005, an
individual taxpayer in computing his or her taxable income is allowed
deductions of $1,000 for each personal and dependency exemption under the
rules for determining exemptions and dependents as provided in the Federal
Internal Revenue Code. The taxpayer may claim his or her spouse and
dependents as exemptions, but if the taxpayer and the spouse are both subject
to the tax imposed by this subchapter, the number of exemptions claimed by
each of them when added together shall not exceed the total number of
exemptions allowed under this subchapter. For a taxpayer, or the taxpayer’s
spouse, who is 65 years of age or older, or who is blind as defined in § 504
of the Income Tax Act of 1967, Public Act 281 of 1967, being M.C.L. §
206.504, one additional exemption is allowed under this section; or if the
taxpayer, or the taxpayer’s spouse, is both 65 years of age or older and
blind, two additional exemptions are allowed under this section.



   (C)   For tax years beginning after 1988 and prior to 2005, an
exemption in the amount of $1,000 is allowed to a person with respect to whom
a deduction under § 151 of the Internal Revenue Code is allowable to another
federal taxpayer during the tax year and is therefore not considered to have
a federal personal exemption under divisions (A) and (B) above.



   (D)   For tax years beginning after 2004, an individual taxpayer in
computing his or her taxable income is allowed deductions of $750 for each
personal and dependency exemption under the rules for determining exemptions
and dependents as provided in the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The taxpayer
may claim his or her spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if the taxpayer
and spouse are both subject to tax imposed by this subchapter, the number of
exemptions claimed by each of them when added together may not exceed the
total number of exemptions allowed under this subchapter. For a taxpayer, or
the taxpayer’s spouse, who is 65 years of age or older, or who is blind as
defined in § 504 of the Income Tax Act of 1967, Public Act 281 of 1967,
being M.C.L. § 206.504, one additional exemption is allowed under this
section; or if the taxpayer, or the taxpayer’s spouse, is both 65 years of
age or older and blind, two additional exemptions are allowed under this
section.



   (E)   For tax years beginning after 2004, an exemption in the amount
of $750 is allowed to a person with respect to whom a deduction under § 151
of the Internal Revenue Code, being 26 U.S.C. § 151 is allowable to another
federal taxpayer during the tax year and is therefore not considered to have
a federal personal exemption under divisions (A) and (B) above.



(Prior Code, § 33.02)  (Ord. D-645, passed 3-16-1964, effective 3-26-1964;
Ord. D-956, passed 9-28-1970, effective 10-8-1970; Ord. D-1582, passed
2-13-1989, effective 7-1-1989; Ord. O-41, passed 12-19-2005, effective
12-29-2005)



§ 33.03  EMPLOYER TO FILE RETURN.



   (A)   An employer shall file a return, furnished by or obtainable on
request from the city, and pay to the city the full amount of the tax
withheld on or before the last day of the month following the close of each
calendar quarter, except that if during any calendar month other than the
last month of a calendar quarter the amount withheld exceeds $100, the
employer shall deposit the amount withheld with the Finance Director before
the end of the next calendar month.



   (B)   (1)   An employer shall file a reconciliation of his or her
quarterly returns on or before the last day of February following each
calendar year in which he or she has withheld from an employee’s
compensation. A deficiency is due when the reconciliation is filed. If the
employer made monthly or quarterly or both payments in excess of the amount
withheld from an employee’s compensation, the city upon proper verification
shall refund the excess to the employer.



      (2)   In addition to the reconciliation, the employer shall
file an information return for each employee from whom the city income tax
has been withheld and each employee subject to withholding under this
section, setting forth his or her name, address, and Social Security number,
the total amount of compensation paid him or her during the year, and the
amount of city income tax withheld from him or her. The information return
shall be on a copy of the federal W-2 form or on a form furnished or approved
by the city. A copy of the information return shall be furnished to the
employee.



      (3)   If an employer goes out of business or otherwise ceases
to be an employer, reconciliation forms and the information return forms
shall be filed by the date the final withholding return and payment are due.



   (C)   If the city believes that collection of the tax withheld from
an employee’s compensation as imposed under this subchapter will be
jeopardized by delay, the city, whether or not the time otherwise prescribed
by this section for making the return and paying or depositing the tax has
expired, shall immediately assess the tax and interest and additions provided
by the subchapter. The tax, interest, and additions thereupon shall become
immediately due and payable and the city shall make an immediate notice and
demand for payment, notwithstanding the fact that the withheld tax is not due
under this section until the last day of the month following the end of the
calendar month or quarter.



(Prior Code, § 33.03)  (Ord. D-645, passed 3-16-1964, effective 3-26-1964;
Ord. D-1416, passed 11-15-1982, effective 11-15-1982)



§ 33.04  RATE OF TAX.



   (A)   Subject to the exclusions, adjustments, exemptions, and
deductions herein provided, an annual tax of 1% on corporations and resident
individuals and of 0.5% on nonresident individuals for general revenue
purposes is hereby imposed as an excise on income earned and received through
June 30, 1989.



   (B)   Subject to the exclusions, adjustments, exemptions, and
deductions herein provided, an annual tax of 1.5% on corporations and
resident individuals and of 0.75% on nonresident individuals for general
revenue purposes is hereby imposed as an excise on income earned and received
on and afer July 1, 1989.



(Prior Code, § 33.04)  (Ord. D-645, passed 3-16-1964, effective 3-26-1964;
Ord. D-1582, passed 2-13-1989, effective 7-1-1989)



SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



§ 33.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST. When referring to the cost of any improvement, shall include the
cost of surveys, plans, right-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices,
advertising, financing and construction, and all other costs incident to the
making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor, and the
financing thereof.



   ENGINEER. The Director of Public Services and City Engineer.



   IMPROVEMENT. Any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is
to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially
benefitted thereby, in proportion to the benefit derived therefrom.



   LAST CITY TAX ASSESSMENT RECORDS. The last assessment roll for city ad
valorem taxes which has been reviewed by the city’s Board of Review, as
supplemented by any changes in the names or addresses of such owners or
parties listed thereon filed with the City Assessor subsequent to the date of
such review.



(Prior Code, § 33.20)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-815, passed 1-29-1968, effective 2-8-1968)



§ 33.16  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT BOARD.



   (A)   The Special Assessment Board shall consist of the Manager, who
shall be Chairperson, the Engineer, who shall be Vice Chairperson, the
Director of Finance, and the Assessor. The Manager shall designate a city
employee who is not a member of the Board to serve as Secretary of the Board.
The Director of Finance and the Assessor may each act under any and all
circumstances through his or her deputy. Either the Manager or the Engineer
may act through the Secretary, and in such event the proceedings or document
shall indicate for whom the Secretary is acting. The Secretary’s authority
to so act shall be conclusively presumed from such recital.



   (B)   Three members of the Board, regular or acting, shall
constitute a quorum. The Board may designate an Assistant Secretary.



   (C)   The Board shall keep minutes of all hearings and meetings
conducted by it, which minutes shall be prepared and signed by the Secretary
or Assistant Secretary and the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson, and filed in
the office of the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 33.21)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-815, passed 1-29-1968, effective 2-8-1968)



§ 33.17  COUNCIL AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Council shall have power to determine that the whole or
any part of the cost of any improvement shall be defrayed by special
assessments upon the property especially benefitted, but such determination
shall not be made until the preliminary proceedings provided for in § 33.18
shall have been completed.



   (B)   The Council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable
number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to
be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a
petition voluntarily presented; but in either event, such petition shall be
advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional.



(Prior Code, § 33.22)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948)



§ 33.18  PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Before determining to make any improvement any part of the
cost of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the Council shall
require the Manager to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and
specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the
same with the Secretary of the Special Assessment Board, together with his or
her recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by
special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of
the City, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and
the lands which should be included in the special assessment district.



   (B)   After such filing, a public hearing shall be held before the
Special Assessment Board at a time and place to be fixed by the Chairperson
or Vice Chairperson. The Secretary of the Board shall cause notice of the
time and place of such hearing to be published once in the official newspaper
of the City not less than ten days prior to the date of said hearing. Such
notice shall also be given by the Secretary of the Board to each owner of or
party in interest in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the
last city tax assessment records, by mailing by first-class mail addressed to
such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records at least ten days
before the date of such hearing.



   (C)   At the time and place specified in such notice for the public
hearing, the Special Assessment Board shall meet and hear any person to be
affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned
from time to time by the Board. After completion of the hearing, the Board
shall transmit to the Council the plans, specifications, and estimates
theretofore filed with its Secretary by the Manager as required in division
(A) above, and shall report to the Council its findings as to the necessity
of the proposed public improvement and its recommendations as to what
proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if
any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments
in which assessments may be paid, and the special assessment district upon
which the special assessments should be levied.



(Prior Code, § 33.23)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-579, passed 8-6-1962, effective 8-16-1962)



§ 33.19  COUNCIL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   After the report of the Special Assessment Board has been
received, the Council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement
and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special
assessment upon the property especially benefitted in proportion to the
benefits thereto. By such resolution, the Council shall approve the plans and
specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof;
determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment
upon the property especially benefitted and what part, if any, shall be
general obligation of the city; determine the number of installments in which
assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on
installments, not to exceed 10% per annum; designate the district or land and
premises upon which special assessments shall be levied; and direct the
Engineer to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the
Council’s determination.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, the Council
may, in its discretion, delay the preparation of the special assessment roll
until after the completion of the improvement, in which case the actual cost
thereof shall be reported to the Council, and the special assessment roll
shall be then made for such actual cost rather than for the estimated cost as
in other cases.



(Prior Code, § 33.24)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-1337, passed 3-31-1980, effective 4-10-1980)



§ 33.20  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (A)   The Engineer shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll
including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district
designated by the Council, and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of
land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the
lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel
of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There
shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to
the city at large.



   (B)   When the Engineer shall have completed such assessment roll,
he or she shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his or her certificate to
the effect that said roll has been made by him or her pursuant to a
resolution of the Council (giving the date of adoption of same) and that in
making the assessments therein he or she has, as near as may be, according to
his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in such resolution, and to the City Charter and the provisions of
this subchapter. Thereupon the Engineer shall file said special assessment
roll with the Clerk, who shall present the same to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 33.25)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948)



§ 33.21  ASSESSING SINGLE LOTS.



   (A)   When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or
in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such
premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of the Charter, or any
ordinance of the city, or law of the state, and is not of that class required
to be prorated among several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment
district, an account of the labor, material, or service for which such
expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect
to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall
be reported to the Director of Finance who shall immediately charge and bill
the owner, if known. The Manager shall annually on or before January 15, or
at such other times as he or she may deem advisable, direct the Engineer to
prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges which shall not
have been paid. Said roll shall be filed with the Clerk who shall present the
same to the Council.



   (B)   The provisions of the preceding sections of this subchapter
with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings necessary
to be had before making the improvements shall not apply to assessments
contemplated in division (A) above.



   (C)   Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll authorized by
this section, the Council shall determine the number of installments in which
assessments may be paid and the rate of interest to be charged on
installments, not to exceed 10%.



(Prior Code, § 33.26)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-1337, passed 3-31-1980, effective 4-10-1980)



§ 33.22  ASSESSMENT ROLL HEARING AND CONFIRMATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the Council
shall order it filed in the office of the Clerk for public examination; shall
fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll; and shall
direct the City Clerk to give notice of said hearing. Such notice shall
specify the time and place of such hearing and shall be published once in the
official newspaper of the city not less than ten days prior to the date of
such hearing. Such notice shall also be given by the City Clerk to each owner
of or party in interest in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon
the last city tax assessment records, by mailing by first-class mail
addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records, at
least ten days before the date of such hearing.



   (B)   Any person deeming himself or herself aggrieved by the special
assessment roll may file his or her objections thereto in writing with the
Clerk prior to the close of said hearing, which written objections shall
specify in what respect he or she deems himself or herself aggrieved.



   (C)   The Council shall meet and review the said special assessment
roll at the time and place appointed, or at an adjourned date therefor, and
shall consider any written objections thereto. The Council may correct said
roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land, or
other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted
in the Council’s minutes. After such hearing and review the Council may
confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have
made, if any, or may refer it back to the Engineer for revision or may annul
it and any proceedings in connection therewith. The Clerk shall endorse the
date of confirmation upon such special assessment roll.



   (D)   Such roll shall, upon confirmation, be final and conclusive.



(Prior Code, § 33.27)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-570, passed 4-23-1962, effective 4-23-1962; Ord. D-579, passed
8-6-1962, effective 8-16-1962)



§ 33.23  ATTACHMENT OF LIENS.



   All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll,
including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of
confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or
parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the
respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land. Such lien shall be
of the same character and effect as the lien created for city taxes and shall
include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of
the Council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien
of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as
may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of
proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon.



(Prior Code, § 33.28)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948)



§ 33.24  HANDLING OF ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (A)   The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the
Finance Director for collection immediately after its confirmation. The
Finance Director shall give notice by one publication in the official
newspaper of the city that said special assessment roll (identifying it) has
been filed in his or her office and specifying when and where payments may be
made thereon. He or she may mail statements of the several assessments to the
respective owners, as indicated by the records of the Assessor of the several
lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and
the manner in which it may be paid; provided however, that failure to mail
any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner
to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment.



   (B)   The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid
during the period of 60 days from the date of confirmation of the special
assessment roll without interest or penalty. Not later than 15 days after the
end of said 60-day period the Finance Director shall transmit such roll to
the Assessor with all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The Assessor
shall then compute, in each year, the annual installment of each assessment
to be spread upon the tax roll of the city for that year, based upon the
number of annual installments as shall have been fixed by the Council.



   (C)   The first installment shall be spread upon the next city tax
roll in a column headed “Special Assessments”, together with interest
upon all unpaid installments from the date of the confirmation of the roll to
and including the July 31 of the year in which such tax roll is made;
provided, that any fraction of a month shall be considered as a full month.
Thereafter one installment shall be spread upon each annual tax roll,
together with one year’s interest upon all unpaid installments; provided,
that when any annual installments shall have been prepaid as hereinafter
provided, then there shall be spread upon the tax roll for such year only the
interest upon all unpaid installments.



   (D)   After each installment has been placed on the tax rolls, the
same shall be collected by the Finance Director with the same rights and
remedies, and the same penalties and interest, as provided in the Charter for
the collection of taxes.



   (E)   After the expiration of the 60-day period provided for in
division (B) above, any installment which has not been spread upon the tax
rolls may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof plus one full
year’s interest thereon. Any person desiring to pay such installment in
advance shall first secure the proper statement from the Assessor to permit
the Finance Director to compute the amount to be paid. The Finance Director
shall report to the Assessor all advance payments on installments so that the
Assessor shall have such information before spreading installments an the
next city tax roll.



(Prior Code, § 33.29)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-590, passed 10-22-1962, effective 11-1-1962)



§ 33.25  DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost
thereof, the Director of Finance shall certify to the Manager the total cost
of said improvement. The Manager shall forward this report to the Council,
together with the amount of the original roll for said improvement.



   (B)   Should the assessments in any special assessment roll,
including the amount assessed to the city-at-large, prove insufficient for
any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then
the Council shall make additional assessments against the city and the
several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original
assessments, to supply the deficiency, but the total amount assessed against
any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received
from the improvement. Should the assessments levied prove to be more than 5%
larger than necessary to defray the cost of the improvement, then the Council
shall, by resolution, order the excess over 5% to be applied to the unpaid
installments of said special assessments against each lot or parcel of land,
in the inverse order in which they are payable. Any amount of such excess as
to any lot or parcel of land which cannot be applied as aforesaid shall be
refunded to the owner as indicated by the records of the City Assessor at
8:00 a.m. on May 1 immediately following the determination of the amount of
excess to be refunded, unless some other person shall, before payment of said
refund, establish to the satisfaction of the Finance Director that he or she
is legally obligated to pay the taxes on said lot or parcel of land, in which
case such other person shall receive the refund.



(Prior Code, § 33.30)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948;
Ord. D-725, passed 4-25-1966, effective 5-5-1966)



§ 33.26  REASSESSMENT IN EVENT OF ILLEGALITY.



   Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council,
be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be
illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or
whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause
a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former
assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in
the original assessment; and whenever the assessment or any part thereof,
levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and
not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and
the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied.



(Prior Code, § 33.31)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948)



§ 33.27  COLLECTION BY COURT ACTION.



   In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien
therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and
penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city
against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount.
If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or
informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant
or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on
satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a
proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render
judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon
such premises.



(Prior Code, § 33.32)  (Ord. D-156, passed 7-26-1948, effective 8-8-1948)



§ 33.28  BOULEVARD LIGHTING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the special
assessment district for the installation of a boulevard lighting system on
any street shall be limited to lands abutting the improvement.



(Prior Code, § 33.33)  (Ord. D-444, passed 1-20-1958, effective 1-30-1958;
Ord. D-569, passed 3-26-1962, effective 4-5-1962)



NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE ZONES



§ 33.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve city neighborhoods and to
further the maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development of
housing for all persons regardless of income level; to provide that the city,
by resolution, may designate one or more neighborhood enterprise zones
pursuant to the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, Public Act 147 of
1992, as amended, being M.C.L. §§ 207.771 et seq.; and to encourage,
through ad valorem property tax benefits established by said Act, the
construction of new structures that have as their primary purpose owner
occupied one- or two-unit residential housing and the rehabilitation of
existing structures having as their primary purpose residential housing
consisting of one to eight units, by bringing them into conformity with
minimum Building and Housing Code standards and improving the livability of
units.



(Prior Code, § 33.40)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A certificate issued by the Chief Inspector,
or his or her designee, of the Department of Economic Development of the
city, attesting to the fact that a new or rehabilitated facility for which an
enterprise zone certificate is in effect is in compliance with the
construction and safety codes of the city.



   NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE ZONE. Any zone designated by the city by
resolution as a neighborhood enterprise zone pursuant to the requirements of
the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act.



   NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE ZONE ACT. Public Act 147 of 1992, as amended,
being M.C.L. §§ 207.771 et seq.



   NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE ZONE CERTIFICATE. A certificate as defined and
issued pursuant to the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act.



   NEW FACILITY. A new structure that has as its primary purpose
residential housing consisting of one or two units, one of which is or will
be occupied by an owner as his or her principal residence. NEW FACILITY
includes a new individual condominium unit, in a structure with one or more
condominium units, that has as its primary purpose residential housing and
that is or will be occupied by an owner as his or her principal residence.
NEW FACILITY does not include apartments.



   OWNER. The record titleholder of, or the vendee of the original land
contract pertaining to, a new facility or a rehabilitated facility for which
a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is applied for or issued.



   REHABILITATED FACILITY. An existing structure with a current true cash
value of $80,000 or less per unit, that has or will have as its primary
purpose residential housing consisting of one to eight units, the owner of
which proposes improvements that, if done by a licensed contractor, would
cost in excess of $5,000 per owner occupied unit or 50% of the true cash
value, whichever is less; or in excess of $7,500 per non-owner occupied unit
or 50% of the true cash value, whichever is less, or the owner proposes
improvements that would be done by the owner and not a licensed contractor
and the cost of the materials would be in excess of $3,000 per owner occupied
unit, or $4,500 per non-owner occupied unit and will bring the structure into
conformity with minimum Saginaw Housing Code standards for occupancy or
improve the livability of the units while meeting minimum Saginaw Housing
Code standards. REHABILITATED FACILITY also includes an individual
condominium unit, in a structure with one or more condominium units that has
as its primary purpose residential housing, the owner of which proposes the
above-described improvements. REHABILITATED FACILITY does not include a
facility rehabilitated with the proceeds of an insurance policy for property
or casualty loss.



(Prior Code, § 33.41)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.42  DESIGNATION OF ZONES.



   The city, by Council resolution, may, upon city initiative or on
petition of any person:



   (A)   Designate one or more neighborhood enterprise zones within a
local governmental unit. A neighborhood enterprise zone, other than a
neighborhood enterprise zone designated pursuant to division (B) below, shall
contain not less than ten platted parcels of land. All the land within a
neighborhood enterprise zone shall also be compact and contiguous;



   (B)   Designate one or more neighborhood enterprise zones limited to
new facilities if each new facility in the zone is part of a development of
ten or more units. The total acreage of the neighborhood enterprise zones
designated under this section shall not exceed 15% of the total acreage
contained within the boundaries of the local governmental unit;



   (C)   Not less than 60 days before the passage of a resolution
designating a zone, the City Clerk shall give written notice to the Assessor
and to the governing body of each taxing unit that levies ad valorem property
taxes in the proposed neighborhood enterprise zone;



   (D)   Before acting upon the resolution, the City Council shall make
a finding that the proposed neighborhood enterprise zone is consistent with
the master plan and the neighborhood preservation and economic development
goals of the city, and adopt a statement of the city’s goals, objectives,
and policies relative to the maintenance, preservation, improvement, and
development of housing for all persons regardless of income level living
within the proposed neighborhood enterprise zone; and



   (E)   The city shall hold a public hearing on the application not
later than 45 days after the date the notice is sent but before acting upon
the resolution.



(Prior Code, § 33.42)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.43  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.



   Once a neighborhood enterprise zone is established in the manner
provided in § 33.42 and the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act,
Public Act 147 of 1992, being M.C.L. §§ 207.771 et seq., any person who
proposes to construct a new facility or to rehabilitate property located in a
neighborhood enterprise zone, and who intends to seek the tax benefits
provided in the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, may file an application for
a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate with the City Clerk. The
application must be filed before a building permit is issued for the work
proposed, or as otherwise provided by the City Council by resolution if the
application is filed not later than six months following the date the
building permit is issued, and shall be filed in the form and manner
prescribed in said Act. The application for a certificate shall be subject to
the requirements, approvals, and conditions of the Neighborhood Enterprise
Zone Act.



(Prior Code, § 33.43)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.44  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Before the sale of a new facility or a rehabilitated facility
for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect, an
inspection by the city shall be requested and made to determine compliance
with all applicable city construction and safety codes.



   (B)   No sale of any new or rehabilitated facility for which a
neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect may be finalized until
there is compliance with the applicable city construction and safety codes
and a certificate of approval attesting to the fact is issued by the Chief
Inspector or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 33.44)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.45  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   A certificate of approval shall be issued only after the new
or rehabilitated facility has been inspected and meets the requirements of
all the applicable city construction and safety codes. An inspection report
shall be completed by the inspector after the inspection is completed. The
report shall note all violations found in the facility. Before a certificate
of approval is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved and the
required inspection fee paid.



   (B)   After issuance, a certificate of approval shall only be valid
for one sale of a new or rehabilitated facility. A new inspection and
certificate of approval shall be required each time a new or rehabilitated
facility is sold.



(Prior Code, § 33.45)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



§ 33.46  INSPECTION FEE.



   The city shall charge a non-refundable inspection fee which shall be
set by Council resolution and paid in advance of the certificate of approval
inspection.



(Prior Code, § 33.46)  (Ord. O-76, passed 2-9-2009, effective 2-19-2009)



CHAPTER 34:  ELECTIONS



Section



   34.01   Designation of boundaries of voting precincts



   34.02   Regular city elections



§ 34.01  DESIGNATION OF BOUNDARIES OF VOTING PRECINCTS.



   (A)   The territory comprising the one ward of the city shall be
divided into 16 voting precincts numbered as follows:



 

Precinct




1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14


15


16




 



   (B)   The boundaries of the precincts numerated in division (A)
above are as described on the true copy of the official map on file in the
City Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, § 34.01)  (Ord. D-1599, passed 9-25-1989, effective 10-5-1989;
Ord. O-7, passed 6-16-2003, effective 6-26-2003; Ord. O-71, passed 6-2-2008,
effective 6-12-2008; Ord. O-183, passed 7-11-2016, effective 7-21-2016)



§ 34.02  REGULAR CITY ELECTIONS.



   (A)   Time of filing nominating petitions for office of Council
member. Nominating petitions for the office of Council member shall be filed
with the City Clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday prior to the
even-year general election, which is held on the Tuesday succeeding the first
Monday in November in every even-numbered year.



   (B)   Time Council members take office. Council members shall be
elected at the even-year general elections pursuant to Michigan Election Law,
Public Act 116 of 1954, being M.C.L. §§ 168.1 et seq. and shall take office
on the following Monday.



(Prior Code, § 34.02)  (Ord. D-975, passed 2-8-1971, effective 2-18-1971;
Ord. O-71, passed 6-2-2008, effective 6-12-2008; Ord. O-183, passed
7-11-2016, effective 7-21-2016)



CHAPTER 35:  EMERGENCIES



Section



Emergency Management Plan



   35.01   Intent and purpose



   35.02   Definitions



   35.03   Emergency Management Coordinator



   35.04   Emergency Management Liaison; duties



   35.05   Mayor and City Manager: powers and duties



   35.06   Governor declaration request



   35.07   Volunteers; appointment



   35.08   Rights of disaster relief force



   35.09   Temporary seat of government



   35.10   Liability



EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN



§ 35.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to provide for
the planning, mitigation, response, and recovery from natural and human-made
disasters within the city by being part of the Saginaw County emergency
management program; to appoint the County Emergency Management Coordinator as
the city’s Emergency Management Coordinator; to provide a means for
coordinating the resources of the municipality with those of the county; to
appoint a city liaison to work with the Emergency Management Coordinator; and
to provide a means through which the City Council may exercise the authority
and discharge the responsibilities vested in it by this subchapter and the
Emergency Management Act, Public Act 390 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 30.401 et
seq., as amended.



   (B)   This subchapter does not relieve any elected officials or
municipal departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by
general law or local ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 35.01)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Emergency Management Act, Public Act 390 of 1976, being M.C.L.
§§ 30.401 et seq., as amended.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Saginaw.



   DISASTER. An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
human-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snow, ice
storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spills, water contamination,
utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major
transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air
contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military
action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from
terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders.



   DISASTER RELIEF FORCE. All agencies of state, county, or municipal
government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees,
and all other persons or groups of persons identified in the Saginaw County
Emergency Operations Plan as having duties to perform or those called into
duty or working at the direction of a party identified in the plan to perform
disaster or emergency-related tasks during a local state of emergency.



   DISTRICT COORDINATOR. The Michigan Department of State Police District
Emergency Management Coordinator.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR. The person appointed to coordinate
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities for all emergency
or disaster situations within a given geographic area made up of one or more
political subdivisions. The city hereby elects to be part of the Saginaw
County Emergency Management Program.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM. A program established to coordinate
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities for all emergency
or disaster situations within a given geographic area made up of one or more
political subdivisions. The city hereby elects to be part of the Saginaw
County Emergency Management Program.



   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The plan developed and maintained by the
county and political subdivisions included in the emergency management
program area for the purpose of responding to all emergency or disaster
situations by identifying and organizing the disaster relief force.



   GOVERNOR’S STATE OF DISASTER. An executive order or proclamation by
the Governor that implements the disaster response and recovery aspects of
the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the
county or municipal programs affected.



   GOVERNOR’S STATE OF EMERGENCY. An executive order or proclamation by
the Governor that implements the emergency response and recovery aspects of
the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the
county or municipal programs affected.



   LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY. A declaration by the Mayor of Saginaw. This
declaration implements the response and recovery aspects of the Saginaw
County Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes certain actions as described
in this subchapter.



   MANAGER. The chief administrative officer of the city.



   MAYOR. The chief elected official and chief executive officer of the
city.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association,
governmental entity, or any other entity.



   VITAL RECORDS. Those records that contain information needed to
continue the effective functioning of the city’s government and provide for
the protection of the rights and interests of persons under emergency
conditions in the event of an emergency or disaster situation.



(Prior Code, § 35.02)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.03  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.



   (A)   Appointment.



      (1)   By the authority of this subchapter, the Mayor hereby
appoints the Saginaw County Emergency Management Coordinator as the Emergency
Management Coordinator for the city. In addition to acting for, and at the
direction of, the Chairperson of the Saginaw County Board of Commissioners,
the Emergency Management Coordinator will also act for, and at the direction
of, the Mayor.



      (2)   A line of succession for the Emergency Management
Coordinator has been established and is listed in the Saginaw County
Emergency Operations Plan.



   (B)   Duties. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall comply with
the standards and requirements as established by the Department of State
Police Emergency Management Division, under the authority of the Act, in
accomplishing the following:



      (1)   Direct and coordinate the development of the Saginaw
County Emergency Operations Plan, in accordance with the policies and plans
established by the appropriate federal and state agencies;



      (2)   Specify departments or agencies which must provide an
annex to the plan or otherwise cooperate in its development;



      (3)   Identify departments and agencies to be included in the
Emergency Operations Plan as part of the disaster relief force;



      (4)   Develop and maintain a County Resource Manual;



      (5)   Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization
of volunteer personnel;



      (6)   Assure the emergency management program meets
eligibility requirements for state and federal aid;



      (7)   Coordinate and/or conduct training and exercise programs
for the disaster relief force within the county and to test the adequacy of
the Emergency Operations Plan;



      (8)   Through public information programs, educate the
population as to actions necessary for the protection of life and property in
an emergency or disaster;



      (9)   Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements;



      (10)   Assist the city liaison with the development of
municipal standard operating procedures which are consistent with the County
Emergency Operation Plan;



      (11)   Oversee the implementation of all functions necessary
during an emergency or disaster in accordance with the Emergency Operations
Plan;



      (12)   Coordinate county emergency management activities with
those of municipalities included in the county emergency management program,
other municipalities, the state, and adjacent counties;



      (13)   Coordinate all preparedness activities, including
maintaining primary and alternate Emergency Operations Centers; and



      (14)   Identify mitigation opportunities within the county and
encourage departments/agencies to implement mitigation measures.



(Prior Code, § 35.03)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.04  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT LIAISON; DUTIES.



   (A)   By the authority of this subchapter, the City Manager has
appointed the Fire Chief to serve as a city liaison for the purpose of
assisting the County Emergency Management Coordinator in coordinating the
emergency management activities within the city. The duties of the city
liaison are as follows:



      (1)   Coordinate city emergency management activities with
those of the county and adjacent jurisdictions;



      (2)   Assist the County Emergency Management Coordinator with
the development of the County Emergency Operation Plan and the incorporation
of city resources into the plan;



      (3)   Identify city departments and agencies to be included in
Emergency Operations Plan as part of the disaster relief force;



      (4)   Identify city resources and forward information to the
County Emergency Management Coordinator for inclusion in the County Resource
Manual;



      (5)   Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization
of volunteer resources;



      (6)   Assist the County Emergency Management Coordinator with
administering training programs;



      (7)   Coordinate city participation in exercises conducted by
the county;



      (8)   Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements;



      (9)   Assist in educating the population as to actions
necessary for the protection of life and property in an emergency or disaster;



      (10)   Encourage departments/agencies within the city to
identify and implement procedures to mitigate the effects of potential
disasters;



      (11)   Assist in the assessment of the nature and scope of the
emergency or disaster and collect damage assessment information and forward
it to the county;



      (12)   Coordinate the vital records protection program; and



      (13)   Develop municipal standard operating procedures for
disaster response which are consistent with the County Emergency Operations
Plan.



   (B)   The City Manager shall appoint a minimum of two persons as
successors to the position of the city liaison. The line of succession shall
be supplied to the County Emergency Management Coordinator. A successor shall
have the full authority of the city liaison while acting as liaison.



(Prior Code, § 35.04)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.05  MAYOR AND CITY MANAGER: POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   On an annual basis, the Mayor and the City Manager shall
review the eligibility and performance of the County Emergency Management
Coordinator and make recommendations to the City Council.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Manager shall review the effectiveness of
the County Emergency Operations Plan as the plan relates to the municipality
once every two years. With the assistance of the city liaison, they shall
make recommendations to the County Emergency Management Coordinator of any
changes which may be needed. After this review and incorporation of necessary
changes, the Mayor and City Manager shall certify the plan to be current and
adequate for the city the ensuing two years.



   (C)   When circumstances within the city indicate that the
occurrence or threat of occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury, or
loss of life or property from natural or human-made cause exists, the Mayor
may declare a local state of emergency. Such a declaration shall be promptly
filed with the County Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall forward it
to the Department of State Police, Emergency Management Division. This
declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
days except with the consent of the City Council.



   (D)   If the Mayor invokes such power and authority, he or she
shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the City Council for one or
more emergency meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act
267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq. to perform its normal
legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and will
report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this
subchapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the
City Council unless specifically provided herein.



   (E)   The Mayor/City Manager may do one or more of the following
under a local state of emergency:



      (1)   Direct the Emergency Management Coordinator to implement
the Emergency Operations Plan;



      (2)   Issue directives as to travel restrictions on local
streets within the city;



      (3)   Relieve city employees of normal duties and temporarily
reassign them to other duties;



      (4)   Activate mutual aid agreements;



      (5)   Direct the city disaster relief effort in accordance
with the County Emergency Operations Plan and city standard operating
procedures;



      (6)   Notify the public of the situation and recommend
in-place or evacuation protective measures;



      (7)   Request a state of disaster or emergency declaration
from the Governor as described in § 35.06; and



      (8)   When obtaining normal approvals would result in further
injury or damage, the Mayor/City Manager may, until the City Council
convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to
the following:



         (a)   For a period of up to seven days, send city
employees and resources to the aid of other communities, as provided by
mutual aid agreements;



         (b)   For a period of up to seven days, make contracts
and obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster
purposes;



         (c)   Employ temporary workers;



         (d)   Purchase and distribute supplies, materials, and
equipment; and



         (e)   Make, amend, or suspend the application of any
ordinance or rule necessary for emergency management purposes which
supplement a rule, order, or directive issued by the Governor or a state
agency. Such an amendment or suspension of any ordinance or rule shall be
temporary and, upon the Governor’s declaration that a state of disaster or
state of emergency is terminated, shall no longer be in effect.



   (F)   The Mayor/City Manager may, if a state of disaster or
emergency is declared by the Governor, assign and make available for duty the
employees, property, or equipment of the city within or without the physical
limits of the city as ordered by the Governor or the Director of the Michigan
Department of State Police in accordance with the Act.



(Prior Code, § 35.05)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.06  GOVERNOR DECLARATION REQUEST.



   If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be
a state of disaster or a state of emergency by the Governor, and the
Mayor/City Manager determines that the situation is beyond the control of the
city, he or she may request the Governor to declare that a state of disaster
or state of emergency exists in the city in accordance with the Act. This
shall be done by immediately contacting the County Emergency Management
Coordinator. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall immediately contact
the District Coordinator. The District Coordinator, in conjunction with the
Emergency Management Coordinator and the city liaison, shall assess the
nature and scope of the disaster or emergency, and they shall recommend state
personnel, services, and equipment that will be required for its prevention,
mitigation, or relief.



(Prior Code, § 35.06)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.07  VOLUNTEERS; APPOINTMENT.



   Each city department, commission, board, or other agency of city
government is authorized to appoint volunteers to augment its personnel in
time of emergency to implement emergency functions assigned in the County
Emergency Operations Plan. Such individuals are part of the disaster relief
force and shall be subject to the rules and operational control set forth by
the respective department, commission, board, or agency through which the
appointment was made, and shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary
travel and subsistence expenses.



(Prior Code, § 35.07)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.08  RIGHTS OF DISASTER RELIEF FORCE.



   In accordance with the Act, personnel of the disaster relief force
while on duty shall:



   (A)   If they are employees of the city or other governmental
agency, regardless of where serving, have the powers, duties, rights,
privileges, and immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their
employment; and



   (B)   If they are not employees of the city or other governmental
agency, be entitled to the same rights and immunities as are provided for by
law.



(Prior Code, § 35.09)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.09  TEMPORARY SEAT OF GOVERNMENT.



   The City Council shall provide for the temporary movement and
reestablishment of essential government offices in the event that existing
facilities cannot be used.



(Prior Code, § 35.10)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



§ 35.10  LIABILITY.



   (A)   As provided for in the Act and this subchapter, the city, or
the agents or representatives of the city, shall not be liable for personal
injury or property damage sustained by the disaster relief force. In
addition, any member of the disaster relief force engaged in disaster relief
activity shall not be liable in a civil action for damages resulting from an
act or omission arising out of and in the course of the person’s good-faith
rendering of that activity, unless the person’s act or omission was the
result of that person’s gross negligence or willful misconduct. The right
of a person to receive benefits or compensation to which he or she may
otherwise be entitled to under the worker’s compensation law, any pension
law, or Act of Congress will not be affected as a result of said activity.



   (B)   As provided for in the Act, any person owning or controlling
real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants
the municipality the right to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any
part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons or
for any other disaster related function during a declared local state of
emergency or during an authorized practice disaster exercise shall not be
civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such
real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other permission,
or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. A person owning or
controlling real estate or other premises who has gratuitously granted the
use of the real estate or his or her premises for the purpose described in
this division (B) shall be legally obligated to make known to the licensee
any hidden dangers or safety hazards which are known to the owner or occupant
of the real estate or premises which might possibly result in the death or
injury or loss of property to a person using the real estate or premises.



(Prior Code, § 35.11)  (Ord. D-1639, passed 8-26-1991, effective 8-26-1991)



CHAPTER 36:  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE



Section



   36.01   Bonds



   36.02   Notice



§ 36.01  BONDS.



   In addition to special requirements for particular surety bonds, all
such bonds running to the city shall be approved by the City Attorney and
filed with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 36.01)



§ 36.02  NOTICE.



   (A)   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections,
abating nuisances, or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the
city may be charged against the premises and/or the owner thereof, under the
provisions of the Charter, any ordinance of the city, or any law of the
state, shall be served:



      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner, as indicated by
the records of the City Assessor, personally or by leaving the same at his or
her residence, office, or place of business with some person of suitable age
and discretion;



      (2)   By mailing said notice by first-class mail to such
owner, as indicated by the records of the City Assessor, at his or her last
known address; or



      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal,
or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer unless
permission is given by said officer to remove said notice.



   (C)   With regard to abatement of nuisance for noxious weeds, the
city shall serve notice by posting a public notice to the city residents in
March by city-approved media sources. Posting public notice by publication in
March will serve as the official and only notice by the city.



(Prior Code, § 36.02)  (Ord. D-365, passed 8-8-1955, effective 8-18-1955;
Ord. O-30, passed 2-21-2005, effective 3-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 30.99



CHAPTER 37:  CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section



Municipal Civil Infractions



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Municipal civil infraction actions; commencement



   37.03   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service



   37.04   Municipal civil infraction citation; contents



   37.05   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau



   37.06   Issuance of an appearance ticket by designated public
servants



   37.07   Fines



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. M.C.L. §§ 600.101 through 600.9948 (Public Act 236 of 1961), as
amended.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the
City of Saginaw authorized by this code or any ordinance to issue municipal
civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.



   BUREAU. The City of Saginaw Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as
established by this chapter.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared
by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of
Saginaw Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs,
if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted
by the city, as authorized by Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act,
Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L. §§ 600.8701 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 37.01)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



§ 37.02  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTIONS; COMMENCEMENT.



   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized city official of:



   (A)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; or



   (B)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the
alleged violator to appear at the City of Saginaw Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau.



(Prior Code, § 37.02)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



§ 37.03  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows.



   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.



   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
District Court for the district, whose jurisdiction encompasses the city.



   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. A copy of the citation shall be retained by
the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Chapter 87 of the
Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L. §§ 600.8701 et
seq.



   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official: “I declare under the penalty
of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information,
knowledge, and belief.”



   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.



   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person
if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or City Attorney approves in
writing the issuance of the citation.



   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized city official as follows.



      (1)   Except as provided by division (G)(2) below, an
authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon
the alleged violator.



      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the
use or occupancy of land, a building, or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or structure
by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class
mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner’s last
known address.



(Prior Code, § 37.03)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



§ 37.04  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION; CONTENTS.



   (A)   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.



   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that
he or she may do one of the following:



      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance;



      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
“with explanation” by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in
person, or by representation; or



      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by doing either of the following:



         a.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before
a judge or District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is
requested by the city; and



         b.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a
judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



   (C)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following:



      (1)   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility
“with explanation” in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for an appearance;



      (2)   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility,
the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and
obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless the hearing
date is specified on the citation;



      (3)   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal
hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city;



      (4)   At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear
in person before a judge or District Court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney; and



      (5)   At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.



   (D)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation, or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance, is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.



(Prior Code, § 37.04)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



§ 37.05  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau (“Bureau”) as authorized under § 8396 of the
Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1991, being M.C.L. § 600.8396) to accept
admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to
municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized
city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed
by this code or any ordinance.



   (B)   Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The
Bureau shall be located at Saginaw City Hall, and shall be under the
supervision and control of the Finance Director. The Finance Director,
subject to the approval of the City Council, shall adopt rules and
regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint any necessary,
qualified city employees to administer the Bureau.



   (C)   Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of
municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and
for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice has been issued. The
fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not
entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the Bureau. Nothing in this
section or subchapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a
municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any
violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required
to dispose of a municipal civil infraction at the Bureau and may have the
violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The
unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall
not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person’s rights,
privileges, and protection afforded by law.



   (D)   Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The
scope of the Bureau’s authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of
any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.



   (E)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations as provided in § 37.03(F) and (G). In addition to any other
information required by this code or other ordinance, the notice of violation
shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the
Bureau, the method by which an appearance may be made, the address and
telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open,
the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the
consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the
required time.



   (F)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator
receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the
Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for
appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance
may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.



   (G)   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine
not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal
ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made
and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by a schedule of fines for
the violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction
citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of the citation may
be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged
violator’s last known address. The citation filed with the court does not
need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as
provided by Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1961,
being M.C.L. §§ 600.8701 et seq. but shall consist of a sworn complaint
containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice
and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation.



(Prior Code, § 37.05)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective
11-11-1996; Ord. D-1788, passed 11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996)



§ 37.06  ISSUANCE OF AN APPEARANCE TICKET BY DESIGNATED PUBLIC SERVANTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      APPEARANCE TICKET. A complaint or written notice issued and
subscribed by a police officer or other public servant authorized by law or
ordinance to issue such appearance ticket, directing a designated person to
appear before a judge of the Seventieth District Court for the County of
Saginaw to answer his or her alleged commission of the violation or
violations of state law or local ordinance as set forth on the appearance
ticket. The form of the appearance ticket shall be as provided by the Code of
Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L. § 764.9f.



      PUBLIC SERVANT. Any officer or employee empowered to issue and
serve an appearance ticket.



   (B)   A public servant of the city who has authorization to issue
and serve an appearance ticket of the city may, pursuant to the Code of
Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L. §§ 764.9a et seq.
and subject to the provisions hereof, serve an appearance ticket on a person
if the public servant has reasonable cause to believe that the person has
committed the offense charged.



   (C)   The City Manager may appoint the following officers or
employees the authority to issue and service appearance tickets citing a
violation of an ordinance of the city: the Chief Inspector; Housing Code
Inspectors; Electrical Code Inspector; Plumbing Code Inspector; Building Code
Inspectors; Zoning Code Officer; Fire Investigator; Finance Director; and
Environmental Improvement Officers. The department head of a department
enforcing the aforecited codes and/or ordinances may also be empowered to
issue an appearance ticket. The department head of each department enforcing
ordinance violations or an employee appointed by the department head shall
review all appearance tickets for accuracy and legal sufficiency prior to the
appearance ticket being forwarded to the Seventieth District Court for the
County of Saginaw.



   (D)   The City Manager may establish an appropriate training program
to instruct each public servant authorized to issue an appearance ticket.



(Prior Code, § 37.06)  (Ord. D-1623, passed 11-19-1990, effective
11-29-1990)



§ 37.07  FINES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise established by ordinance or other section
under this subchapter, a schedule of fines payable to the Bureau for
admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance
violation notices is hereby established. Fines for the classes of municipal
civil infractions shall be as follows:



 

Class of Municipal Civil Offense
 
First Offense
 
First Repeat Offense
 
Second or Any Subsequent Repeat Offense


A
 
$10
 
$20
 
$40


B
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


C
 
$50
 
$100
 
$200


D
 
$100
 
$200
 
$400


E
 
$200
 
$400
 
$500


F
 
$500
 
$1,000
 
$2,000



 



   (B)   A copy of the schedule of fines, as amended from time to time,
shall be posted at the Bureau.



   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless
otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, § 37.07)  (Ord. D-1775, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC SERVICES



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE



      51.   SEWER



      52.   WATER



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   50.01   Definitions/interpretations



   50.02   Collection by the city



   50.03   Supervision by the City Manager



   50.04   Precollection practices



   50.05   Refuse containers



   50.06   Materials not to be collected



   50.07   Storing of refuse



   50.08   Collection



   50.09   Fees



   50.10   On-site burning



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS/INTERPRETATIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   BRUSH. All tree and shrub parts including: branches, roots, stumps, and
trunks; provided, however, that no tree or shrub part shall measure more than
four inches in diameter at its largest part.



   BULKY ITEMS. Any item of household furniture, mattress, water heater,
refrigerator, freezer, floor coverings, appliances, washer, dryer, stove,
weight over 50 pounds, and any items of similar nature named by the City
Manager in any regulation promulgated hereunder.



   CITY. The City of Saginaw, Michigan.



   COMMERCIAL HAULER. Any person who collects, hauls, or conveys refuse in
or through the city in accordance with a contractual agreement between that
person and the city.



   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, which contains not more than
two dwelling units.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy
by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities.



   FAMILY. One or two persons or parents with their direct lineal
descendants and adopted children and stepchildren (and including the domestic
employees thereof) together with not more than three persons not related,
living together in the whole or part of a dwelling unit comprising a single
housekeeping unit.



   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Saginaw.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING. The classes of dwellings and buildings defined as
multiple dwellings in the Housing Law of Michigan, Public Act 167 of 1927,
being M.C.L.§ 125.402, as amended.



   OWNER. The person listed as the person with the latest ownership
interest of a parcel of real property on the property records of the City
Assessor.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   REFUSE. Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes, animal droppings, or entrails) including garbage, rubbish, yard
wastes, street cleanings, trimmings, and special items.



   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION DISTRICT. The geographic portion of the city
where collection service by the city or its commercial hauler is available to
users and subscribers.



   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and
non-combustible wastes, such as (by way of illustration, but not limitation)
paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, crockery, and similar materials.



   YARD WASTE. All grass clippings, leaves, weeds, landscape twigs, and
other small plant waste items not more than two inches in diameter measured
at its largest part.



(Prior Code, § 50.01)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



§ 50.02  COLLECTION BY THE CITY.



   (A)   Collection required. Except as provided herein, all refuse
accumulated in the city’s residential collection district shall be
collected, conveyed, and disposed of in accordance with this chapter by the
city or its commercial hauler, or by an actual producer or owner of premises
as defined by and in accordance with the provisions of division (B) below. No
person other than the city or its commercial hauler shall collect, convey
over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse
accumulated in the city except as follows.



   (B)   Actual producer. This chapter shall not prohibit the actual
producer of refuse or the owner of premises with the exception of owners of
premises with five or more dwelling units upon which refuse has accumulated
either personally or by his or her agents, employees, or servants to collect,
convey, and dispose of such refuse; provided such producers or owners comply
with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing law, except
as provided herein. (Owners of premises with dwelling units of four or fewer
but including at least one shall subscribe to city collection service.)



   (C)   Outside collectors. This chapter shall not prohibit collectors
of refuse collected from outside of the “residential collection district”
from hauling such refuse over city streets, provided such collectors comply
with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing law.



   (D)   Garbage disposal. This chapter shall not prohibit the disposal
of any garbage by a garbage disposal unit connected with an integral part of
the sewage system of the building and capable of reducing all garbage
deposited therein to “properly shredded garbage” as that phrase is used
in § 51.028 of this code; provided, however, that this method of disposal
involving use of the sewage system of the city shall not be used by
commercial haulers or outside collectors.



(Prior Code, § 50.02)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



§ 50.03  SUPERVISION BY THE CITY MANAGER.



   All refuse collected by the city or its commercial hauler in
residential collection districts shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed
of by the city under the supervision of the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee. The City Manager shall have the authority to make
regulations concerning the days of collection, type, and location of waste
containers, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance,
and disposal of refuse as the City Manager shall find necessary, and to
change and modify the same after notice and subject to any applicable law;
provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof.



(Prior Code, § 50.03)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



§ 50.04  PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Garbage. All garbage shall be drained of liquid and shall be
wrapped in paper before being deposited for collection.



   (B)   Refuse. All refuse shall be drained of liquid before being
deposited for collection.



   (C)   Twigs. All twigs under two inches in diameter shall be placed
in paper compost bags or in approved containers marked “Yard Waste”,
before being deposited for collection.



   (D)   Yard waste. All yard waste shall be placed in an approved
container marked “yard waste”, and placed curbside for disposal.



   (E)   Brush. One bundle of brush (cut or broken branches) is allowed
monthly. The brush cannot exceed four inches in diameter. Individual brush
pile must be no more than four foot by four foot by ten feet in length.



   (F)   Bulky items. Bulky items shall be placed curbside for pick up.
The schedule for bulky items collection shall be set by the City Manager and
posted in the City Clerk’s office.



   (G)   Recyclable. The city does provide bi-weekly recycling
services. One recycle bin per address is provided free to residents.
Additional bins can be purchased at the posted cost. Official recycle bins or
bins less than 33 gallons and properly labeled as “Recyclables Only” may
be used. Place all allowed paper, glass, metal, and #1 - #7 plastic
containers, with the exception of #6 foam materials, together in one
recycling bin. Remember to empty and rinse all containers before recycling.
Removing labels is not necessary. Empty, flatten, and cut down cardboard
boxes into pieces no larger than two foot by three foot and place in or under
recycling bin.



(Prior Code, § 50.04)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  REFUSE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Duty to provide and maintain in sanitary condition. Refuse
containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the
premises. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant of the premises to
provide the refuse container; except the owner of a multiple dwelling shall
be responsible for providing the refuse disposal container(s). Refuse
containers shall be maintained in sanitary condition. Any container which
does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or that may have ragged
or sharp edges, or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person
collecting the contents thereof, shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The
City Manager shall have the authority to halt collection services at any
premises for failure to comply herewith.



   (B)   Approved containers. Except as otherwise provided in the City
Manager’s regulations, all containers shall meet the requirements of this
section. Every can shall be made of galvanized iron, plastic, or other
rust-resistant material, shall be covered, shall taper from top to bottom,
and shall have a capacity of no more than 35 gallons. The weight of the
container and its contents may not exceed 50 pounds. Plastic bags of a type
approved by the City Manager may be used but not as an exterior container for
garbage or other material that is too sharp or too heavy for the strength of
the bag. No more than 20 bags per household can be placed out for pickup each
week.



   (C)   Sanitation. Containers shall be of a type approved by the city
and shall be kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times.



   (D)   Prohibited containers. The following containers are
prohibited: metal drums, fiber or paperboard drums, wire trash burners,
barrels, paper shopping bags, cardboard boxes, or containers having sharp or
jagged exposures; containers in excess of 35 gallons, or hand holds adequate
to permit the container to be handled safely and easily by the collector,
broken bags, scattered bags, or containers that are likely to disintegrate
due to weather or the nature and weight of its contents, any container that
has been treated with chlorine bleach, ammonia, or any other substance
intended to repel animals or which may cause harm to the person collecting
the refuse. Unauthorized containers, broken bags, scattered bags, and
prohibited items will be removed by the city pursuant to § 94.066(B), and
the cost charged back to the property owners pursuant to § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 50.05)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  MATERIALS NOT TO BE COLLECTED.



   The following items will not be picked up by the city’s collection
service:



   (A)   Materials placed in prohibited containers;



   (B)   Small items in piles requiring a shovel or fork to handle;



   (C)   Stones, bricks, plaster, shingles, lumber, demolition
materials, building materials, concrete, sand, gravel, and earth;



   (D)   Dead animals;



   (E)   Motor vehicle parts or bodies and tires;



   (F)   Liquids, including oil, paints, and solvents; any material
defined as “hazardous” under any environmental or health law; any
material which is radioactive, acidic, caustic, or explosive;



   (G)   Ashes containing hot cinders or smoldering embers;



   (H)   Fire-damaged furniture or material;



   (I)   Material resulting from contract work, including (by way of
description, but not limitation) landscaping, tree trimming, construction or
demolition, or work done by utility companies;



   (J)   Human waste or excrement; and



   (K)   Approved containers treated with bleach or a hazardous
material to repel animals.



(Prior Code, § 50.06)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



§ 50.07  STORING OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street,
alley, or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by
such person or not, within the city unless it is in an approved container for
collection, or under express approval granted by the City Manager. No person
shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water.



   (B)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of
garbage or refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited. Failure to provide for weekly collection for the purpose to
protect the public health and the removal of accumulation of garbage or
refuse after the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and subject to the penalties as provided in § 50.99.



   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep, or
deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer,
parkway, or other public place or onto any premises. Any person found guilty
of such act shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 50.99.



(Prior Code, § 50.07)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed
8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  COLLECTION.



   (A)   Point of collection. Refuse to be collected by the city shall
be placed on the property side of the curb on paved streets, or in the area
between the sidewalk and the edge of the roadway on uncurbed streets on one
location not earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled day of
collection but not later than 7:00 a.m. of the scheduled day of collection.
No rubbish and garbage shall be placed on the public sidewalk. Emptied
containers and any materials not collected shall be removed from the street
on the day of collection or the day of the refusal to collect the material,
as applicable. It shall be the responsibility of the occupants or persons in
charge of a residence in the city to place all small or separate items of
refuse accumulating on the premises in approved containers and to set the
containers out on the scheduled collection days. If carts are used, the carts
shall not unduly restrict the removal of the containers.



   (B)   Collection practices.



      (1)   Collection schedule. Collection of refuse shall be made
on a weekly schedule throughout the city. The collection schedule and the
residential collection districts shall be set by the City Manager and posted
in the City Clerk’s office. The City Manager may set separate schedules for
the collection of brush and special items.



      (2)   Limitation of properties served.



         (a)   The collection of refuse by the city’s
collection service will be limited to residential properties. The quantity of
refuse to be collected from residential multi-family dwelling units shall be
limited to no more refuse than is produced by the average dwelling unit.



         (b)   No properties outside the residential collection
districts shall be provided collection service by the city.



      (3)   Interrupted collection schedule. No collection of refuse
will be made on New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. During the remainder of a week which
includes one of the above holidays, all collections will be one day later
than normal with the Friday schedule being collected on Saturday.



      (4)   Collection of special items. Special items as defined
herein will be collected on a weekly basis. The schedule will be posted in
the City Clerk’s office.



      (5)   Rules and regulations. Regulations set by the City
Manager shall be presented to the City Council for its approval, and a copy
of the approved regulations shall be available in the City Clerk’s office.
Any amendment of the regulation shall be presented to the City Council for
approval and filed with the City Clerk.



      (6)   Waiver of property interest; scavenging prohibited. The
act of placing refuse at the curbside shall constitute a voluntary waiver of
any privacy or possessory right or interest of any person claiming a past or
present ownership interest in the refuse; including any ownership interest in
any value the refuse may have as an item for recycling. Nothing herein
however shall relieve any person of any responsibility, duty, or liability
for any injury or harm which may result from such prior ownership including
any liability which may be imposed or result under any law intended to
protect the environment or to protect the public health, welfare, or safety.



      (7)   Unauthorized collection or transportation prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to collect, disturb, or transport refuse
placed on either private or public property unless the person is an employee
of the city, a commercial hauler, or a person engaging in collection and
transportation of special items as defined by § 50.01, with the exception of
refrigerators.



(Prior Code, § 50.08)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. D-1660, passed 7-27-1992, effective 7-27-1992; Ord. O-11, passed
8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed 8-24-2015, effective
9-3-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  FEES.



   (A)   Residential. All fees for solid waste collection, disposal,
recycling, processing, and marketing including materials to be placed in a
landfill or composted, whether such services are provided by the city or its
commercial hauler, shall be set by the City Manager with City Council
approval and the fee schedule shall be posted in the City Clerk’s office.



   (B)   Commercial (includes properties with five or more dwelling
units). The fee schedules for optional payment and service for the city
collection of refuse from a business located in a residential collection
district shall be set based upon a calculation which takes into account such
factors as the differences in volume, weight, and nature of the material
collected from the business as compared to the average refuse material
collected from a residential dwelling unit. Such fees shall be fixed by the
City Manager with City Council approval and posted in the City Clerk’s
office.



   (C)   Lien against premises served. The charges for rubbish services
which are not already levied as a millage on the premises served are hereby
recognized to constitute a lien pursuant to the Revenue Bond Act, Public Act
94 of 1993, being M.C.L. § 141.121, as amended. Whenever such charge is
delinquent for six months, the city official in charge of the collection
shall certify to the tax assessing officer of the city the fact of such
delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as
a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien enforced
in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected
and the lien enforced against such premises. All provisions of the Charter of
the city and of the laws of the state applicable to the time and manner of
certification and collection of delinquent city taxes levied against real
estate in the city shall be applicable to and shall be observed in the
certification and collection of charges for rubbish services.



   (D)   Billing procedure and delinquent accounts. Solid waste
disposal bills shall be mailed annually and become due and payable 90 days
following the billing date. A 10% penalty shall become payable on past due
accounts. The halting of the city’s collection service at a premises for
nonpayment of refuse service charges shall be a right in addition to the
right of the city to proceed for the collection of the unpaid charge in any
manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim.



(Prior Code, § 50.09)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-92, passed
11-23-2009, effective 12-3-2009; Ord. O-138, passed 6-25-2012, effective
7-5-2012; Ord. O-166, passed 8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



§ 50.10  ON-SITE BURNING.



   (A)   Open burning. Open burning of refuse in the city is
specifically prohibited, except as provided in § 92.12. Any person found
guilty of such act shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 50.99.



   (B)   Incinerators. No person shall burn or permit to be burned on
the premises within the person’s control any refuse, unless the same shall
be burned in a completely enclosed incinerator properly designed to prevent
the emission of smoke, flying paper, and ash therefrom and such person has
received all the required approvals, licenses, and permits; and such burning
is in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Any person found
guilty of such an act shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in §
50.99.



(Prior Code, § 50.10)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-154, passed
10-23-2013, effective 11-2-2013; Ord. O-166, passed 8-24-2015, effective
9-3-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any
provision of this chapter is responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided in Ch. 37.



   (B)   Authorized city official. The City Engineer and/or his or her
designees are hereby designated as the authorized city officials, as defined
by Ch. 37, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil
infraction violation notices as provided by Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 50.99)  (Ord. D-1658, passed 7-13-1992, effective 7-23-1992;
Ord. D-1769, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1785, passed
11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996; Ord. O-11, passed 8-11-2003, effective
8-21-2003; Ord. O-166, passed 8-24-2015, effective 9-3-2015)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWER



Section



Sewers



   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Installations



   51.003   Privately constructed sewers



   51.004   Outside sewers



   51.005   Miscellaneous provisions



   51.006   Sanitary sewers



   51.007   Sewer connection investigation



Wastewater Disposal



   51.020   Purpose and authority



   51.021   Administration



   51.022   Abbreviations



   51.023   Definitions



   51.024   Use of POTW required



   51.025   Discharge to natural outlets



   51.026   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   51.027   Roof and stormwater connections prohibited



   51.028   Prohibited discharge standards



   51.029   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards



   51.030   State pretreatment standards



   51.031   Local limits



   51.032   City’s right of revision



   51.033   Dilution



   51.034   Pretreatment facilities



   51.035   Additional pretreatment measures



   51.036   Toxic substances and petroleum products control and
accidental discharge prevention



   51.037   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   51.038   Hauled wastewater



   51.039   Wastewater discharge permit application



   51.040   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process



   51.041   Reporting requirements



   51.042   Control manholes and monitoring facilities



   51.043   Right of entry



   51.044   Confidential information



   51.045   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



   51.046   Administrative enforcement remedies



   51.047   Judicial enforcement remedies



   51.048   Supplemental enforcement action



   51.049   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



   51.050   Miscellaneous provisions



   51.051   Rules and regulations



   51.052   Conflict



   51.053   Savings clause



Wastewater Disposal Charges



   51.065   Purpose



   51.066   Applicability of charges



   51.067   Definitions



   51.068   Basis of charge



   51.069   Optional arrangement



   51.070   Wastewater disposal charges for premises within and outside
the city



   51.071   Wastewater exceeding discharge limitations



   51.072   Penalty



   51.073   No free wastewater disposal service



   51.074   Collection



   51.075   Agreements



   51.076   Agreements with public officers and agencies



   51.077   User charges and fees



 



   51.999   Penalty



SEWERS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF INSPECTOR. The City Engineer and Superintendent or the Assistant
Superintendent of Maintenance and Service.



   SEWER CONNECTION. The part of the sewerage system connecting the sewer
main and the lot line of abutting property.



   SEWER EXTENSION. The part of the sewerage system from the lot line of
abutting property extending to the premises served.



   SEWER MAIN. The part of the sewerage system intended to serve more than
one sewer connection.



(Prior Code, § 51.01)



§ 51.002  INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   Sewer connections to city sewer mains shall be installed only
under city supervision, either by city employees or by others pursuant to a
contract with the city. A written permit from the City Engineer must be
obtained.



   (B)   Hereafter, upon the installation of a sewer main, except sewer
mains carrying stormwater only, in any street or alley in the city, a sewer
connection shall be installed for each abutting lot or parcel of land upon
which there is a building occupied and used as a residence and not served by
the city sewer system, and for each other abutting lot or parcel of land,
which, under the provisions of any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation,
is required to be connected to the city sewer system. Notice of intent to
install any such sewer connection, objection thereto, hearing thereon, and
final determination thereof shall be as provided in § 96.003(B)(3) and
(B)(4). Upon written request signed by the owners, as indicated by the
records of the City Assessor’s office, of any other abutting lot or parcel
of land, a sewer connection shall be installed for said lot or parcel of
land, provided such request is delivered to the City Engineer prior to the
beginning of construction of the sewer main. The cost of any sewer connection
installed as herein authorized shall be charged against the lot or parcel of
land served and the owner of such lot or parcel of land, shall be a lien
thereon and shall be collected as provided in § 33.21. When any sewer
connection is installed by city employees, either under this section or under
§ 96.003(B), the cost to be charged shall be the cost established therefor,
as provided in this section. A written permit from the City Engineer must be
obtained.



   (C)   All sewer connections other than those provided for in §
96.003(B) and division (B) above shall be installed only by the city and only
upon the prepayment of the cost thereof as determined by the City Manager and
approved by the Council, and that such amount thereof shall be a lien
assessed against the property and collected as provided in § 33.21. A
written permit from the City Engineer must be obtained.



   (D)   No person shall install a sewer extension without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. The fee for such permit
shall be approved by City Council and available in the Engineering Office.



   (E)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (F)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 51.02)  (Ord. D-209, passed 1-14-1950, effective 2-13-1958;
Ord. D-449, passed 2-3-1958, effective 2-13-1958; Ord. O-111, passed
4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)



§ 51.003  PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED SEWERS.



   (A)   No person shall construct any private sewer main which will be
served directly or indirectly by the city sewerage system without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer and approval from the
Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent of Maintenance and Service.
The fee for such permit shall be $5per lineal foot of each sewer main and in
no case shall any such fee be less than$500.



   (B)   No person shall install any sewer connection to any private
sewer main which will be served directly or indirectly by the city sewerage
system without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. The
fee for such permit shall be approved by Council and available in the Office
of the City Clerk.



   (C)   No person shall install any sewer extension from a connection
of any private sewer main which will be served directly or indirectly by the
city sewerage system without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. The fee for such permit shall be approved by City Council and
available in the Engineering Office.



   (D)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (E)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 51.03)  (Ord. D-449, passed 2-3-1958, effective 2-13-1958;
Ord. O-111, passed 4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)



§ 51.004  OUTSIDE SEWERS.



   (A)   No property located outside the limits of the city shall be
served directly or indirectly by the city sewerage system unless the person
so served, or his or her authorized representative, has first entered into
contract with the city, such contract to be approved by the Council.



   (B)   For all water consumers subject to the sewer service charge,
said charge shall be billed and collected in the same matter that water
charges are billed and collected or upon such other basis as may be approved
by the Council.



   (C)   Existing sewer connections of property located outside of the
limits of the city to the city sewerage system shall be discontinued at such
time as the charge for either sewer or water service becomes more than 90
days delinquent.



(Prior Code, § 51.04)  (Ord. D-10, passed 1-2-1940; Ord. D-449, passed
2-3-1958, effective 2-13-1958)



§ 51.005  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No sewer main, connection, or extension shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the city officer having jurisdiction thereof, as
indicated by the contract or permit under which the same is constructed, who
shall be notified when such construction is ready for inspection.



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to approval by
the Council, to make such rules and regulations not in conflict with the
provisions of this subchapter relative to sewer mains, connections, and
extension which will be served directly or indirectly by the city sewerage
system as are necessary to protect public property or the safety or health of
the public, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rule or
regulation.



   (C)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (D)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 51.05)  (Ord. D-449, passed 2-3-1958, effective 2-13-1958)



§ 51.006  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of the terms PUBLIC SEWER, SEWER, and SANITARY SEWER used in this
section shall be defined in §§ 51.020 through 51.053.



   (B)   Stormwater and surface drainage shall not be discharged
directly or indirectly into a public sanitary sewer, except that any footing
drain tile from which roof and surface drainage is excluded may be connected
to so discharge its flow.



(Prior Code, § 51.06)  (Ord. D-449, passed 2-3-1958, effective 2-13-1958)



§ 51.007  SEWER CONNECTION INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The lot or land owner of record shall maintain his or her
sewer connection or pipe which extends from the mainline sewer line to the
land owner’s property line (also known as an area commonly referred to as
the public right-of-way) in a satisfactory working condition.



   (B)   The cost of any sewer connection investigation or sewer
connection hook-up, repair, or replacement shall be paid for by the lot or
land owner of record.



   (C)   No investigation shall be made on sewer connections which have
been in service for 50 or more years. The purchase of a new connection shall
be required of the lot or land owner in cases where the sewer connection is
50 or more years of age.



   (D)   (1)   In the event of evidence of a sewer connection
stoppage, the owner of the lot or land may request, in writing, that the city
perform an investigation, repair, and/or replacement of the sewer connection.



      (2)   The cost of such investigation, repair, and/or
replacement of the sewer connection shall be borne by the owner of record,
and that such amount thereof be a lien assessed against the property and
collected as provided in § 33.21.



   (E)   A written permit from the City Engineer must be obtained.



(Prior Code, § 51.07)  (Ord. D-1585, passed 3-13-1989, effective 3-23-1989)



WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 51.020  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare by abating and preventing pollution through the
regulations and control of the quantity and quality of industrial,
commercial, and other wastewater and wastes admitted or discharged into the
POTW of the city.



   (B)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of
the POTW of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws and regulations, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part
403).



   (C)   The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters,
or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;



      (3)   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the POTW; and



      (5)   To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or
state laws to which the POTW is subject.



   (D)   This subchapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This
subchapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides
for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting.



   (E)   By virtue of obligations and authority placed upon the city as
an operator of a wastewater collection and treatment system (POTW) which
discharges into public waters, by the Federal Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.; Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L. §§ 324.101
et seq., as amended; or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; applicable
NPDES permits issued to the city; existing or future contracts between the
city and other governmental or private entities or by virtue of common law
usage of the city’s POTW, this subchapter shall apply to every industrial,
commercial, and other users whose wastewater or waste is discharged into or
flows through the city’s POTW or is treated at a treatment plant of the
POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.15)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.021  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted
to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to
other city personnel.



(Prior Code, § 51.16)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.022  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this subchapter, shall have
the designated meanings:



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
gallons per day


MAC
 
Michigan Administrative Code


mg/l
 
milligrams per liter


NPDES
 
National pollutant discharge elimination system


O & M
 
Operation and Maintenance


PCB
 
Polychlorinated biphenyl


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SIU
 
Significant Industrial User


TSS
 
Total suspended solid


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Prior Code, § 51.17)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.023  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.



   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, Public Law 92-500 (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), which
is on file in the office of the Director.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Chief of the Surface Water Quality Division,
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or delegated representative.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or
any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for
the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



   BASELINE MONITORING REPORT. The initial report provided by the user
when making out an application for a wastewater discharge.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g.,
mg/l)



   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility needed for compliance with pretreatment standards.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply
to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter with a strong chemical oxidant under
standard laboratory procedure and expressed in milligrams per liter.



   CITY. The City of Saginaw.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
stormwater.



   DAILY MAXIMUM. The concentration (or mass loading, expressed in terms
of pounds per day) that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day or
24-hour period. Where DAILY MAXIMUM limitations are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily
discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. Sampling for DAILY
MAXIMUM shall be a 24-hour flow proportioned composite sample, except that a
minimum of four grab samples shall be taken in lieu of a 24-hour flow
proportioned composite sample for pH, cyanide, phenol (total), residual
chlorine, oil and grease, sulfides, volatile organic compounds (and any other
parameters specified by the Director). If it is not feasible to obtain a flow
proportioned composite sample, a time proportioned composite sample or a
minimum of four grab samples may be used in lieu of the flow proportioned
composite sample if the user demonstrates to the Director that a
representative sample will be obtained. If the pollutant concentration in any
sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be
regarded as zero when calculating the DAILY MAXIMUM concentration (except as
otherwise provided in a permit, order, or agreement issued under this
subchapter). If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the
determination whether the DAILY MAXIMUM limitation for that parameter has
been exceeded on a single calendar day or 24-hour period shall be based on
the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day or
24-hour period. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the
determination whether the DAILY MAXIMUM limitation for that parameter has
been exceeded on a calendar day or 24-hour period shall be based on the
average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day
or 24-hour period. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a
given day, the determination whether the DAILY MAXIMUM limitation for that
parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that
single grab sample.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Utilities of the city, or the
authorized deputy, agent, or representative of such person.



   DISCHARGE. The introduction of wastewater, wastes or pollutants into
the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether direct or
indirect (including flow and infiltration).



   DISSOLVED SOLIDS. Those solids in wastewater other than suspended
solids.



   DOMESTIC USER. A user that discharges only segregated normal strength
domestic waste into the POTW.



   DOMESTIC WASTE. Water-carried waste of human origin generated by
personal activities from toilet, kitchen, laundry or bathing facilities, or
by other similar facilities used for household or residential purposes.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Division
Director, or other duly authorized official.



   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the
standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, serving of food,
from the handling, storage and sale of produce, or from the canning or
packaging of food.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard
to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW,
intentionally or unintentionally, from any nondomestic source regulated under
§ 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid, solid, or gaseous wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, food processing, laboratories, landfills, trades, or
businesses, and other nondomestic users, including leachate and contaminated
groundwater, whether treated or not, as distinct from sewage.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use, or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.,
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act; the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; the Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq.,
and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.



   MAY. Is permissive. (See SHALL.)



   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents and associated
biologicals, liquid human and animal wastes, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES PERMIT.
The permit issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality to the
city concerning discharges from the POTW.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, river, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or subsurface water.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this
division (3) has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment.



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this division (3)(b).



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   NONDOMESTIC USER. Any user other than a domestic user.



   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in moles per liter of solution.



   POLLUTANT. Without limitation, all of the following:



      (1)   Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes;



      (2)   Certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., but not
limited to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or
odor);



      (3)   Substances regulated by categorical pretreatment
standards;



      (4)   Substances discharged to the POTW which are required to
be monitored by a user, are limited in the POTW’s NPDES permit, or required
to be identified in the POTW’s application for an NPDES permit or in a
user’s application for a wastewater discharge permit;



      (5)   Substances for which control measures on users are
necessary to avoid restricting the POTW’s sludge use and disposal program,
to avoid operational problems at the POTW, or to avoid worker health and
safety problems; and



      (6)   Toxic substances.



   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration may
be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process
changes, or by other means, except by increasing the use of process water or
in any other way attempting to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in §
51.028.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as defined
by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any sewers, pipes, or other conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant which is part of the POTW.



   QUANTIFICATION LEVEL. The measurement of the concentration of a
pollutant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a
specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the
lowest concentration at which a particular pollutant can be quantitatively
measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the
pollutant as determined in accordance with applicable state and federal
regulations.



   RECEIVING WATERS. Any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer,
or other body of surface or subsurface water receiving discharge of sewage.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and subsurface waters shall not intentionally be admitted.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (i.e., from household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying storm and/or wastewater.



   SHALL. Is mandatory. (See MAY.)



   SHALL DISCHARGE. Discharging, causing or allowing to be discharged,
either directly or indirectly.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU.



      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
divisions (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER.



   SLUG LOADING or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
51.028, or any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature, including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



   STORM SEWER. Any drain or sewer, either natural or artificial, which is
intended expressly for the conveyance of stormwater.



   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including stormwater
runoff and snow melt runoff.



   SURCHARGE. The additional treatment charges by the city for the
treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excess of specified
concentrations, loadings, or other applicable limits.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, which is
removable by laboratory filtering and determined in accordance with
procedures specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any pollutant defined by the EPA and any material or
substance which alone or with other materials or substances can cause risk to
health or the environment, or cause interference.



   USER. A source of discharge of wastewater or wastes to the POTW,
whether intentional or unintentional.



   WASTE(S). Substances in liquid, solid, or gaseous form that are
discharged, or otherwise placed, dumped, or allowed into the POTW, by any
person.



   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.



(Prior Code, § 51.18)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.024  USE OF POTW REQUIRED.



   (A)   All wastewaters in the city or areas under the jurisdiction of
the city, and all wastewater discharged into the POTW system by a person
contracting for treatment service by the city, must be treated in accordance
with provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use garbage grinders of any size for
grinding those materials described in § 51.028.



   (C)   No person shall discharge any wastewater, waste, or other
substance directly into a manhole, catch basin, or inlet. All discharges to
sewers shall be through sewer connections.



(Prior Code, § 51.19)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.025  DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge directly or indirectly to any natural
outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any wastes or wastewaters, except where suitable treatment has been provided,
in accordance with provisions of the ordinances and regulations of the city
and with state and federal laws and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 51.20)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.026  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the determination of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director, and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction and equipped with easily removable
covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.



   (B)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall
be provided and maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.



(Prior Code, § 51.21)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.027  ROOF AND STORMWATER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to directly connect eaves troughs and
roof downspouts to the POTW throughout the portion of the POTW tributary to
combined sewers. Residential properties shall have until September 26, 2002
to comply with this provision. Commercial and industrial properties shall
have until September 26, 2006 to comply. A user may request in writing to the
Director to be exempted from the direct connection prohibition. The request
shall include a demonstration that the disconnection of downspouts and eaves
troughs is not a cost effective means of reducing the frequency or duration
of combined sewer overflows or of the city maintaining compliance with its
NPDES permit. If the user’s request is deemed approvable by the Director,
in the Director’s sole discretion, then the Director may forward the
request to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for approval. The
user shall be responsible for all costs of making the demonstration and
obtaining the approval of the Director and the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality.



   (B)   In those areas served by separate storm and sanitary sewers,
it shall be unlawful to connect eaves troughs, roof downspouts, or other
sources of stormwater discharges to a sanitary sewer.



(Prior Code, § 51.22)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.028  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce, or cause to be
introduced into the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through, interference, the city to violate its NPDES permit or its biosolids
management program. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in
the POTW, including but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash
point of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0, or more than 10.5
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment.
The city may enforce a maximum pH of 9.0 for individual users if the Director
determines that a discharge with a higher pH may be detrimental to the POTW;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts or of such size
which will cause obstruction of the flow in POTW or resulting in interference
including any substance detrimental to or determined by the Director to be
detrimental to the POTW;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 120°F, or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
head of a treatment plant to exceed 104°F or 40°C;



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products
of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director in accordance with § 51.038;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry to the POTW for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (13)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Director in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (14)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (15)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (16)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;



      (17)   Collectible floating fats, oils, or greases;



      (18)   Garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (19)   Pollutants which cause a high concentration of inert
suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, lime slurries, diatomaceous
earth, and lime residues;



      (20)   Pollutants which cause high concentration of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride;



      (21)   Pollutants which exert a COD that would increase
operational expense or cause treatment problems;



      (22)   Pollutants which exert a high chlorine demand such as,
but not limited to, nitrite, cyanide, thiocyanate, sulfite, and thiosulfate;



      (23)   Pollutants which result in water or waste materials
containing toxic or poisonous substances that may damage or interfere with
any sewage treatment process or that may constitute a hazard to any person,
animal, fish or aquatic life, or that may be a hazard in the receiving waters
of the state; and



      (24)   Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as biosolids, residue, sludge, or scum to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the biosolids
management, reuse, or reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a
biosolids, reuse, or reclamation program. In no case shall a substance be
discharged to the POTW and cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
biosolids use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations under applicable
federal, state, or local law.



   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.23)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.029  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The federal categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R.
Chapter I, Subchapter N, including, but not limited to, Parts 405 through
471, and any amendments thereto and replacements thereof are hereby
incorporated by reference.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c). Equivalent limitations so imposed shall be deemed
pretreatment standards and the user will be required to comply with the
equivalent limitation in lieu of the promulgated categorical standard from
which the equivalent limitation is derived. Any user operating under a
wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent limitations calculated
from a production based standard shall notify the Director within two
business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the
production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.
The Director may impose a revised equivalent limitation based on the revised
production level.



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e). An alternate limit may not be used if the alternate limit
is below the detection limit for the regulated pollutant.



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



   (E)   A new source shall install, have in operating condition, and
start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
time feasible, but not to exceed 90 days, a new source shall meet all
applicable pretreatment standards.



(Prior Code, § 51.24)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.030  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The state pretreatment standards found at MAC, Part 23 of Water
Resources Commission General Rules, including, but not limited to, R 323.2301
to R 323.2317, and any amendments thereto and replacements thereof are hereby
incorporated by reference.



(Prior Code, § 51.25)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.031  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The following specific discharge limits apply to all users. No
user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily
maximum allowable discharge limits



 



Arsenic
 
0.473 mg/l


Benzene
 
0.500 mg/l


Cadmium
 
0.110 mg/l


Chromium
 
2.770 mg/l


Copper
 
1.184 mg/l


Cyanide (amenable)
 
0.473 mg/l


Lead
 
0.377 mg/l


Mercury
 
Less than quantification level (1) below


Nickel
 
1.786 mg/l


Selenium
 
0.083 mg/l


Total BTEX (sum of benzene, toulene, ethylbenzene, and xylene)
 
5.000 mg/l


Total PCBs
 
Less than quantification level (2) below


Zinc
 
1.162 mg/l


BOD
 
493 mg/l (3)


TSS
 
1100 mg/l (4)


Phosphorus
 
7 mg/l (5)


Ammonia nitrogen
 
77 mg/l (6)


NOTES:


(1)   The sampling procedures, preservation, and handling, and analytical
protocol for mercury shall be in accordance with EPA Method 245.1. The
quantification level shall not exceed 0.0002 mg/l unless a higher level is
appropriate due to sample matrix interference. The local limit for mercury is
less than the quantification level using the specified analytical method. Any
discharge of mercury at or above the quantification level is a specific
violation of this subchapter. If all the samples in any reporting period are
less than the quantification level, the city will consider the permittee to
be in compliance with the local limit for these pollutants for that reporting
period, provided that the permittee is also in full compliance with the
minimization program set forth in its wastewater discharge permit (if
applicable). This note does not authorize the discharge of mercury at levels
which are injurious to the designated uses of the waters of the state or
which constitute a threat to the public health, welfare, worker health or
safety, or sludge disposal.


(2)   The sampling procedures, preservation, and handling, and analytical
protocol for total PCBs shall be in accordance with EPA Method 608. The
quantification level shall be the quantification level specified in the NPDES
permit, as amended or reissued from time to time, unless a higher level is
appropriate due to sample matrix interference. The local limit for total PCBs
is less than the quantification level using the specified analytical method.
Any discharge of PCB at or above the quantification level is a specific
violation of this subchapter. Except as provided in division (B) below, if
all the samples in any reporting period are less than the quantification
level, the city will consider the permittee to be in compliance with the
local limit for these pollutants for that reporting period, provided that the
permittee is also in full compliance with the minimization program set forth
in its wastewater discharge permit (if applicable). This note does not
authorize the discharge of PCBs at levels which are injurious to the
designated uses of the waters of the state or which constitute a threat to
the public health, welfare, worker health or safety, or sludge disposal.
Total PCBs shall be defined as the sum of all Aroclor-specific measurements
at or above the quantification level including, but not limited to, Aroclors
1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260, with any Aroclor result less
than the quantification level being treated as zero. In addition, any
detected Aroclor-specific measurements shall be reported.


(3)   Any discharge of BOD in excess of 200 mg/l shall be subject to
surcharge, per § 51.071.


(4)   Any discharge of TSS in excess of 350 mg/l shall be subject to
surcharge, per § 51.071.


(5)   Any discharge of phosphorus in excess of 4.0 mg/l shall be subject
to surcharge, per § 51.071.


(6)   Any discharge of ammonia nitrogen in excess of 30 mg/l shall be
subject to surcharge, per § 51.071.


The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal
unless indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in
addition to, or in place of, any of the concentration-based limitations above.




 



   (B)   The Director may impose a mass limitation in addition to, or
in place of, the concentration-based limitation for total PCBs on a user with
total PCBs in wastewater at the user’s facility at or above the
quantification level, even if the total PCBs in wastewater are at a location
upstream from the point at which the user’s wastewater discharges to the
POTW. The mass limitation shall be developed to ensure that the city’s
NPDES permit discharge limitation for total PCBs is not violated due to pass
through of total PCBs. Compliance with the mass limitation shall be
determined at the point where wastewater is discharged to the POTW by
calculating the mass of total PCBs discharged by the user using flow and
concentration data for all of the wastewater streams at the user’s facility
that contribute to the user’s discharge to the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.26)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective
8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.032  CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.27)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective
8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.033  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 51.28)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.034  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   (A)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to
comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §§
51.028 through 51.031 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
state, or the Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary
for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Director for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
for modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable
to the Director under the provisions of this subchapter. Any subsequent
changes in such facilities or operating procedures shall be reported to and
be approved by the Director prior to the user’s commencement of the changes.



   (B)   A user shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances)
that are installed or used by the user to comply with the requirements of
this subchapter. Proper operation and maintenance includes, without
limitation, effective performance, adequate funding, adequate operator
staffing, and adequate quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) procedures
for sampling and analysis.



   (C)   Upon reduction of efficiency of operation, or loss, or failure
of all or part of a user’s pretreatment equipment or facility, the user
shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards and other applicable standards, requirements, and
limits, control its production and all discharges until operation of the
equipment or facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in situations, including, without
limitation, where the primary source of power for the pretreatment equipment
or facility is reduced, lost, or fails. It shall not be a defense for a user
in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce
the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of
this subchapter.



   (D)   A user shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct
any adverse impact to the POTW or the environment resulting from
noncompliance with this subchapter, including such accelerated or additional
monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the
noncomplying discharge.



(Prior Code, § 51.29)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.035  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (B)   The Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.



   (C)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Director and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed,
by the user at his or her expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Prior Code, § 51.30)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.036  TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS CONTROL AND ACCIDENTAL
DISCHARGE PREVENTION.



   (A)   All storage of toxic substances, petroleum products, and
pollutants in any area or building shall be contained in such a manner that
none of the materials could spill or otherwise get into the POTW in event of
an accident or failure.



   (B)   Each industrial user must provide and maintain at the user’s
expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing, or
other appropriate structures) adequate to prevent the discharge from
accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants, toxic
substances, petroleum products, or discharges regulated by this subchapter.
At a minimum, the containment or curbing shall be sufficient and shall be
maintained so as to hold not less than 150% of the largest tank volume in the
area, unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are
approved in advance by the Director. The containment area shall be
constructed so that no liquid polluting material can escape from the area by
gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or
indirectly into the POTW. All floor drains found within the containment area
must be plugged and sealed. Containment shall also be provided for storage
tanks that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage
areas. Solid pollutants shall be located in areas designed to prevent the
loss of the materials to the POTW. If requested by the Director, detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection
required by this section shall be submitted to the Director for review. The
Director may order an industrial user to take interim measures for emergency
containment as determined necessary by the Director under the circumstances.



   (C)   Each industrial user shall provide and continuously maintain
protection from accidental discharges of wastes or other substances regulated
by this subchapter.



   (D)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of regulated wastes
or substances shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user’s
cost and expense. Review and approval by the Director of plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to
modify the industrial user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements
of this subchapter. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall
not relieve a user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, or for any other damage to
persons or property, or for any other liability that may be imposed under
this subchapter or under other applicable laws and regulations.



   (E)   Each industrial user shall designate at least one person or
personnel position to be in charge of and responsible for the user’s
discharges to the POTW, including responsibility for maintaining pretreatment
facilities and operations, if any, and prevention of accidental discharges.
The person or personnel position so designated shall be an individual with
knowledge of all pollutants, toxic substances, and wastes routinely or
potentially generated or used by the user, and of all process alterations
that could, in any manner, increase or decrease normal daily flow or waste
strength to the POTW. The name of the person or personnel position designated
as provided by this section and a phone number where the person can be
reached shall be submitted by each industrial user to the Director.



   (F)   Each industrial user required to develop a pollution incident
prevention (“PIP”) plan as provided by the Department of Environmental
Quality, Waste Management Division, Water Resources Protection, R 324.2001 et
seq., as amended, shall submit a copy of that plan to the Director.



   (G)   The Director may require a user to prepare a waste
minimization plan to reduce or minimize the amount of pollutants the user
discharges to the POTW, including without limitation any toxic substance(s)
with a specific discharge limit that is less than the quantification level
and that is detected in wastewater at the user’s facility. This requirement
may be contained in a wastewater discharge permit as provided in §
51.040(B)(2)(d). A waste minimization plan required by the Director shall
describe the investigation of source and extent of pollutants, corrective
action, verification of corrective action completion, and schedule for
reducing or minimizing pollutants discharged to the POTW. The Director may
require that a waste minimization plan include requirements for up-pipe
monitoring at locations upstream from the point at which the user’s
wastewater discharges to the POTW, including without limitation locations
within the user’s facility, at a frequency and for a duration acceptable to
the Director, to identify pollutants to be controlled or eliminated and to
verify that the pollutants have been controlled or eliminated. A user
required by the Director to prepare a waste minimization plan shall prepare
and submit the waste minimization plan to the Director within the time period
specified by the Director. Upon the approval of the Director, the user shall
implement the waste minimization plan. The user shall take reasonable,
cost-effective corrective actions to reduce or minimize the discharge of
pollutants to the POTW as necessary to meet the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 51.31)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.037  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The Director may require any user to develop, submit for and
obtain approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, at the discretion
of the Director, the Director may develop such a plan for any user and assess
the user a reasonable fee for plan development. A user which is required to
prepare an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit an approvable
plan to the Director no later than 60 days after the Director provides notice
to the user of the requirement of a plan. An accidental discharge/slug
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, including without limitation notifications
required by § 51.041(F); and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic substances and pollutants (including solvents), and
measures and equipment for emergency response.



   (B)   If a user submits or has submitted to the Director plans or
documents pursuant to other requirements of local, state, or federal laws and
regulations which meet all applicable requirements of this section, the
Director may at his or her discretion determine if the user has satisfied the
accidental discharge/slug control plan submission requirements of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 51.32)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.038  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Director, and at such times as are established by
the Director. The Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain
wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   The Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Director may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Director
also may prohibit the disposal of any type or load of hauled industrial waste
and may deny permit applications or terminate permits in his or her
discretion. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Director. No load may be discharged without prior consent
of the Director. The Director may collect samples of and analyze each hauled
load at the user’s expense to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
The Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



   (E)   Hauled waste shall not violate this subchapter, including §§
51.028 through 51.031, or any other requirements established by the city.



(Prior Code, § 51.33)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.039  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Director, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater
within 30 days of the request. The Director is authorized to prepare a form
for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.



      (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit from the Director, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to division (B)(3) below may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.



      (2)   The Director may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter.



      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter
and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§§ 51.046 through 51.048. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. Any
user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit which was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this subchapter and
which wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days
after said date, apply to the Director for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with division (E) below and shall not cause or allow discharges to
the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this subchapter
except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Director.



   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.



   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents.



      (1)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit must submit a permit application. The Director may require all users
to submit as part of an application the following information:



         (a)   All information required by § 51.040(B);



         (b)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or
intentionally be discharged to the POTW;



         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
or proposed hours of operation;



         (d)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;



         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



         (g)   Quantity of water purchased by user and quantity
of river or well water used by user on a monthly or quarterly basis;



         (h)   Time and duration of discharges; and



         (i)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the Director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.



      (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
processed and will be returned to the user for revision.



   (F)   Application, notification, and report signatories and
certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user
notifications and written reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information as the Director determines necessary for completion and proper
review of the application. Within 60 days of receipt of an administratively
complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Director will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Director may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit. A permit may be denied by
the Director if the Director determines that the proposed discharge, or
continued discharge, will not comply with all applicable standards and
requirements of this subchapter; if the user refused to accept the terms and
conditions of a permit as proposed to be issued by the Director; for any
reason that would support a suspension or revocation of the permit as
provided by this subchapter; if the Director determines that the POTW cannot
adequately treat the discharge (due to insufficient capacity, the quality or
quantity of pollutants, and the like); or for any other reason as determined
necessary by the Director to prevent the discharge of pollutants into the
POTW that, singly or in combination with other pollutants, would not meet
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, would interfere with the
operation of the POTW, would pass through the POTW into the receiving waters
or the atmosphere, would inhibit or disrupt the POTW’s processing, use, or
disposal of sludge, would cause health or safety problems for POTW workers,
or would result in a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or of other
applicable laws and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 51.34)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.040  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge
permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years
from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the Director.
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it
will expire. At the discretion of the Director, a wastewater discharge permit
may be renewed by the Director in writing for a period to be determined by
the Director.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge
permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the waterbody receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker
health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect
against damage to the POTW.



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge
permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;



         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit
is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with
division (E) below and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment
standards;



         (d)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
and



         (e)   A statement of applicable penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state, or local law.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not
be limited to, the following conditions:



         (a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW;



         (c)   Requirements for the development and
implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, nonroutine, or slug discharges;



         (d)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection facilities and equipment;



         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Director to ensure compliance with this subchapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permit appeals/other appeals. The user
may in writing petition the Director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance or any other
decision of the Director within 30 days of the issuance of the decision.



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   During an appeal, the effectiveness of a new wastewater
discharge permit, if said new permit is not a renewal of a prior permit,
shall not be stayed pending the appeal process. If the wastewater discharge
permit being appealed is a renewal of a prior discharge permit and
application for the renewed permit was made in a timely manner prior to the
expiration of the then effective permit, then the prior discharge permit
shall continue in effect until a final administrative decision on the appeal
has been made.



      (4)   If the Director fails to act within 30 days (or a longer
period if agreed upon in writing by the Director and the user), a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or
not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.



      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Circuit Court for the county.



   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit modification.



      (1)   The Director may modify a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



         (a)   To incorporate any new, revised, or otherwise
applicable federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements
affecting the POTW or the user;



         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to
the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



         (c)   A change in the POTW or in any condition of the
user’s discharge, facility, production, or operations that requires either
a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the city’s POTW, the POTW’s processing, use
or disposal of sludge, city personnel, or the receiving waters;



         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the
wastewater discharge permit;



         (f)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



         (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from
categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;



         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
wastewater discharge permit;



         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the user facility
ownership or operation to a new owner or operator;



         (j)   To add or revise a compliance schedule for the
permittee;



         (k)   To reflect changes or revisions in the POTW’s
NPDES permit;



         (l)   To ensure POTW compliance with applicable sludge
management requirements promulgated by EPA or MDEQ;



         (m)   To incorporate any new or revised requirements
resulting from reevaluation of the POTW’s local limits; or



         (n)   To incorporate a request for modification by the
permittee, as determined appropriate by the POTW and provided the request
does not create a violation of any applicable requirement, standard, law,
rule, or regulation.



      (2)   The permittee shall be informed of any changes in the
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change, unless a
shorter time is determined necessary by the Director to meet applicable laws
or to protect human health or the environment.



   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days’ advance
notice to the Director and the Director approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the Director must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:



         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer
is to occur; and



         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying
with the existing wastewater discharge permit.



      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders
the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.



      (1)   The Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



         (a)   Failure to notify the Director of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Director of changed conditions pursuant to § 51.041(E);



         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



         (f)   Refusing to allow the Director timely access to
the facility premises and records;



         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



         (h)   Failure to pay fines;



         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges or surcharges;



         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer
of business ownership of a permitted facility;



         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this
subchapter; or



         (n)   As determined by the Director, the discharge has a
reasonable potential to endanger human health or the environment and the
threat can be abated only by revocation of the permit.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. A wastewater
discharge permit issued to a particular user for a particular facility is
void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user for
that facility. Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, a user shall
immediately terminate its discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter
recommence discharge without further authorization from the Director as
provided by this subchapter. The Director may reissue a revoked permit upon a
showing satisfactory to the Director that the permittee has corrected the
violation or condition that led to the revocation. A person who has had a
permit revoked may apply for a new permit.



   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an
expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance
with § 51.039, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s
existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (H)   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.



      (1)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Director shall enter
into an interjurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality,
unless the user discharges directly to the POTW. If a user located within
another municipality discharges directly to the POTW, the Director shall
enter into a user contract with the user.



      (2)   Prior to entering into an interjurisdictional agreement
required by division (H)(1) above, the Director shall request the following
information from the contributing municipality:



         (a)   A description of the quality and volume of
wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;



         (b)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and



         (c)   Such other information as the Director may deem
necessary.



      (3)   An interjurisdictional agreement, as required by
division (H)(1) above, shall contain the following conditions:



         (a)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this subchapter
and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in §
51.031. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or
local limits;



         (b)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



         (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment
implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the
contributing municipality and the Director;



         (d)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
provide the Director with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



         (e)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;



         (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality’s discharge;



         (g)   A provision ensuring the Director access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality’s
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Director;



         (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for
breach of the terms of the interjurisdictional agreement; and



         (i)   A provision specifying that the city has the right
to take legal action to enforce the terms of the contributing
municipality’s ordinance or to impose and enforce pretreatment standards
and requirements directly against noncompliant dischargers in the event the
contributing jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to take such action.



      (4)   A user contract, as required by division (H)(1) above,
shall contain the following conditions:



         (a)   A requirement that the user comply with all
requirements of this subchapter and §§ 51.065 through 51.077;



         (b)   A requirement ensuring the Director access to the
user’s facility for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examining and
copying records, and any other duties or purposes deemed necessary by the
Director;



         (c)   An agreement by the user that the user will be
subject to enforcement under all provisions of this subchapter and that the
user submits to and accepts the jurisdiction of the City to enforce all
provisions of this subchapter; and



         (d)   A provision specifying that the city has the right
to take legal action to enforce the terms of this subchapter and the user
contract, including the right to obtain injunctive relief.



(Prior Code, § 51.35)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.041  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4) or MAC R 323.2311(2),
whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director a report
required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and MAC R 323.2310(2) which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below:



         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owner;



         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility;



         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;



         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);



         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.



            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;



            2.   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported, as applicable.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed
in accordance with procedures set out in division (J) below; and



            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in division (K) below.



         (f)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the
user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M shall be specified. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in division (B) below; and



         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.039(F).



   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by § 51.040(B)(2)(g):



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Director
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the Director.



   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Director a report required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d) and MAC R
323.2310(3) containing the information described in divisions (A)(2)(d)
through (A)(2)(f) above. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 51.039(F).



   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.



      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June
and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 51.039(F).



      (2)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Director,
using the procedures prescribed in division (K) below, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.



      (3)   If the Director has imposed mass limitations, as
provided in §§ 51.029, 51.031, and 51.033, the report shall indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the user’s
discharge.



      (4)   If the Director has imposed equivalent limitations, as
provided in § 51.029, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of mass of pollutant
discharge per unit of production, the report shall contain the user’s
actual average production rate for the reporting period.



      (5)   The Director may in his or her discretion perform the
required sampling and analysis in lieu of the user. Where the Director
collects all the information for the periodic compliance report, including
flow data, the user will not be required to submit the report.



      (6)   The Director shall require a frequency of user
monitoring adequate to assess and assure compliance by users of applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. Data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis during the period covered by a periodic compliance
report shall be representative of conditions during the period.



   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the
Director of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 90 days before the change.



      (1)   The Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 51.039.



      (2)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under §§ 51.039(G) and 51.040 or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 51.040(D) in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.



      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes
include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.



   (F)   Reports of potential problem discharges.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this subchapter.



      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a discharge described in division (F)(1) above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised
of the emergency notification procedure.



   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Director as the Director may require.



   (H)   Notification by user of violation/repeat sampling and
reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user
must notify the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Director monitors
at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the Director samples
between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results
of this sampling.



   (I)   Notification by user of the discharge of hazardous waste.



      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Waste Management
Division, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth
in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month; and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this division (I) need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under  division (E) above. The requirement in
this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject
to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements
of divisions (A), (C), and (D) above.



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division
(I)(1) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during
which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of the
Resource Conversion and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6921 identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Director, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and the State Department
of Environmental Quality Waste Management Division of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section,
the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.



      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this subchapter, a
permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the methods and
techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA Administrator.



   (K)   Sample collection.



      (1)   Users shall sample their discharges to assure compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter, any permit or order issued pursuant
to this subchapter, pretreatment standards, and other applicable federal,
state, and local laws, and as otherwise determined necessary by the Director
consistent with the purposes and intent of this subchapter. Except as
indicated in division (K)(2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples
using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow
proportional sampling is infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of
time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged.



      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques, with a minimum of four grab samples spaced throughout
the daily sampling period to represent the entire period.



      (3)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (4)   The sample event frequency, which shall be a minimum of
quarterly (i.e., once per three months) and which may be at a greater
frequency if so determined by the Director, will be specified in the user’s
permit. On the petition of the user, the Director may consider an alternate
sample frequency to provide a more accurate characterization of a user’s
discharge. Each sample event must provide daily average and daily maximum
results at a sample frequency of three times within a two-week period for
users with flows less than 250,000 gallons per day (based on dry weather
flows) and six times within a two-week period for users with flows of 250,000
gallons per day or greater (based on dry weather flows). The samples shall be
collected during periods of dry weather or under conditions that ensure that
the discharge being sampled is not diluted by stormwater. The Director may
require additional samples that are representative of stormwater-containing
discharges.



   (L)   Split samples. If requested by the Director at or prior to the
sampling event, the Director shall be provided with splits of any sample
taken by a user. If requested by the user at or prior to the sampling event,
the user shall be provided with splits of any sample taken by the city.



   (M)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted
on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (N)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this subchapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying,
all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this subchapter and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent
of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method,
and time of sampling; the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Director.



   (O)   Information requests. Users shall furnish to the Director any
available information that the Director requests to determine whether cause
exists for modifying, revoking and reissuing, or terminating a wastewater
discharge permit, to determine compliance with a wastewater discharge permit,
or to determine whether a wastewater discharge permit is required. Users
shall also, upon request, furnish to the Director copies of any records
required by a wastewater discharge permit. The information and records
requested by the Director shall be provided by the user to the Director
within 24 hours of the request, unless an alternative time frame is specified
by the Director when making the request or unless the Director allows
additional time for the user to submit the requested information based on a
showing by the user of good cause for any delay. The user’s failure to
submit the requested information to the Director within 24 hours (or within
any alternate time period approved by the Director as provided by this
section) shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (P)   Signature and certification requirements. All written reports
and notifications required by this subchapter shall be signed and certified
as required in § 51.039(F).



   (Q)   Costs of monitoring, sampling and analyses. All required
monitoring, taking of samples, and sample analyses shall be at the sole cost
of the user.



   (R)   Notification of spill of wastewater to land or water. Any user
which causes or observes a release from a sewer of untreated or partially
treated wastewater onto land or into the waters of the state shall
immediately notify the Director.



(Prior Code, § 51.36)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.042  CONTROL MANHOLES AND MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The Director may require a user to install a control
manhole(s) and equipment to allow observation, sampling, and measurement of
wastewater discharges. Location and details must be approved by the Director.
The cost of the manhole(s) and equipment determined necessary by the Director
for sampling and metering, and installation and operation of the equipment
shall be at the expense of the user.



   (B)   All control manholes shall be located on the user’s property
within ten feet of the property line or as otherwise approved by the
Director. If the property is fenced, a gate shall be provided at the manhole
location with provision for a lock to be provided by the Director. If the
user does not want direct access to its property for security or other
reasons, the user shall at its expense, construct a security fence around the
control manhole of an area acceptable to the Director.



   (C)   The user shall provide a drawing to the Director showing the
locations of all sewer connections and control manholes. Dimensions to the
manholes both from street lines and building lines shall be provided. The
sketch shall show the roadways and access points to the control manholes and
note entry limitations if any, and shall state the telephone number and
person to contact should entrance become necessary, and any other data
considered pertinent by the Director. Each control manhole shall be
identified by name and number. Ample space shall be provided around the
control manholes and shall be maintained free and clear by the user at all
times.



(Prior Code, § 51.37)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.043  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   Inspection and sampling.



      (1)   The Director shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user:



         (a)   To determine whether the user is complying with
all requirements of this subchapter and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder; and



         (b)   For any other purpose directly related to the
Director’s review and enforcement of compliance under this subchapter by
any user, whether on or off the premises.



      (2)   Users shall allow the Director ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties under this
subchapter.



         (a)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities pursuant to this subchapter. While on the property of the
user, the Director is hereby directed to observe all reasonable safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the user which are communicated by
the user to the Director at the outset of the entry.



         (b)   The Director shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation by the user of, such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations,
at the user’s expense.



         (c)   The Director may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated in accordance with the
manufacturers’ recommendations to ensure their accuracy.



         (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and
easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Director and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the
user.



         (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director
access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   Search warrants. If the Director has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this subchapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 51.38)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.044  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Director’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Director, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall
be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other EFFLUENT DATA as defined by 40
C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will
be available to the public without restriction.



(Prior Code, § 51.39)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.045  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The Director shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (B)   SIGNIFICANT NONCOM-PLIANCE shall mean:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for
the same pollutant parameter by any amount;



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);



      (3)   Any other discharge violation that the Director believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;



      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Director’s exercise of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the Director determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Prior Code, § 51.40)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.046  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Director finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may serve upon that user a
written notice of violation. Within 14 days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted
by the user to the Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders. The Director may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document and may include stipulated
fines. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions (D) and (E) below and
shall be judicially enforceable.



   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Director may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Director and show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.



   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may issue an order to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including, without limitation, additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer, pretreatment facility design and plan preparation and implementation,
and any other affirmative action considered necessary for compliance with
this subchapter. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (E)   Cease and desist orders.



      (1)   When the Director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to
recur, the Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive
action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (F)   No limitation on civil infraction. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the authorized city official, as defined in this
section, to issue a municipal civil infraction citation or municipal civil
infraction violation notice, as prescribed by this subchapter and Ch. 37 of
this code of ordinances.



   (G)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The Director may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present,
an endangerment to the environment.



         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge
shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, and suspension of water service to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when
the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the period
of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in division
(I) below are initiated against the user.



            (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in
part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under divisions
(C) and (I) of this section.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
requiring a hearing prior to an emergency suspension under this section.



   (H)   Termination of discharge.



      (1)   In addition to the provisions in § 51.040(F), any user
who violates following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit
conditions;



         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;



         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to
discharge;



         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
51.028 through 51.031.



      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination
of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division
(C) above why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.



   (I)   Continuing violation. Each act of violation, and each day or
portion of a day that a violation of this subchapter, or of any permit,
order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this subchapter is
permitted to exist or occur, constitutes a separate violation and shall be
subject to fines, penalties and other sanctions as provided by this
subchapter.



   (J)   Number of violations. The number of violations resulting from
a user’s noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards shall be
determined as follows.



      (1)   Applicable concentration limitations and mass (or
loading) limitations shall be treated as separate limitations, and a user may
be liable and penalized separately for exceeding any of those limitations for
a single pollutant or sampling parameter.



      (2)   Each violation of a daily maximum limit for a single
pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a single violation for each
day on which the violation occurs or continues, and the violation shall be
considered to continue until subsequent sample results establish that the
violation has ceased.



      (3)   Each violation of an instantaneous maximum limit for a
single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a single violation
for each such exceedance. There may be multiple violations for each day on
which such a violation occurs or continues, and the violation shall be
considered to continue until subsequent sample results establish that the
violation has ceased.



      (4)   If a wastewater discharge permit regulates more than one
outfall, each outfall shall be considered separately in computing the number
of violations as provided by this section.



(Prior Code, § 51.41)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.047  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may petition the court
through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this subchapter on activities of the user. The Director may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.



   (B)   Civil penalties. See § 51.999.



   (C)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
subchapter are not exclusive. The Director may take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Director is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user.



(Prior Code, § 51.42)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.048  SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.



   (A)   Performance bonds. The Director may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this subchapter, a previous wastewater discharge
permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or the Director may in a wastewater discharge permit prohibit a
discharge, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the
city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance and cover expenses that might
reasonably be incurred as a result of future violations.



   (B)   Liability insurance. The Director may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this subchapter, a previous wastewater discharge
permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or the Director may in a wastewater discharge permit prohibit a
discharge, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained liability
insurance or other financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused in the future by its discharge.



   (C)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only
recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated
its ability to comply.



   (D)   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of §
94.002 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.



   (E)   Informant rewards. The Director may pay up to $500 for
information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user.



   (F)   Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to
receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city.
Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a
user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or
requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the Director.



(Prior Code, § 51.43)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.049  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (A)(3) below are met.



      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user submitted the following information to
the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset:



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. If this information
is provided orally, a written submission of this information must be provided
within five days of becoming aware of the upset.



      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 51.028(A) or the specific
prohibitions in § 51.028(B)(3) through (B)(7) if it can prove that it did
not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference
and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility needed for compliance with
pretreatment standards.



         SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4)
below.



      (3)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Director, at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain: a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.



      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(3) above.



         (b)   The Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(4)(a) above.



(Prior Code, § 51.44)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.050  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Pretreatment charges and fees. The city may adopt and levy
reasonable fees for full reimbursement of costs, including without
limitation, administration and overhead costs of setting up and operating the
city’s pretreatment program which may include:



      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications
including the cost of processing such applications;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance
procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s
discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental
discharge procedures and construction;



      (4)   Fees for filing appeals; and



      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the city.



   (B)   Cost recovery.



      (1)   When a discharge of wastewater, wastes, or any other
material, causes an obstruction, damage, unusual operational problems, or any
other impairment to the POTW, or causes contamination of surface or
subsurface waters, the Director may assess a charge against the violator
equal to the cost required to clean or repair the facility or otherwise
correct the problems, and may add such costs to the violator’s waste
service charge.



      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this
subchapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge that produces a deposit
or obstruction or otherwise damages or impairs the POTW, or causes or
contributes to a violation of any federal, state, or local law governing the
POTW, shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse the city for all expenses,
costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable or incurred by the POTW
or the city as a result of any such discharge, violation, exceedance or
noncompliance. The costs that must be reimbursed to the city shall include,
without limitation, all of the following:



         (a)   All costs incurred by the POTW and the city in
responding to the violation or discharge, including expenses for any
cleaning, repair, or replacement work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring,
and treatment, as a result of the discharge, violation, exceedance, or
noncompliance;



         (b)   All costs incurred by the POTW and the city in
monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in connection with investigating,
verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedance, or
noncompliance;



         (c)   The full amount of any fines, assessments,
penalties, and claims, including natural resource damages, levied against the
POTW or the city by any governmental agency or third party as a result of a
violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit (or other applicable law or
regulation) that is caused by or contributed to by any discharge, violation,
exceedance, or noncompliance. This provision is not intended to impose joint
and several liability on any user where the harm is proven is proven to be
divisible; and



         (d)   The full value of any city staff time (including
any required overtime), contractor, consultant, and engineering fees, and
actual attorney fees and defense costs (including the City Attorney and any
special legal counsel), associated with responding to, investigating,
verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedance, or
noncompliance or otherwise enforcing the requirements of this subchapter.



      (3)   Further, the city is authorized to correct any violation
of this subchapter or damage or impairment to the POTW caused by a discharge
and to bill the person causing the violation or discharge for the amounts to
be reimbursed to the city. The costs reimbursable under this section shall be
in addition to fees, amounts, or other costs and expenses required to be paid
by users under other sections of this subchapter.



   (C)   Penalties and interest on unpaid charges.



      (1)   Unpaid charges, surcharges, fines, and penalties shall,
after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the
unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per
month.



      (2)   A lien against the user’s property will be sought for
unpaid charges, surcharges, fines, and penalties.



   (D)   Severability. If any provision of this subchapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.



   (E)   Agreements.



      (1)   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
person whereby:



         (a)   Sewage or waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, except that the applicable state
or federal standards regarding prohibited discharges shall not be waived and
a waiver of the federal categorical pretreatment standards shall be obtained
only through the procedures established in applicable regulations, including
but not limited to 40 C.F.R. Part 403; or



         (b)   A variation is established from any requirement in
this subchapter, other than a discharge limit, provided such variation is not
a violation of any applicable state or federal law or regulation.



      (2)   Any special agreement or arrangement under this
subchapter is subject to the payment by such person to the city of additional
costs, fees, or charges as may be reasonable.



   (F)   Protection from damage. No person shall break, damage,
destroy, deface, or tamper with any property structure or appurtenances which
is a part of the POTW. No person shall, without a permit, uncover or connect
to any structure or appurtenance which is a part of the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.45)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.051  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager may authorize the Director to make such rules and
regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter concerning
pretreatment requirements and fees and no person shall fail to comply with
any such rule or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 51.46)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.052  CONFLICT.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this
subchapter shall control in the event of any inconsistency or conflict
between this subchapter and any other provision of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 51.47)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



§ 51.053  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   The amendment or repeal by this subchapter or any ordinance or
ordinance provision shall have no effect upon prosecutions commenced prior to
the effective date of this subchapter or prosecutions based upon actions
taken by any person prior to the effective date of this subchapter. Those
prosecutions shall be conducted under the ordinance provisions in effect
prior to the effective date of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 51.48)  (Ord. D-1927, passed 7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



WASTEWATER DISPOSAL CHARGES



§ 51.065  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for fees for the equitable
distribution of the costs of operation, maintenance, administration, and
improvement of the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.50)  (Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000;
Ord. D-1933, passed 8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.066  APPLICABILITY OF CHARGES.



   The wastewater disposal charges herein established shall apply to each
lot or parcel of land, building, or premises (hereinafter called premises)
from which wastewater is discharged into any public combined sewer or public
sanitary sewer, and to each premises for which a connection to any sewer is
ordered installed, said charges to take effect upon the expiration of the
time limit for the installation of the sewer connection or upon use of such
connection for the disposal of wastewater, whichever occurs first.



(Prior Code, § 51.51)  (Ord. D-1634, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.067  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this subchapter and related regulations shall be the same as
defined in § 51.023, and as follows.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. A user discharging industrial wastes and sewage into
the POTW.



   RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL USER. A user discharging domestic wastes and
sewage into the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 51.52)  (Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000;
Ord. D-1933, passed 8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.068  BASIS OF CHARGE.



   (A)   The rates herein established shall be based upon the amount of
water used on the user’s premises, including water from public and private
supplies or, at the election of the user as hereinafter provided, upon the
amount of wastewater discharged to the POTW. All private water supplies, any
portion of which reaches the POTW, shall be metered at the user’s expense,
the consumption thereof shall be added to the consumption from the public
water supply and the resultant total shall be used to establish the
wastewater disposal charge. Failure to meter any water supply shall not
release the user from paying the wastewater disposal charge thereon. In such
case the equivalent size of water meter used for establishing the appropriate
readiness-to-serve charge and the total water consumption used for
establishing the commodity charge shall be established by the Director and
shall be conclusive.



   (B)   The rates herein established shall consist of both a commodity
charge and a readiness-to-serve charge for all users of the POTW. These
charges shall be reviewed annually to assure they properly reflect the cost
of service.



(Prior Code, § 51.53)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.069  OPTIONAL ARRANGEMENT.



   (A)   Any user may elect to establish metering facilities to measure
and record the discharge from its premises to the POTW. All such arrangements
shall be subject to the prior approval of the Director and the expense
thereof, including installation, maintenance, and operation, shall be borne
by the user.



   (B)   When metering facilities to measure and record the discharge
from the premises to the POTW have been installed as permitted by this
subchapter, the readiness-to-serve charge provided for in this subchapter
shall be based upon the equivalent size of water meter, as determined by the
Director, which would be required if all liquids reaching the wastewater
metering facilities were delivered through the public water supply. The
commodity charge shall be applied to the flow volume of the wastewater. In
event the metering facilities shall fail to operate or record the flow
correctly, the charge shall be based upon the estimate of the Director of the
flow of wastewater for the billing period.



(Prior Code, § 51.54)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.070  WASTEWATER DISPOSAL CHARGES FOR PREMISES WITHIN AND OUTSIDE THE
CITY.



   The net rate charged for wastewater disposal for premises within the
limits of the city classified as residential-commercial and industrial users,
but excluding those users for which a different rate is established pursuant
to this subchapter, shall be the sum of the following commodity and
readiness-to-serve charges over the next five years, corresponding to the
city’s fiscal year as indicated:



   (A)   Commodity charge, based on water consumption, or on the
discharge into the POTW, whichever is applicable, at the rate as approved by
City Council and available in the Engineering Office;



   (B)   Readiness-to-serve monthly charge, based on the size of each
water meter measuring water, any part of which is discharged into a public
sewer, or the equivalent size of water meter approved by City Council and
available in the Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 51.55)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1782, passed 11-4-1996, effective 1-1-1997; Ord. D-1830, passed
9-14-1998, effective 10-1-1998; Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective
11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed 8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002; Ord. O-81,
passed 4-20-2009, effective 4-30-2009)



§ 51.071  WASTEWATER EXCEEDING DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.



   When it is determined by the Director that a user is discharging
wastewater to the POTW which is subject to surcharge as specified in §
51.031, the following surcharges shall be made for that portion of the
wastewater discharge exceeding the surcharge limits approved by City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 51.56)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.072  PENALTY.



   A penalty of 10% of the amount of the charges made under this
subchapter shall be added to each bill not paid on or before the due date
thereon.



(Prior Code, § 51.57)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.073  NO FREE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SERVICE.



   No free wastewater disposal service shall be furnished to any person,
firm, or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency.



(Prior Code, § 51.58)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.074  COLLECTION.



   Charges for wastewater disposal service shall be billed by the Water
Division and collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided
for water bills. The Water Division may enforce the payment of such
wastewater disposal service charges by shutting off the user’s water
supply, or an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against such
user. The charges for wastewater disposal service, which under the provisions
of the Revenue Bond Act, Public Act 94 of 1933, being M.C.L. § 141.121, as
amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby
recognized to constitute such lien; and the Director of Finance shall,
annually, on or about May 1, certify to the City Assessor all wastewater
disposal charges which shall be delinquent for six months, whereupon such
charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such
premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same
manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien
thereof enforced. A like lien for such charges and service shall, to the
extent permitted by law, be imposed against property outside the city and
shall be enforced as provided in the Revenue Bond Act, Public Act 94 of 1993,
observing procedures similar to the above as appropriate for township taxes.



(Prior Code, § 51.59)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.075  AGREEMENTS.



   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby
wastewater or waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
city for treatment, subject to the payment by such person of such additional
charges as may be reasonable. Charges for such service shall be as provided
by resolution of the City Council or by written agreement approved by the
City Council.



(Prior Code, § 51.60)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.076  AGREEMENTS WITH PUBLIC OFFICERS AND AGENCIES.



   The charges for wastewater disposal services furnished to the Drain
Commissioner or to any municipality or public agency shall be provided for by
written agreement approved by the City Council, the schedule of charges to be
set forth in said agreement or in a resolution adopted by the City Council.
In no event shall such charges be less than the total cost, including all
direct and indirect costs of comparable service to premises within the city.



(Prior Code, § 51.61)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.077  USER CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery
of costs from users of the city’s POTW for the operation of the
pretreatment program established in §§ 51.020 through 51.053. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of charges and
fees and shall be sufficient to meet costs of operation of the pretreatment
program or as provided by law.



   (B)   (1)   The City Manager shall adopt charges and fees by rule
and regulation, subject to the approval by the City Council; such charges and
fees shall include:



         (a)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the wastewater treatment and pretreatment programs;



         (b)   Costs for monitoring, sampling, analysis,
inspections, and surveillance procedures;



         (c)   Costs for reviewing accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



         (d)   A fee for filing appeals;



         (e)   Costs of consistent removal (by the POTW) of
pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and



         (f)   Other fees and charges as the City Manager may
deem appropriate to carry out the requirements of this subchapter and §§
51.020 through 51.053.



      (2)   The fees and charges established by the City Manager
shall be based upon the reasonable cost to the city to regulate or perform
the action.



(Prior Code, § 51.62)  (Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991;
Ord. D-1878, passed 10-9-2000, effective 11-1-2000; Ord. D-1933, passed
8-26-2002, effective 10-1-2002)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 30.99.



   (B)   Municipal civil infractions and fines.



      (1)   Violations and penalties. A person who violates any
provision of §§ 51.020 through 51.053, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil
fine of not less than $1,000 per day, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each infraction. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.



      (2)   Fines/schedule of fines.



         (a)   Increased fines may be imposed for repeat
offenses. As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second or any
subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or
provision of this subchapter:



            1.   Committed by a person within any 90-day
period; and



            2.   For which the person admits responsibility or
is determined to be responsible.



         (b)   The increased fines for repeat offenses under this
subchapter shall be in accordance with the following schedule:



            1.   For a first repeat offense, the fine shall be
not less than $2,500, plus costs; and



            2.   For a second or subsequent repeat offense,
the fine shall be not less than $5,000, plus costs.



      (3)   Ch. 37. All definitions, procedures and provisions set
forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances shall govern municipal civil
infractions under the provisions of this subchapter to the extent they do not
conflict with the provisions of this subchapter.



      (4)   Authorized city official. The Director is hereby
designated as the authorized city official, as defined by Ch. 37 of this code
of ordinances, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal
civil infraction violation notices as provided by this subchapter and Ch. 37
of this code of ordinances.



      (5)   Disputing fines. Users desiring to dispute such fines
must file a written request for the Director to reconsider the fine along
with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the
fine. Where a request has merit, the Director may convene a hearing on the
matter. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together
with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The
Director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions,
such as notices and orders, to the fine.



      (6)   Issuance of a civil fine. Issuance of a civil fine shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.



(Prior Code, § 51.41)



   (C)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of §§ 51.020 through 51.053, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of not less than
$1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.



      (2)   Any person who discharges waste, causes, or allows a
discharge or other activity or inactivity, prohibited by §§ 51.020 through
51.053, or violates the limitations, prohibitions or requirement of a permit
issued pursuant hereto; or any categorical pretreatment standard; or any
person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation, record, report,
plan, or other document filed with the Director; or, who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate, any monitoring device or method
required under §§ 51.020 through 51.053, shall be in violation of §§
51.020 through 51.053. Any such violation is a misdemeanor subject to the
penalties as established by City Council.



      (3)   The Director may recover reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.



      (4)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factor as justice requires.



      (5)   The imposition of any penalty for violation of the
provisions of §§ 51.020 through 51.053, or for the violation of the
limitations, prohibitions, or requirements of a permit issued pursuant to
§§ 51.020 through 51.053 or any categorical pretreatment standard shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with all such provisions, limitations,
prohibitions, requirements, or standards, or any other applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.



      (6)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Prior Code, § 51.42)



(Ord. D-1635, passed 9-9-1991, effective 9-9-1991; Ord. D-1927, passed
7-15-2002, effective 8-1-2002)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



General Regulations



   52.01   Water wasting air conditioning and refrigeration equipment



   52.02   Water emergencies



Water Distribution System



   52.15   Definitions



   52.16   Installations



   52.17   Privately constructed water distribution systems



   52.18   Installation inspections



   52.19   Water contracts



   52.20   Water meters



   52.21   Right-of-entry



   52.22   Service: turning on and off



   52.23   Cross-connections



   52.24   Regulatory authority



Water Charges



   52.35   No free water service



   52.36   Required for service



   52.37   Activation fee



   52.38   Charge for premises within city



   52.39   Charge for premises outside city



   52.40   Special agreements



   52.41   Charge for late payment



   52.42   Billing and collection



Unfiltered Water Distribution



   52.55   Definitions



   52.56   Water connections



   52.57   Water extensions



   52.58   Water meters



   52.59   Water rates



   52.60   Billing



   52.61   Discontinuation of service



 



   52.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Notice regarding water connections, see § 36.02



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 52.01  WATER WASTING AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
terms shall have and shall be construed to have the following meanings.



      AIR CONDITIONING SEASON. The period from May 1 to September 30
during each calendar year.



      AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM. Any combination of equipment, whether
compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air, the
accumulated or effluent heat being wholly or partially removed by the use of
water, and which is designed for the maintenance of temperatures of not less
than 60°F.



      CAPACITY IN TONS and TONS’ CAPACITY.



         (a)   The name plate horsepower of any compressor prime
mover unit for any air conditioning installation.



         (b)   Two-thirds the name plate horsepower of any
compressor prime mover unit for any refrigeration installation.



         (c)   In the event the name plate horsepower is not
indicated, CAPACITY IN TONS or TONS’ CAPACITY shall mean the total maximum
B.T.U. per hour capacity of the installation divided by 12,000.



      CHIEF INSPECTOR. The officer or agent as he or she shall be duly
authorized to act in enforcement of these regulations.



      CROSS-CONNECTION. A connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, wastes, or other
contaminants can enter the public water supply system.



      REFRIGERATION SYSTEM. Any combination of equipment, whether
compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air, the
accumulated or effluent heat being wholly or partially removed by the use of
water and which is designed for the maintenance of temperatures of less than
60°F.



      SYSTEM. Any combination of apparatus, individual unit, group, or
collection of units supplied with water through any single customer service
pipe or pipes connected to the public water system, irrespective of the
ownership of the units.



      WATER CONSERVING DEVICE. A cooling tower, spray pond, evaporating
condenser, or other equipment by which water is cooled and recirculated,
thereby limiting the use of water from the public water system to that amount
lost through evaporation or by flushing of the equipment.



   (B)   Permit required for installation. After the effective date of
this section, no person shall install any air conditioning system or
refrigeration system of four or more tons’ capacity without first obtaining
a permit.



   (C)   Procedure where system in existence.



      (1)   The owner of any air conditioning system or
refrigeration system of four or more tons’ capacity installed prior to the
effective date of this section shall in lieu of a permit give notice in
writing of such installation.



      (2)   Failure to give such notice shall be a violation of this
section.



   (D)   Standards of operation. The following standards of operation
are hereby established.



      (1)   Systems of four or more tons’ capacity. Systems of
four or more tons’ capacity shall be equipped with an approved water
conserving device.



         (a)   Efficiency of water conserving device. The water
conserving device required herein shall be of such efficiency that it will
operate with not over six gallons of city water per hour per ton of
refrigeration. The water level control on the tank or reservoir shall be so
adjusted as to prevent waste of water through the overflow.



         (b)   Construction of make-up device. The make-up water
connection required herein shall be so arranged that the supply has a
physical break between the city water line and such device whereby it is
impossible for water to siphon back into the water line in case of low
pressure.



      (2)   Systems of less than four tons’ capacity. All systems
having a capacity of less than four tons shall be equipped with an approved
automatic valve which will shut off the flow of cooling water whenever the
air conditioning or refrigeration system is not in operation.



(Prior Code, § 52.01)  (Ord. D-474, passed 2-2-1959, effective 4-1-1959;
Ord. D-576, passed 5-21-1962, effective 5-31-1962; Ord. D-1875, passed
9-25-2000, effective 10-5-2000)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.02  WATER EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   Determination of water emergency. When the City Manager shall
determine that the consumption of water by the city and by its wholesale raw
and treated water users has or is about to equal or exceed the total supply
being received by the city from the Saginaw-Midland Water Supply System, he
or she shall declare that a critical water consumption period exists and
place in effect the maximum day allotment water schedule approved by the
Council.



   (B)   Declaration of water emergency. At such time as the City
Manager shall determine that water consumption within the city has or is
about to equal or exceed the supply available to the city for use of its
water customers in the city on a continuing basis, he or she shall declare
that a water emergency exists.



   (C)   Uses prohibited during water emergency. When the City Manager
shall have declared that a water emergency exists as provided in division (B)
above, the use and withdrawal of water by any person



from the city water distribution system for any of the following purposes is
hereby prohibited:



      (1)   Watering of yards. The sprinkling, watering, or
irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines,
gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation;



      (2)   Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks,
driveways, filling station aprons, porches, and other outdoor services;



      (3)   Swimming pools. Swimming and wading pools not employing
a filter and recirculating system; and



      (4)   Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water
through defective plumbing, which shall mean the knowing permission for
defective plumbing to remain out of repair.



   (D)   Notice of water emergency. When the City Manager shall have
declared that a water emergency exists as provided in division (B) above,
notice thereof shall be given by releasing the same to the official newspaper
of the city and to all radio and television stations maintaining offices or
studios within the city. Such notice shall advise of the time of commencement
of such emergency and that the same will continue until notice of termination
thereof is given by the City Manager through the same media.



   (E)   Termination of water emergency. When the City Manager shall
determine that the conditions which caused the declaration of the emergency
under division (B) above no longer exist, he or she shall so declare and give
notice of such determination as provided in division (D) above.



(Prior Code, § 52.02)  (Ord. D-651, passed 6-22-1964, effective 6-2-1964) 
Penalty, see § 52.99



WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM



§ 52.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   WATER CONNECTION. The part of the water distribution system connecting
the water main with a point between the roadway line and the lot line of
abutting property.



   WATER EXTENSION. The part of the water distribution system extending
from the water connection into the premises served.



   WATER MAIN. The part of the water distribution system intended to serve
more than one water connection.



(Prior Code, § 52.10)



§ 52.16  INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   Water connections to city water mains shall be installed only
under city supervision, either by city employees or by others pursuant to
contract with the city.



   (B)   Hereafter, upon the installation of a water main in any street
or alley in the city, a water connection shall be installed for each abutting
lot or parcel of land upon which there is a building occupied and used as a
residence and not served by the city water system or by a private water
system determined to be safe and adequate by the City Engineer. Notice of
intent to install any such water connection, objection thereto, hearing
thereon, and final determination thereof shall be as provided in §
96.003(B)(3) and (B)(4). Upon written request, signed by the owners, as
indicated by the records of the City Assessor’s office, of any such
abutting lot or parcel of land, a water connection shall be installed for
said lot or parcel of land, provided such request is delivered to the City
Engineer prior to the beginning of construction of the water main. The cost
of any water connection shall be the cost established therefor as provided in
division (C) below, which said cost shall be charged against the lot or
parcel of land served and the owner of such lot or parcel of land, shall be a
lien thereon, and shall be collected as provided in § 33.21.



   (C)   All water connections other than those provided for in
division (B) above and § 96.003(B) shall be installed only upon the
prepayment of the cost thereof as determined by the City Manager and approved
by the Council, and that such amount thereof be a lien assessed against the
property and collected as provided in § 33.21. A written permit from the
City Engineer must be obtained.



   (D)   No person shall install a water extension without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. The fee for such permit
shall be approved by City Council and available in the Engineering Office.



   (E)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (F)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (G)   No person shall work at the water meter without an inspection
provided by the Maintenance and Service Division. The fee for such inspection
shall be approved by City Council and placed on the water bill.



(Prior Code, § 52.11)  (Ord. D-209, passed 2-14-1950, effective 2-14-1950;
Ord. D-516, passed 4-18-1960, effective 4-28-1960; Ord. O-113, passed
4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.17  PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   No person shall construct any private water main which will be
served directly or indirectly by the city water distribution system without
first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. The fee for such a
permit shall be approved by City Council and available in the Office of the
City Engineer.



   (B)   No person shall install any water connection to any private
water main which will be served directly or indirectly by the city water
distribution system without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. The fee for such permit shall be approved by City Council and
available in the Office of the City Engineer.



   (C)   No person shall install any water extension from a water
connection of any private water main which will be served directly or
indirectly by the city water distribution system without first obtaining a
written permit from the City Engineer. The fee for such permit shall be
approved by City Council and available in the Office of the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 52.12)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-29-1977;
Ord. O-113, passed 4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.18  INSTALLATION INSPECTIONS.



   No water main, connection, or extension shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent of
Maintenance and Service who shall be notified when such construction is ready
for inspection. Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by the City Council and available in
the Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 52.13)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)



§ 52.19  WATER CONTRACTS.



   (A)   No property shall be served directly or indirectly by the city
water distribution system unless the person so served, or his or her
authorized representative, has first entered into a contract with the city.
If the property to be served is located outside the limits of the city, and
is for bulk or wholesale water service, such contract shall be approved by
the Council. For retail customers outside the limits of the city and for
property to be served located within the limits of the city, a contract
complying with the applicable provisions of this chapter shall be approved on
behalf of the city by the Director of Finance. Water service contracts for
retail customers outside the limits of the city shall be executed by the
owner of the premises served.



   (B)   Each person contracting for water service outside the limits
of the city shall certify under oath the number of premises and dwellings
served through his or her water meter, together with such additional
information pertaining thereto as may be required by the Director of Finance.
Any change in the number of premises and dwellings served shall be reported
to the city within ten days.



   (C)   The provisions of §§ 52.35 through 52.42 are incorporated
herein by reference for the sole purpose of construing contracts heretofore
entered into by the city in which reference is made to this subchapter. For
such purpose, §§ 52.35 through 52.42 shall be deemed an amendment to this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 52.14)  (Ord. D-303, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-1-1953;
Ord. O-65, passed 12-3-2007, effective 12-13-2007)



§ 52.20  WATER METERS.



   (A)   (1)   All premises using water shall be metered. Meters and
other necessary equipment will be furnished by the city and shall remain the
property of and under the control of the city at all times.



      (2)   The type of meter, meter reading device, and other
equipment utilized shall be determined by and at the sole discretion of the
city. The Director of Finance, or his or her designee, is hereby empowered to
discontinue water service at and/or charge the customer any additional costs
incurred by the city for any location where such equipment is not compliant
with the city’s system.



   (B)   No person other than an authorized employee of the city shall
break or injure the seal on, or change the location of, alter, or interfere
in any way with, any equipment installed by the city. The Director of
Finance, or his or her designee, is hereby empowered to discontinue water
service for any violation of this division (B).



   (C)   Whenever any equipment installed by the city is injured
because of any act or negligence on the part of the owner or occupant of the
premises where such equipment is installed, the expense to the city caused
thereby shall be charged to and collected from such owner or occupant.



   (D)   In the event a meter shall fail to register properly, the
Director of Finance, or his or her designee, is empowered to estimate the
quantity of water used on the basis of former consumption and bill
accordingly.



(Prior Code, § 52.15)  (Ord. O-189, passed 7-10-2017, effective
7-20-2017)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.21  RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   No person shall refuse to admit to premises owned or occupied by him or
her or hinder any authorized agent of the city entering said premises for the
purpose of reading a water meter or inspecting a water meter or any piping in
connection with the water distribution system.



(Prior Code, § 52.16)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.22  SERVICE: TURNING ON AND OFF.



   No person, other than an authorized employee of the city, shall turn on
or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on a water
service for testing his or her work (after which it must be immediately
turned off) or upon receiving a written order from the Director of Finance.



(Prior Code, § 52.17)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)



§ 52.23  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection
Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R 325.11401
to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water supply where
cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



   (C)   A representative of the city shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or
systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the representative of
the city any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on
such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when
requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connection.



   (D)   The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection
in violation of this section exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this section.



   (E)   All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested
initially upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly.
Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified
by the city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the city shall be
qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the
results of his or her testing.



   (F)   The potable water supply made available on the properties
served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible
contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing
regulations. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic
purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a
conspicuous manner such as “WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING”.



   (G)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and
city plumbing regulations, but supplementary to them.



(Prior Code, § 52.18)  (Ord. D-1875, passed 9-25-2000, effective 10-5-2000)



§ 52.24  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to approval by the
Council, to make such rules and regulations, not in conflict with the
provisions of this subchapter, relative to water mains, connections,
extensions, water meters, and remote water meter registers which shall be
served directly or indirectly by the city water distribution system,
necessary for the accurate recording of the quantity of water delivered or
necessary to protect public property or the safety or health of the public,
and no person shall fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 52.19)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)



WATER CHARGES



§ 52.35  NO FREE WATER SERVICE.



   No free water service shall be furnished to any persons, firm, or
corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.



(Prior Code, § 52.30)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953)



§ 52.36  REQUIRED FOR SERVICE.



   Before any premises may be served with water or sewage disposal
services, the person contracting shall:



   (A)   Be in compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the
city;



   (B)   Apply for water and sewage disposal services and agree to pay
for those services; and



   (C)   Deposit with the Finance Director a reasonable amount of money
as determined by the Director of Finance to guarantee payment for any
indebtedness arising out of said servicing of the premises. Provided, that no
deposit shall be required for service to a single-family residence from a
person who has had city water or sewage disposal service previously for a
period of two years and has at all times paid for all such services promptly,
nor shall a deposit be required if the Director of Finance finds that the
applicant has a satisfactory credit rating. In no case where a deposit is
required shall the deposit be less than $150. No interest shall be paid on
deposits. Said deposit will be credited to the final bill upon termination of
service.



(Prior Code, § 52.31)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953;
Ord. D-1735, passed 2-6-1995, effective 2-16-1995; Ord. O-57, passed
4-16-2007, effective 4-36-2007; Ord. O-139, passed 6-25-2012, effective
7-5-2012; Ord. O-145, passed 5-6-2013, effective 5-16-2013; Ord. O-158,
passed 7-21-2014, effective 7-31-2014)



§ 52.37  ACTIVATION FEE.



   A service fee shall be established by Council and posted in the Office
of the City Clerk that will be charged to every customer’s account which is
activated during a billing cycle.



(Prior Code, § 52.32)  (Ord. D-1828, passed 9-14-1998, effective 10-1-1998)



§ 52.38  CHARGE FOR PREMISES WITHIN CITY.



   (A)   Treated and filtered water. The net rate charged for treated
and filtered water to consumers within the limits of the city shall be the
sum of the readiness-to-serve charge and the commodity charge.



      (1)   Readiness-to-serve monthly charge. Readiness-to-serve
monthly charge, based on the size of the water meter shall be by City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



      (2)   Commodity charge. Commodity charge, based upon the
amount of water used shall be approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (B)   Unmetered fire connections.



      (1)   The net rate charged per month for unmetered fire
connections shall be a demand charge, based upon the size of the connection
pipe shall be approved by City Council and available in the Engineering
Office.



      (2)   The above charges shall include only water used to
extinguish fires. No water shall be used from a fire connection for any
purpose other than the extinguishment of fires unless such water is metered
and paid for as follows.



         (a)   Water used to maintain pressure on a
privately-owned fire line system at a pressure above the normal pressure
maintained in the city water mains shall be charged at the standard commodity
charge.



         (b)   Water used for any purpose other than division
(B)(2)(a) above shall be metered separately and charged at the rate approved
by City Council and available in the Engineering Office.



      (3)   The unauthorized use of unmetered water from a fire
connection shall, upon notice by the Director of Finance, terminate the
customer’s privilege of having an unmetered fire connection.



(Prior Code, § 52.33)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953;
Ord. D-1726, passed 1-1-1995, effective 1-1-1995; Ord. D-1781, passed
10-14-1996, effective 1-1-1997; Ord. D-1829, passed 9-14-1998, effective
10-1-1998; Ord. O-18, passed 4-19-2004, effective 4-29-2004; Ord. O-36,
passed 6-20-2005, effective 6-30-2005; Ord. O-53, passed 10-9-2006, effective
10-19-2006; Ord. O-64, passed 8-27-2007, effective 9-6-2007; Ord. O-80,
passed 4-20-2009, effective 4-30-2009; Ord. O-167, passed 8-24-2015,
effective 9-3-2015)



§ 52.39  CHARGE FOR PREMISES OUTSIDE CITY.



   (A)   Treated and filtered water to retail consumers. The net rate
charged for treated and filtered water to retail consumers outside the limits
of the city, except other municipalities and public agencies authorized by
law to own or operate a water supply system and except consumers having an
agreement approved by the Council which does not refer to this section to
determine rates, shall be the sum of the readiness-to-serve charge and the
commodity charge.



      (1)   Readiness-to-serve monthly charge. Readiness-to-serve
monthly charges based upon the size of meter shall be approved by City
Council and available in the Engineering Office.



      (2)   Commodity charge. Commodity charge based upon the amount
of water used per 1,000 gallons shall be approved by City Council and
available in the Engineering Office.



   (B)   Out of city wholesale water rates for other municipalities and
other wholesale customers.



      (1)   Commodity charges. The net rate charged per month for
unmetered fire connections shall be a demand charge, based upon the size of
the connection pipe shall be approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



      (2)   Readiness-to-serve monthly charge. Readiness-to-serve
monthly charge shall be charged monthly and shall be approved by City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 52.34)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953;
Ord. D-1726, passed 1-1-1995, effective 1-1-1995; Ord. D-1781, passed
10-14-1996, effective 1-1-1997; Ord. D-1829, passed 9-14-1998, effective
10-1-1998; Ord. O-18, passed 4-19-2004, effective 4-29-2004; Ord. O-36,
passed 6-20-2005, effective 6-30-2005; Ord. O-53, passed 10-9-2006, effective
10-19-2006; Ord. O-64, passed 8-27-2007, effective 9-6-2007; Ord. O-80,
passed 4-20-2009, effective 4-30-2009; Ord. O-167, passed 8-24-2015,
effective 9-3-2015)



§ 52.40  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   The charges for filtered water furnished to municipalities and public
agencies shall be provided by written agreement approved by the event shall
such charges be less than the total cost, including all direct and indirect
costs, of comparable service to premises within the city.



(Prior Code, § 52.35)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953)



§ 52.41  CHARGE FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   A penalty of 10% of the amount of the charges made under § 52.38 or §
52.39 shall be added to each bill not paid on or before the due date thereon.



(Prior Code, § 52.36)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953)



§ 52.42  BILLING AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Rules and regulations. Water service charges shall be billed
and collected in accordance with rules and regulations established by the
City Manager and approved by the Council.



   (B)   Collection. The Director of Finance is hereby empowered to
discontinue water service for nonpayment of any water rates, assessments,
charges of rentals due the city, or for the violation of any provision of
this subchapter. In addition thereto, the Director of Finance is further
empowered to discontinue water service to any person or property located
outside the city limits, if any charges against said person or premises
arising out of the furnishing by the city of sewage disposal service becomes
more than 90 days delinquent. Water services that are turned off for
nonpayment and subsequently turned on shall be assessed a service charge
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk. No service
discontinued hereunder shall be reinstated except upon payment of a turn-on
service charge shall be established by Council and posted in the Office of
the City Clerk that.



   (C)   Lien against premises served. The charges for water and
services which are, under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Act, Public Act
94 of 1933, being M.C.L. § 141.121, as amended, made a lien on all premises
served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are
hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge
against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the city
official in charge of the collection thereof shall certify to the tax
assessing officer of the city the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such
charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such
premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same
manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien
thereof enforced. All provisions of the Charter of the city and of the laws
of the state applicable to the time and manner of certification and
collection of delinquent city taxes levied against real estate in the city
shall be applicable to and shall be observed in the certification and
collection of charges for water service. Provided, however, where notice is
given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided
by M.C.L. § 141.121, no further service shall be rendered any piece of
property until a cash deposit pursuant to § 52.36 shall have been made as
security for the payment of such charges and service. A like lien for such
charges and service shall to the extent permitted by law be imposed against
property outside the city and shall be enforced as provided in M.C.L. §
141.121, observing procedures similar to the above as appropriate for
township taxes.



(Prior Code, § 52.37)  (Ord. D-304, passed 4-7-1953, effective 6-21-1953;
Ord. D-1643, passed 9-23-1991, effective 10-3-1991; Ord. O-29, passed
2-7-2005, effective 2-17-2005)



UNFILTERED WATER DISTRIBUTION



§ 52.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Saginaw, Michigan.



   COUNCIL. The duly elected governing body of the city.



   SAGINAW BRANCH LINE. The part of the city’s unfiltered water supply
line of the “Saginaw-Midland Water Supply System” which is located
between the Junction Pumping Station and the north city limits of the city.



   SUPERINTENDENT OR ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF MAINTENANCE AND
SERVICE.  The duly appointed officers of the city or their authorized
representatives.



   WATER CONNECTION. The part of the consumer’s water supply system
between the Saginaw Branch Line and the highway right-of-way line or the
city’s pipe line right-of-way line.



   WATER EXTENSION. That part of the consumer’s water supply system
extending from the end of the water connection into the premises served and
ending at the city’s water meter.



(Prior Code, § 52.50)  (Ord. D-1010, passed 12-13-1971, effective
12-23-1971)



§ 52.56  WATER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Water connections to the Saginaw Branch Line shall only be
installed by the city. Connections may be sold to individual consumers or
organized groups of consumers at prices to be determined by the
Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent of Maintenance and Service for
each individual location. The price of a connection shall include the cost of
the branch service connection to the supply main, the corporation stop or
valve, the required copper, brass fittings, the curb stop, service box (only
if the water extension is over 100 feet or longer in length), meter pit with
accessories, and the equipment and labor cost of installing the above items.
Connections shall be installed upon the prepayment of the estimated cost of
construction, or the owner of record may request that the city incur the
initial cost and that such amount be a lien assessed against the property and
collected as provided in § 33.21. A written permit from the City Engineer
must be obtained.



   (B)   Permission to construct a water extension shall be implied
with the purchase of each connection. A written permit from the City Engineer
must be obtained.



   (C)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (D)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 52.53)  (Ord. D-1010, passed 12-13-1971, effective
12-23-1971; Ord. O-20, passed 5-3-2004, effective 5-13-2004)



§ 52.57  WATER EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   There shall be no branches or connections off the pipe
connecting the supply main with the meter.



   (B)   In the event that the consumer has a suitable place for a
meter on his or her premises, the pipe extension to the meter shall be
constructed of the same materials as the connection and shall be laid at a
sufficient depth to prevent freezing.



   (C)   The water extension pipe shall be provided with a valve close
to and on the connection side of the meter. This valve shall be round way,
and shall be either of the gate type with operating wheel or of the inverted
ground key type with tee handle or lever.



   (D)   In extension installations where the building does not have a
basement, there shall be, in addition to the valve at the meter, a round way
inverted ground key stop and waste valve with box and operating rod in the
ground below the frost line.



   (E)   No part of the water main, connection, or extension between
the Saginaw Branch Line and the meter shall be covered until inspected and
approved by the Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent of Maintenance
and Service, who shall be notified when such construction is ready for
inspection. A written permit from the City Engineer must be obtained.



   (F)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled.



   (G)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



(Prior Code, § 52.54)  (Ord. D-1010, passed 12-13-1971, effective
12-23-1971)



§ 52.58  WATER METERS.



   (A)   All water taken from the Saginaw Branch Line shall be metered.



   (B)   The individual or organized group of individuals contracting
for service shall provide, at their own expense, a suitable place for the
installation of a meter, or if in the judgement of the city a meter pit
should be constructed, such meter pit shall be constructed in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the city.



   (C)   No person other than an authorized employee of the city shall
break or injure the seal on, or change the location of, alter, or interfere
in any way with any water meter.



   (D)   Whenever a meter is injured because of any act or negligence
on the part of the owner or occupant of the premises where such meter is
installed, the expense of the city caused thereby shall be charged to and
collected from such owner or occupant.



   (E)   In the event that a meter shall fail to register properly, the
city is empowered to estimate the quantity of water used on the basis of
former consumption, and bill accordingly.



   (F)   Owners or persons in charge of premises housing meters shall
be responsible for damages to a meter by hot water, frost, or other causes
under their control.



(Prior Code, § 52.55)



§ 52.59  WATER RATES.



   (A)   The net rate charged for unfiltered water to consumers
supplied from the Saginaw Branch Line shall be the sum of the
readiness-to-serve charge and the commodity charge.



      (1)   Readiness-to-serve charge. Readiness-to-serve charge,
based on the size of the water meter shall be approved by City Council and
available in the Engineering Office.



      (2)   Commodity charges. Commodity charge, based upon the
amount of water used shall be approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (B)   Gross rates shall be 10% greater than above-scheduled rates
and shall be charged for water service paid for after the due date shown on
bills.



(Prior Code, § 52.56)  (Ord. D-766, passed 2-20-1967, effective 3-1-1967)



§ 52.60  BILLING.



   (A)   (1)   Water service charges may be billed monthly or
quarterly as determined by the city. Water service billed monthly shall be
computed so that the total cost per quarter shall be the same as if billed
quarterly.



      (2)   The city will assume no responsibility for water bills
caused by a leak in the water service beyond the meter and/or in a private
service extension, and the property owner shall be responsible for the costs
of any repairs relating to same. The City Manager, or his or her designee,
shall establish rules and regulations pertaining to the construction and
maintenance of such private service extensions.



      (3)   In the event one water connection serves two or more
customers, the meter shall be in the name of the individual or organized
group of individuals contracting with the city for service and said
individual or organized group of individuals shall be responsible for all
water service charges.



   (B)   Payment of all bills, charges, fees, and deposits shall be
made to the Finance Director, City Hall.



(Prior Code, § 52.57)  (Ord. O-189, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 52.61  DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to discontinue water service for
non-payment of any water rates or charges due the city or for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations adopted by the city.



   (B)   No service discontinued for the non-payment of water rates or
charges due the city shall be reinstated except upon the prepayment of a
turn-on service charge as established by the water rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 52.58)  (Ord. D-731, passed 7-11-1966, effective 7-11-1966;
Ord. O-16, passed 12-8-2003, effective 12-18-2003)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly, during any such water
emergency, use or withdraw water from the city water distribution system for
any of the purposes prohibited in § 52.02(C), shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed $25 for each
violation of § 52.02 and shall, in addition, if he or she refuses to
discontinue said violation, be subject to the discontinuance of water service
during the continuance of such emergency.



(Prior Code, § 52.02)



   (C)   Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of § 52.23 or any written order of the city in pursuance thereof,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished in accordance with § 30.99. Each day upon which a violation of the
provisions of this code shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional
violation for the purpose of § 52.23.



(Prior Code, § 52.18)



(Ord. D-651, passed 6-22-1964, effective 6-2-1964; Ord. D-1875, passed
9-25-2000, effective 10-5-2000)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES



      74.   SNOWMOBILES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code and Michigan Vehicle Code
by reference



   70.02   Definitions



   70.03   Rules and regulations



   70.04   Official traffic map



Accidents



   70.15   Interference at scene of accident prohibited



   70.16   Driver unable to report accidents



Impoundment of Vehicles



   70.30   Immobilization devices



   70.31   Administrative action upon impoundment



   70.32   Redemption of vehicle; hearing



   70.33   Sale or other disposition of vehicle



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see §  31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see §  31.02



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  ADOPTION OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE BY
REFERENCE.



   (A)   Uniform Traffic Code.  The city ordains:



      (1)   Code and amendments and revisions adopted. The Uniform
Traffic Code as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of
State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, Public Act 306 of
1969, being M.C.L. §§ 24.201 to 24. 328 and made effective October 30,
2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code
when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and
adopted by reference.



      (2)   References in code.  References in the Uniform Traffic
Code to a “governmental unit” shall mean the city.



      (3)   Notice to be published. The City Clerk shall publish
this section in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same
time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code and the fact
that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the Office of
the City Clerk for inspection.



      (4)   Penalties.  The penalties provided by the Uniform
Traffic Code are adopted by reference.



   (B)   Michigan Vehicle Code.  The city ordains:



      (1)   Code amendment and revisions adopted. The Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. §§ 257.1 through
257.923, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code
when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by
reference.



      (2)   References in code.  References in the Michigan Vehicle
Code to “local authorities” shall mean the city.



      (3)   Notice to be published. The City Clerk shall publish
this section in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same
time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact
that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the Office of
the City Clerk for inspection.



      (4)   Penalties.  The penalties provided by the Michigan
Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may
not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum
period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.



(Prior Code, § 70.01)  (Ord. D-1865, passed 9-11-2000, effective 9-21-2000)



§ 70.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons; and a motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation. It does not include a school bus or a bus equipped and used for
living or camping purposes.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.



   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter,
with a motor which produces not to exceed five maximum brake horsepower, and
every bicycle with motor attached.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.



   PUBLIC HOLIDAYS. As used in this title, include the following: New
Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas Day.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The portion of the city not defined as business
district.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate preferential use of the
roadway.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a street, park, or other public place which is
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic- control sign or signal.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes
of travel.



(Prior Code, § 70.02)  (Ord. D-1540, passed 2-9-1987, effective 2-19-1987;
Ord. D-1872, passed 9-11-2000, effective 9-21-2000)



§ 70.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby empowered to direct and control
traffic; to create quiet and safety zones; to designate and approve of all
official traffic-control signals; to designate emergency vehicles; to
designate streets or portions thereof closed to traffic by reason of
construction or repairs; to designate play streets and their hours of use.



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to approval of
the Council, to designate through streets and the speed limits thereon; to
designate the location of all official traffic-control signals; to prescribe
the manner and duration of parking of vehicles; to create loading zones and
bus, taxicab, and dray stands; to designate the route of trucks, tractors,
and trailers through the city; to designate the maximum weight of any vehicle
permitted upon any bridge; to make all needful rules for the direction of
traffic or parking of vehicles on any highway, alley, or place not unlawful
nor inconsistent with this title; and to establish fees for the use of
temporary traffic regulatory devices or equipment and block party permits.



   (C)   Upon Council approval, all rules and regulation changes made
hereunder shall become effective when the traffic-control devices or traffic
signals, if required under this title, have been installed. A certified copy
of such adopted rules and regulations shall be filed with the County Clerk.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 70.03)  (Ord. D-1555, passed 7-13-1987, effective 7-23-1987;
Ord. O-98, passed 2-8-2010, effective 2-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP.



   There is hereby adopted and made a part hereof the map of the city
filed with the City Clerk (File No. A-1719) upon which said map are indicated
through streets and the speed limits thereon, the location and type of
official traffic-control signals, the location of loading, bus, taxicab, and
dray stands, and the duration of time vehicles are permitted to park.
Whenever any rule or regulation in reference to the matters designated on
said map are made, said rule or regulation shall amend said map.



(Prior Code, § 70.04)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



ACCIDENTS



§ 70.15  INTERFERENCE AT SCENE OF ACCIDENT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall proceed to the scene of an accident or other
emergency or stop and park a vehicle or congregate in the vicinity thereof so
as to interfere with police officers or other persons performing their duties
at the scene of such accident or other emergency or for the purpose of
advertising or offering any service for hire, nor shall any person thereat
solicit gainful employment of any nature.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be a criminal misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 70.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.16  DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of
making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant
shall make or cause to be made said report.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be a criminal misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 70.21)  Penalty, see § 70.99



IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES



§ 70.30  IMMOBILIZATION DEVICES.



   When a vehicle is in circumstances warranting impoundment, the City
Manager or his or her designated representative may, in lieu of or prior to
impoundment, attach to the vehicle a device that will prevent the vehicle
from being moved. Said device may be removed by the City Manager or his or
her designated representative if the violations are paid together with a
device removal fee which is established by Council and posted in the Office
of the City Clerk, if security is posted for court appearance on the
violations as provided in § 70.33, if the violations are dismissed, or if it
is necessary to impound the vehicle. It is unlawful for any person to remove
such a device without authorization of the City Manager or his or her
designated representative.



(Prior Code, § 70.30)  (Ord. D-1554, passed 6-29-1987, effective
7-9-1987)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.31  ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION UPON IMPOUNDMENT.



   When a vehicle is impounded, all of the following shall be done:



   (A)   Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen;



   (B)   Within 24 hours after impounding the vehicle, enter the
vehicle impounded into the law enforcement information network;



   (C)   Within seven days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal
holidays, after impounding the vehicle, send a notice that the vehicle has
been impounded to the owner and the secured party, if any, by certified mail.
Each notice shall contain all of the following information:



      (1)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle;



      (2)   The location from which the vehicle was taken into
custody;



      (3)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody;



      (4)   The name and address of the police agency in whose
custody the vehicle is being held;



      (5)   The location where the vehicle is being held;



      (6)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle;



      (7)   The date by which the vehicle must be redeemed;



      (8)   That a procedure exists to contest the impoundment of
the vehicle; and



      (9)   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
contest the impoundment of the vehicle within 15 days after the date of this
notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all
rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of
the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds.



(Prior Code, § 70.31)  (Ord. D-1554, passed 6-29-1987, effective 7-9-1987)



§ 70.32  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE; HEARING.



   (A)   If the owner does not contest the immobilization or
impoundment of the vehicle, the owner may obtain the release of the vehicle
by paying the accrued charges to the city together with a device removal fee
which is established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   If the owner contests the immobilization or impoundment of the
vehicle, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted in the
Seventieth District Court. An owner who contests the immobilization or
impoundment of the vehicle may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a
bond or cash deposit as determined by the court.



(Prior Code, § 70.32)  (Ord. D-1554, passed 6-29-1987, effective 7-9-1987;
Ord. O-141, passed 8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)



§ 70.33  SALE OR OTHER DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   After the disposition of the hearing described in § 70.32,
and if a hearing is not requested, not less than 15 days nor more than 180
days after the date of the notice described in § 70.31 is sent, the Police
Department shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale unless the
vehicle is redeemed.



   (B)   A public sale shall be conducted in the following manner:



      (1)   It shall be under the control of the Police Department;



      (2)   It shall be open to the public and consist of open
auction bidding;



      (3)   It shall be held not less than five days after public
notice of the sale has been published; and



      (4)   The public notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle
was taken into custody. The public notice shall give a description of the
vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date, and locations of the sale.



   (C)   The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall
be applied in the following order of priority:



      (1)   Towing and storage charges;



      (2)   Expenses incurred by the city; and



      (3)   Remainder to the secured party, if any. If there is not
a secured party, remainder to the owner. If the remainder of the money is not
claimed by the secured party or owner within 30 days after the sale, it shall
become the property of the city.



   (D)   If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the Police Department
may do one of the following:



      (1)   Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy
charges against the vehicle;



      (2)   Obtain title to the vehicle for the Police Department or
the city by doing both of the following:



         (a)   Paying the towing and storage charges; and



         (b)   Applying for title to the vehicle.



      (3)   Hold another public sale pursuant to division (B) above.



   (E)   Within two days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal
holidays after the disposition of the vehicle the Police Department shall do
both of the following:



      (1)   Notify the Secretary of State of the disposition; and



      (2)   Cancel the entry into the law enforcement information
network described in § 70.31(B).



(Prior Code, § 70.33)  (Ord. D-1554, passed 6-29-1987, effective 7-9-1987)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any provision of this title which describes an act or omission
constituting a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. §§ 257.1 et seq., as amended, shall be
processed as a civil infraction and any person found to have committed a
civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine in accordance with the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. § 257.907. Any
civil fine ordered to be paid shall be collected in any manner authorized by
law.



   (B)   A violation of any other section of this title constituting a
criminal misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, unless such section contains a specific penalty therein, in
which case said penalty shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 70.99)  (Ord. D-1312, passed 7-23-1979, effective 8-1-1979)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Regulations



   71.01   Noise and smoke



   71.02   Streets closed to traffic



   71.03   Stop when traffic obstructed



   71.04   Processions and parades



   71.05   Limitations on turning around



   71.06   Limitation on backing



   71.07   Emerging from alley or private driveway



   71.08   Vehicle not to be driven on sidewalks



   71.09   Clinging to moving vehicles



   71.10   Trailers and towed vehicles



   71.11   Restrictions as to speed



   71.12   Following; overtaking; passing



   71.13   Right-of-way; opening doors



   71.14   Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanisms



   71.15   Putting glass and the like on highway prohibited



   71.16   Weight of vehicles on bridges; penalties



   71.17   School buses



Pedestrians



   71.30   Crossing at crosswalks



   71.31   Crossing at other than crosswalks



   71.32   Pedestrians soliciting rides



   71.33   Blind persons and  persons with afflictions



Cost Recovery



   71.45   Purpose



   71.46   Definitions



   71.47   Liability for expense of an emergency response



   71.48   Cost recovery schedule



   71.49   Collection and enforcement



 



   71.99   Penalty



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 71.01  NOISE AND SMOKE.



   (A)   No person in charge or control of any vehicle on any street,
alley, or private property shall make with such vehicle or any device
connected therewith any noise so excessive as to annoy the public. Violation
of this provision shall be deemed a Class C civil infraction and shall be
punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   No person shall use any sound amplifying device, recorded
music, or radio in or from any vehicle on any street for the purpose of
attracting the attention of persons to the sounds issuing therefrom excepting
in vehicles and by devices officially used by governmental units, and
excepting uses authorized by § 94.045 through 94.047. Violation of this
provision shall be deemed a Class C civil infraction and shall be punishable
as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   Every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle or
motor-driven cycle, shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke. A person shall not remove, destroy, or damage any of the
baffles contained in the muffler, nor shall a person use a muffler cutout,
bypass, or similar device upon a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on a
highway or street. Violation of this provision shall be deemed a civil
infraction and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(A).



   (D)   The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be
so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or
smoke. Violation of this provision shall be deemed a civil infraction and
shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(A).



   (E)   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a
properly operating exhaust system which shall include a tailpipe and
resonator on any vehicle where the original design included a tailpipe and
resonator. Violation of this provision shall be deemed a civil infraction and
shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(A).



(Prior Code, § 71.01)  (Ord. D-1258, passed 5-15-1978, effective
5-25-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  STREETS CLOSED TO TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Whenever any street is closed to the use of traffic and is so
indicated by authorized signs or barriers, no vehicle shall proceed into said
street or any portion thereof except as directed by said signs.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.02)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a Class C
civil infraction and punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.03)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  PROCESSIONS AND PARADES.



   (A)   No procession or parade containing 100 or more persons or ten
or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the
military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Police Chief and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.04)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street unless such movement can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. However, no such
turn shall be made where a sign prohibiting such turn has been erected or at
any intersection controlled by a traffic signal.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.05)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  LIMITATION ON BACKING.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an
intersection or over a crosswalk and shall not in any event on any street or
alley back a vehicle more than 60 feet and then only when such movement can
be made with safety.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.06)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a
sidewalk, into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, or onto the
roadway where there is no sidewalk, and upon entering the roadway shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.07)  (Ord. D-1279, passed 10-23-1978, effective
11-2-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  VEHICLE NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk
area improved for pedestrian use except at a permanent or temporary driveway.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
criminal misdemeanor and punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.08)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled,
roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself
to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.



   (B)   No person shall ride upon the fenders, running boards,
bumpers, outside steps, or on the outside of any vehicle.



   (C)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall permit any person or
persons to perform any of the acts mentioned in divisions (A) and (B) above.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a civil
infraction and punishable as provided in § 70.99(A).



(Prior Code, § 71.09)  Penalty, see § 71.99



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles and toy vehicles, see Ch. 73



§ 71.10  TRAILERS AND TOWED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor more
than two trailers, and the connection shall not be over 15 feet long, and a
red flag or other signal, or cloth not less than 12 inches both in length and
width, shall be fastened to the tow line so as to make it plainly
discernible. Each vehicle shall separately display thereon the lights
required on a vehicle of the class to which it belongs.



   (B)   No vehicle, including any trailer or trailers attached, shall
exceed 50 feet in length. Provided, however, a greater length may be
permitted when the load consists of poles, structural iron, scenery, or other
articles which, from their nature, cannot be shortened.



   (C)   Trailers must track within six inches of the preceding vehicle.



   (D)   Trailers shall be attached to the preceding vehicle by means
of a suitable coupling. Two safety chains, one on each side of the coupling,
must also be used. Both chains must be attached to the same part of the
chassis as is the coupling. Each chain must be of sufficient strength to pull
the trailer or trailers attached to it when it is loaded to maximum capacity.



   (E)   Violation of this provision shall be deemed a Class C civil
infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.10)  (Ord. D-206, passed 12-27-1949, effective
1-6-1950)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  RESTRICTIONS AS TO SPEED.



   (A)   With the exception of those instances where a lower speed is
specified in this title or by regulation, it shall be prima facie lawful for
the driver of a vehicle to drive the same at a speed not exceeding the
following, but in any case it shall be unlawful to exceed the following
speeds except upon through streets or state trunk line highways where a
different speed limit is authorized and has been marked by adequate signs
giving notice of such permissible speed: 25 mph in cemeteries unless a
different speed has been duly posted. Where a speed limit other than 25 mph
has been duly posted it shall be unlawful to exceed such posted speed.



   (B)   In every charge of violation of division (A) above, the
complaint, also the summons or notice to appear, shall specify the speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the speed which this
section declares shall be prima facie lawful at the time and place of such
alleged violation.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
Class C civil infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of
this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.11)  (Ord. D-1154, passed 6-16-1975, effective
6-26-1975)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  FOLLOWING; OVERTAKING; PASSING.



   (A)   Following or overtaking a vehicle.



      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the
speed of such vehicle, and the traffic and condition of the roadway.



      (2)   The driver of any vehicle overtaking a vehicle parked on
the right-hand side of the roadway, shall pass at a safe distance to the left
thereof and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of such parked vehicle.



   (B)   Limitations on privilege of overtaking and passing. The driver
of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the centerline of the
roadway in passing a parked vehicle, unless such left side is clearly visible
and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit
such passing to be made in safety.



   (C)   Overtaking on bridge.



      (1)   No vehicle shall overtake and pass another vehicle
moving in the same direction upon any bridge unless the roadway of such
bridge is of sufficient width to accommodate two lanes of traffic moving in
each direction; and such passing shall occur only when such movement can be
made with safety.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (C), the roadway within
100 feet of a bridge, including the approaches thereto, shall be considered a
part of the bridge.



   (D)   Violation. Violation of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed a Class C civil infraction and shall be punishable as provided in
Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.12)  (Ord. D-206, passed 12-27-1949, effective 1-6-1950;
Ord. D-536, passed 8-22-1960, effective 9-1-1960)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  RIGHT-OF-WAY; OPENING DOORS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   When two vehicles enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the
right-of-way to the vehicle on the right, except as otherwise provided in
division (B) below. Provided, however, where signs bearing the message
“Yield-Right-of-Way” are erected upon the approach to the intersection, a
driver approaching such sign shall slow to a reasonable speed for existing
conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding the right-of-way to all
traffic on the intersecting street which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed
shall forfeit any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have hereunder.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection where no
traffic signal is located and who intends to turn to the left shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but said driver having so yielded and having given a signal when and
as required by this title, may make such left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.



      (3)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection at which
a traffic signal is located intending to make a left turn shall permit
vehicles bound straight through in the opposite direction which are waiting a
go signal to pass through the intersection before making the turn.



      (4)   No person shall open the door of a parked vehicle
without first making certain that said door may be opened in safety and
without interfering with other vehicles in the roadway.



   (B)   Exceptions to the right-of-way rule. The driver of a vehicle
entering through streets, as designated in accordance with this title, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such highways and
streets.



   (C)   Violation. Violation of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed a Class C civil infraction and shall be punishable as provided in
Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.13)  (Ord. D-206, passed 12-27-1949, effective 1-6-1950;
Ord. D-391, passed 6-4-1956, effective 6-14-1956)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.14  OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISMS.



   (A)   No person, adult or minor, or animal shall be seated in the
lap of the driver, nor shall the driver be seated in the lap of a person
occupying the front seat, when the motor vehicle is in motion.



   (B)   On and after October 1, 1955, no commercial vehicle licensed
as such shall be operated on the highways at any time between December 15 and
March 15, both dates inclusive, unless it is equipped with a hot air
windshield defroster or an electrically heated windshield or such other
scientific method that may be devised so long as same is heated and
maintained in operable condition at all times.



   (C)   No motor vehicle licensed as such, and manufactured after
January 1, 1956, shall be operated on the highways unless it is equipped with
a windshield washer maintained in operable condition at all times and capable
of cleaning the windshield in such a fashion as to leave the driver with a
clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway.



   (D)   Violation of this provision shall be deemed a Class C civil
infraction and punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.14)  (Ord. D-1255, passed 3-20-1978, effective 3-20-1978;
Ord. D-1872, passed 9-11-2000, effective 9-21-2000)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.15  PUTTING GLASS AND THE LIKE ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall permit to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material or shall fail to immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (B)   No person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway
shall fail to remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 71.15)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.16  WEIGHT OF VEHICLES ON BRIDGES; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of
a vehicle and load, if any, is unlawful may require the driver to stop and
submit to a weighing of same by proceeding to any private or public scale
available for the purpose of determining whether the weight thereof is in
excess of the permitted weight.



   (B)   No owner or operator of any vehicle, nor any lessee of a
vehicle, nor owner-operator shall cause or allow a vehicle to be driven or
moved upon or over a bridge when the weight of that vehicle and load, if any,
exceeds the maximum weight limit established for such bridge by rule and
regulation for traffic control pursuant to § 70.03(B) and posted on the
approach to said bridge.



   (C)   (1)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of
division (B) above shall be assessed a fine as prescribed by the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. § 257.724.



      (2)   The court may impose the fine or jail sentence or both
as provided by law for violations of ordinances of the city.



   (D)   For the purposes of this section any number of vehicles
connected together shall constitute a single vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 71.16)  (Ord. D-899, passed 12-8-1969, effective 12-8-1969)



§ 71.17  SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   The driver of the school bus, before resuming motion, shall
deactivate flashing lights and permit stopped traffic to proceed and shall,
when resuming motion, proceed in a manner which will allow congested traffic
to disperse by keeping the bus as near to the right side of the road as can
be done with safety.



   (B)   Passengers crossing the road upon being discharged from a
school bus shall cross in front of the stopped school bus.



   (C)   A school bus driver shall not stop the bus for the purpose of
receiving or discharging passengers unless the bus is completely visible in
its stopped position to approaching or overtaking drivers of vehicles for a
distance of at least 400 feet.



   (D)   In a proceeding for a violation of division (A) above, proof
that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant
was in violation of division (A) above, together with proof that the
defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was, at the time of
the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the
driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.



   (E)   (1)   A school bus transporting pupils inside the city, in
addition to any other equipment and distinctive marking required by law,
shall be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high and widely spaced
laterally as practicable which shall be capable of displaying to the front
two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level, and to the
rear two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level.



      (2)   The lights shall have sufficient intensity to be visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet in normal sunlight and shall be
actuated by the driver of the school bus when, but only when, the vehicle is
stopped and for a distance of at least 200 feet in advance of a stop for the
purpose of receiving or discharging school children.



   (F)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a Class
C civil infraction punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 71.17)  (Ord. D-1509, passed 3-17-1986, effective 8-16-1986;
Ord. D-1540, passed 2-9-1987, effective 2-19-1987; Ord. D-1872, passed
9-11-2000, effective 9-21-2000)  Penalty, see § 71.99



PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.30  CROSSING AT CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Pedestrian’s right-of-way at crosswalks.



      (1)   Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, except as otherwise provided in this title.



      (2)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or
at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle from the rear shall not overtake
and pass such stopped vehicle.



   (B)   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks: whenever
practicable, pedestrians shall move upon the right half of crosswalks.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
criminal misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.30)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.31  CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary,
and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused
or incapacitated person upon a roadway.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
criminal misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.31)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.32  PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
criminal misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.32)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.33  BLIND PERSONS AND  PERSONS WITH AFFLICTIONS.



   (A)   Blind persons or persons incapacitated to the extent that
their movement on foot is retarded, by holding out horizontally a white cane
in the direction they desire to travel over crosswalks on any street, shall
be given the right-of-way over all vehicles except emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
criminal misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 71.33)  Penalty, see § 71.99



COST RECOVERY



§ 71.45  PURPOSE.



   The city finds that a significant number of the traffic arrests and
traffic accidents in the city involve drivers operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of intoxicants, such as alcoholic beverages or a
controlled substance or a combination thereof. Furthermore, the city finds
that there is a greater likelihood of personal injury or property damage in
accidents involving a driver operating under the influence of intoxicants. As
a result, the city finds that a greater operational and financial burden has
been placed on the city’s public safety services by persons operating a
motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicants, and that it is necessary to
recover these increased costs of enforcement activities caused by such
persons.



(Ord. O-190, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 71.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY RESPONSE.



      (1)   The providing, sending, and/or utilizing of public
services, police, firefighting, rescue services, and/or any other agents of
the city to a motor vehicle accident, or an arrest, in which one or more
drivers were operating a motor vehicle under the influence of one or more
intoxicants;



      (2)   The providing, sending, and/or utilizing of public
services, police, firefighting, rescue services, and/or any other agents of
the city to any scene where a person and/or driver becomes helpless,
endangered, or otherwise in need of assistance by reason, in whole or in
part, of being under the influence of one or more intoxicants; or



      (3)   The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a law
enforcement officer when the driver is or was operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of one or more intoxicants.



   EXPENSE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The direct and reasonable costs
associated with the occurrence of an emergency response. These costs shall
include, but are not limited to: all of the salaries, wages (including
overtime pay), worker’s compensation benefits and fringe benefits of the
city personnel responding to the incident or engaged in the investigation,
supervision, and report preparation associated with the incident; all costs
connected with the administration and provision of breathalyzer or chemical
tests related to any prosecution of the person involved in the incident; cost
of equipment operation and supplies used in responding to the incident; cost
of materials obtained directly by the city in relation to the incident; and
cost of any contract labor or materials obtained by the city in relation to
the incident.



   OPERATING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ONE OR MORE INTOXICANTS.



      (1)   Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of
an alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicants;



      (2)   Operating with an unlawful blood alcohol content as
defined by the Michigan Vehicle Code; or



      (3)   Operating while visibly impaired due to the consumption
of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, or a combination of
intoxicants.



(Ord. O-190, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 71.47  LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE.



   (A)   Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response
if that person, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance, proximately causes any incident resulting in an
emergency response as defined by this subchapter, and is convicted of a
related criminal offense.   



   (B)   This subchapter shall be construed to impose a responsibility
and liability of a civil nature on the part of the operator of the motor
vehicle and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or
reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines and costs
which may be imposed by a court on a person who is convicted of any criminal
offense arising from the incident that resulted in an emergency response.



(Ord. O-190, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 71.48  COST RECOVERY SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The Police Department, Fire Department, and City Manager shall
periodically evaluate the actual costs incurred in making such emergency
responses and determine an average cost during emergency responses. This
amount shall be amended from time to time to reflect increases or decreases
in the salaries of all personnel, along with the costs for vehicles and other
necessary equipment.   



   (B)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall forward the
average cost developed in division (A) above to the District Court and
Circuit Court having jurisdiction over the city. This cost, as restitution to
the city, may be imposed by the court during the imposition of any sentence
upon any person liable under this section.



(Ord. O-190, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 71.49  COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The amount ordered to be paid under this subchapter shall be
paid to the Clerk of the Court who shall transmit the payment amount to the
Finance Director.



   (B)   If not otherwise ordered by the court, the reimbursement
amount ordered shall be made immediately. The court may order that
reimbursement be made within a specified period or in specified
installments.   



   (C)   If the person convicted is placed on probation, any
reimbursement ordered under this section shall be a condition of that
probation.   



   (D) A court order for reimbursement under this subchapter may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action.



(Ord. O-190, passed 7-10-2017, effective 7-20-2017)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 70.99.



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 71.03, 71.10 through 71.14, and
71.17 shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Ch. 37.



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking Zones



   72.01   Standing for loading only



   72.02   Bus, taxicab, and dray stands



   72.03   Boat launch parking areas



General Regulations



   72.15   All-night parking prohibited



   72.16   Standing or parking close to curb



   72.17   Prohibited purposes



   72.18   Trailers



   72.19   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places



   72.20   Multiple parking violation



   72.21   Lights on parked vehicles



   72.22   Unattended motor vehicles



   72.23   Off-street parking



   72.24   Trailer coaches



Parking Rates



   72.35   City parking lots or areas



   72.36   Reduced group rates



   72.37   Parking agreements



Administration and Enforcement



   72.50   Parking Violations Bureau



   72.51   Presumption



 



   72.99   Penalty



PARKING ZONES



§ 72.01  STANDING FOR LOADING ONLY.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials or passengers in any place marked as a
loading zone during the hours when regulations applicable to loading zones
are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of
material exceed 30 minutes.



   (B)   During hours when regulations applicable to loading zones are
in effect, no loading zone marked “Commercial Loading Zone” shall be used
by any vehicle not registered as a commercial vehicle; no loading zone
designated “Passenger Vehicle Loading Zone” shall be used by a vehicle
not registered as a passenger vehicle.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.01)  (Ord. D-879, passed 5-26-1969, effective 6-5-1969) 
Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  BUS, TAXICAB, AND DRAY STANDS.



   (A)   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon
any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or
taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the
driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.



   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a
bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such
stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except
that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter such zone.



   (C)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a
dray owned by a licensed drayman in any dray stand.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.02)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  BOAT LAUNCH PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   The various fees for the boat launch parking areas shall be
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   The issuance of, and fines for, a violation of this section
shall be governed by § 72.99 and all other applicable parking ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 72.03)  (Ord. D-1708, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994;
Ord. O-141, passed 8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)  Penalty, see § 72.99



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 72.15  ALL-NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   All night parking prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall park any vehicle on any street at any
time between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, unless parking
on a specific street has been authorized under § 70.03(B) and as provided in
division (K) below.



      (2)   Violation of this division (A) shall be punishable as
provided in § 72.99.



   (B)   Parking between curb and sidewalk. Nothing in division (A)
above shall prohibit the parking of vehicles in the area between the curb and
the sidewalk, if the area is paved with asphalt or concrete and if one of the
following two conditions exists:



      (1)   The abutting property is zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2,
or M-3; and



      (2)   The abutting property is zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3,
and it is physically impossible or not feasible to park on said premises one
or more of the vehicles ordinarily thereat.



   (C)   Conditions defined. For the purposes of this section, it shall
be deemed to be physically impossible or not feasible to park on said
premises one or more of the vehicles ordinarily thereat only where one or
more of the following conditions exists and did so exist on September 1, 1959:



      (1)   The abutting premises are devoted to business uses,
residential uses, or both, and there is insufficient space on the premises to
park all the vehicles used in connection with said business uses, residential
uses, or both such uses;



      (2)   The abutting premises are devoted to residential uses,
and there is no space on said premises for the lawful parking of vehicles;



      (3)   (a)   The abutting premises are devoted to
residential uses, and there is space on the premises which could lawfully be
devoted to parking of vehicles but to which space there is no means of
access. A side or rear yard of less than nine feet shall not be deemed to
provide parking space or access to any parking space within the meaning of
this section; and



         (b)   The presence of fences, trees less than four
inches in diameter (measured at a height of three feet above grade), shrubs,
other vegetation, and structures other than the principal building or
outbuildings on any premises, or the presence of utility poles and
appurtenances, fire hydrants, or trees of the above-mentioned size in the
street abutting same, shall not be deemed to prevent access to any parking
space on any premises.



      (4)   The abutting premises are devoted to residential uses
and the number of parking spaces available thereon, if any, is less than the
number of vehicles used in connection therewith by the residents of the
premises; and



      (5)   The abutting premises are determined by the City
Engineer to be topographically unsuitable for off-street parking.



   (D)   When permit required.



      (1)   Parking in this section permitted in the area between
the curb and the sidewalk shall be in such paved parking areas which are in
existence on the effective date of this section, or in such parking areas
thereafter constructed and for which a construction permit has been obtained
through the Department of Engineering pursuant to § 96.037 of this code of
ordinances.



      (2)   The Department of Engineering shall issue an
“Authorized Restricted Parking Area Certificate” for each lawful
“restricted parking area” as that phrase is defined in division (G)
below. No charge shall be made for any such certificate, and it shall remain
in force until the conditions which authorized its issuance cease to exist.



   (E)   Parking between edge of roadway and sidewalk on unpaved
streets. Nothing in division (A) above shall prohibit the parking of vehicles
between the edge of the roadway and the sidewalk on unpaved streets if one of
the two conditions set forth in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above exists,
such parking to be subject to the provisions of division (C) above.



   (F)   Requirements in residential areas. Parking spaces in this
section permitted in residential districts in the area between the curb and
sidewalk as to paved streets and in the area between the edge of the roadway
and the sidewalk as to unpaved streets shall comply with the following.



      (1)   Only passenger cars seating not more than nine persons
may be parked in any such parking space.



      (2)   All lawful and feasible parking spaces on the abutting
premises must be developed and utilized before any such parking space on the
street may be used. No space shall be deemed to be feasible if access thereto
is not available under the standards of division (C)(3) above. No parking
space shall be deemed to be feasible, except as to a premises occupied by a
single family, where access thereto cannot be had at all times without moving
another vehicle.



      (3)   None of the expense of the creation of such parking
spaces, except for the relocation of a fire hydrant to permit a driveway
approach and the provision of signs, shall be borne by the city.



   (G)   Unlawful parking. Areas in which parking is authorized by this
section between the curb and the sidewalk or on unpaved streets between the
edge of the roadway and the sidewalk are hereby designated RESTRICTED PARKING
AREAS, and it shall be unlawful for any person not a resident or a permittee
of the owner or lessee of the entire abutting premises to park any vehicle in
any such restricted parking area. The driver of a vehicle used in the
business conducted on the abutting premises shall be deemed to be a resident
thereof for the purposes of this division (G).



   (H)   General limitations.



      (1)   No charge shall be made for the use of any street
parking space authorized by this section, but nothing in this section
contained shall prohibit the control of daytime parking in any such parking
spaces by the use of parking meters when approved by the Council.



      (2)   Each parking area hereinafter created shall be entirely
within the extension of the property lines of abutting premises, such
extension to be at right angles to the street line, except that with the
consent in writing of the owner (as indicated by the records of the City
Assessor) of the abutting premises any such parking area may extend beyond
such extensions of the property lines on one or both sides a total distance
of not to exceed ten feet.



   (I)   No permanent rights created. The creation or use of any such
parking area in the street shall not increase the right of the abutting owner
in the public right-of-way, and the right to use any such parking area may be
lost if the Council determines at any future time that it is necessary to use
this area for a public purpose.



   (J)   Definitions. “Yard”, “R-1”, “R-1A”, “R-2”,
“R-3”, “B-1”, “B-2”, “B-3”, “M-1”, “M-2”, and
“M-3” shall have the same meanings respectively as they have in the
zoning regulations and map.



   (K)   Parking on specified streets authorized by the City Manager
with Council approval. Parking on a specified street authorized by the City
Manager with City Council approval shall be permitted under exceptional
circumstances when there are properties in the vicinity devoted to
residential and/or business/industrial uses and the number of parking spaces
available on the subject properties is less than the number of vehicles used
in connection with the residential and/or business/industrial property where
such use was established prior to September 1, 1959.



(Prior Code, § 72.20)  (Ord. D-476, passed 3-9-1959, effective 9-1-1959;
Ord. D-497, passed 9-28-1959, effective 9-28-1959; Ord. D-1825, passed
8-24-1998, effective 8-24-1998)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other
than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of
traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
edge of the roadway, except that upon those streets which have been marked or
signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such mark or sign.



   (B)   When parking is permitted in the area between the curb and the
sidewalk on paved streets and in the area between the edge of the roadway and
the sidewalk on unpaved streets, no persons shall stand or park a vehicle in
any such area other than parallel with the curb or edge of the roadway,
headed in the direction of traffic, except that on those streets which have
been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the
angle to the curb indicated by such official mark or sign.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.21)  (Ord. D-536, passed 8-22-1960, effective 9-1-1960) 
Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.17  PROHIBITED PURPOSES.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for
the principal purpose of:



      (1)   Advertising;



      (2)   Displaying it for sale; and/or



      (3)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except
repairs necessary by an emergency.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking of vehicles
in connection with civic or other events of city-wide interest or importance
when specifically authorized by the Council.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.22)  (Ord. D-499, passed 10-19-1959, effective
10-29-1959)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.18  TRAILERS.



   (A)   No trailers shall be parked on any of the streets of the city
for a longer period than one hour at any time.



   (B)   Streets in a business district may be designated on which no
trailer shall be stopped, parked, or allowed to stand between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking of vehicles
in connection with civic or other events of city-wide interest or importance
when specifically authorized by the Council.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.23)  (Ord. D-499, passed 10-19-1959, effective
10-29-1959)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.19  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:



      (1)   Between the curb and the sidewalk or behind the curb
where there is no sidewalk. Provided, however, that nothing in this division
(A) shall prohibit parking in such paved parking areas so located, as may
exist at the time of the adoption of this prohibition and in such additional
paved areas as may be hereafter created in compliance with the applicable
provisions of city ordinances; and



      (2)   In any area within the city parks and cemeteries unless
such area is designated as a parking area.



   (B)   No person shall remove a vehicle not owned by such person into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.



   (C)   A motor bus, for the purpose of taking on or discharging
passengers, may be stopped on the highway side of a vehicle illegally parked
in a legally designated bus loading zone.



   (D)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.24)  (Ord. D-1587, passed 3-27-1989, effective 4-7-1989;
Ord. D-1872, passed 9-11-2000, effective 9-21-2000)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.20  MULTIPLE PARKING VIOLATION.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, a MULTIPLE PARKING VIOLATION
shall be: each additional period of maximum legal parking time a vehicle
remains parked in the same parking space after the issuance of the original
parking violation notice; or each additional hour a vehicle remains parked in
the same place which parking is prohibited after the issuance of the original
parking violation notice other than for parking prohibited under § 72.15(A).



   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle so as to commit a multiple
parking violation.



(Prior Code, § 72.25)  (Ord. D-1366, passed 4-6-1981, effective
4-16-1981)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.21  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked on a street during the
time between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and
there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 500 feet
upon such street, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.



   (B)   When during said times or at any time there is not sufficient
light upon a street to reveal a person at a distance of 500 feet, there shall
be displayed upon the left side of a parked vehicle one or more lamps
projecting a white light or amber light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and
projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the rear of such vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 72.26)  (Ord. D-536, passed 8-22-1960, effective 9-1-1960) 
Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.22  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall
allow such vehicle to stand on any roadway unattended without first
effectively setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said
vehicle, and when standing upon any grade without turning the front wheels of
such vehicle to the curb or side of the roadway.



   (B)   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall
allow such vehicle to stand unattended in any street, alley, or other public
place under the control of the city without first locking the ignition and
removing the ignition key from the vehicle.



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.27)  (Ord. D-401, passed 10-8-1956, effective
10-18-1956)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVEWAY. The minimum width approach which provides direct access
from a public street or alley to an off-street parking area located behind
the minimum front or street side area required by the city zoning regulations.



      FRONT YARD. A space including all the area bounded by the side
lot lines, whether they are parallel or not, the front lot line, and a line
drawn parallel to the front lot line through that point on the principal
building nearest the front lot line.



      STREET SIDE YARD. A space including all the area bounded by the
front yard, the rear lot line, the street side lot line, and a line drawn
parallel to the street through that point on the principal building nearest
the street lot line.



   (B)   Parking prohibited in certain places.



      (1)   No person shall park any motor vehicle in or upon the
front yard or street side yard areas required by the city zoning regulations
except as provided in division (B)(2) below.



      (2)   It shall not be a violation of division (B)(1) above if
the motor vehicle is parked on the driveway but not over the lot line and not
in the public right-of-way.



   (C)   Limitation. This section shall not be construed to repeal,
suspend, or modify the provisions of any other ordinance or provision
relating to off-street parking.



(Prior Code, § 72.28)  (Ord. D-1301, passed 5-29-1979, effective 6-8-1979;
Ord. D-1789, passed 11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996; Ord. D-1791, passed
1-6-1997, effective 1-16-1997)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.24  TRAILER COACHES.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      TRAILER COACH. Any portable structure or vehicle so designed and
constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place
for one or more persons.



   (B)   Prohibited parking and use.



      (1)   No person shall park or cause to be parked any trailer
coach overnight on any street, alley, highway, or public place.



      (2)   No person shall park or permit the parking of any
occupied trailer coach or use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
trailer coach on any site, lot, field, or tract of land not specifically
licensed as a trailer coach park.



      (3)   No trailer coach shall at anytime be parked on any lot
within the front yard area required by the city zoning regulations.



      (4)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels
or tires from any trailer coach except for the purposes of repair, nor shall
any person elevate, block, or stabilize any trailer coach other than with
jacks designed, provided, and intended for that purpose.



      (5)   Violation of the provisions of this division (B) shall
be punishable as provided in § 72.99.



(Prior Code, § 72.29)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 72.99



PARKING RATES



§ 72.35  CITY PARKING LOTS OR AREAS.



   (A)   Rates and charges for parking in city-owned or operated
off-street parking lots or areas. The various fees for the parking areas
shall be established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Parking Violations Bureau. The Parking Violations Bureau or
its authorized agent will invoice customers for daily, weekly, and monthly
parking use on a quarterly basis. Invoices will be mailed on or about the
first day of each quarter with payment due by the fifteenth day of the first
month of each quarter.



   (C)   Special charge for release of parked vehicle from city
off-street area after hours. The release fee shall be established by Council
and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (D)   Special charge for reactivation and reissuance. The fee for
such permit shall be established by Council and posted in the Office of the
City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 72.40)  (Ord. D-945, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970;
Ord. D-985, passed 8-2-1971, effective 8-12-1971; Ord. D-1752, passed
8-21-1995, effective 8-31-1995; Ord. O-45, passed 3-20-2006, effective
3-30-2006; Ord. O-141, passed 8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)  Penalty, see
§ 72.99



§ 72.36  REDUCED GROUP RATES.



   (A)   Reduced group rates for parking for 25 or more spaces may be
authorized by written agreement approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Each agreement shall, among other things, satisfy the
following conditions.



      (1)   The group shall be an established organization capable
of carrying out its contractual obligations.



      (2)   The term of the contract shall be established by written
agreement approved by the City Council.



      (3)   The group shall not sublease any of the spaces to any
person at a rate less than that charged by the city at any time during the
term of the sublease for other individually leased spaces in the same parking
facility.



   (C)   The city or its authorized agent shall invoice such customers
pursuant to the terms of the written agreement.



(Prior Code, § 72.41)  (Ord. D-945, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970;
Ord. D-1497, passed 8-26-1985, effective 9-5-1985; Ord. O-141, passed
8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)



§ 72.37  PARKING AGREEMENTS.



   The foregoing provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to
establish in general the rates, policies, and procedures related to the
city’s parking facilities but shall not be held to be mandatory. Any
contract heretofore or hereafter approved by the Council and not prohibited
by state or federal law or by the Charter shall be valid even though one or
more of the provisions of the subchapter may not have been observed.



(Prior Code, § 72.42)  (Ord. D-1498, passed 8-26-1985, effective 9-5-1985)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.50  PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Parking Violations Bureau
(Bureau) pursuant to the Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1961,
being M.C.L. § 600.8395.



   (B)   The purpose of the Bureau shall be to accept admissions in
parking violation cases and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as
prescribed by city ordinance.



   (C)   A PARKING VIOLATION NOTICE or CITATION means a notice
directing a person to pay the fines and costs herein prescribed for the
parking or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of city ordinance. The
parking violation notice shall indicate the nature of the violation, the
section of the ordinance violated, the contact information for the Bureau (or
its authorized agent), and the amount of fine and/or penalty levied for the
offense.



   (D)   A parking violation notice or citation may be issued by a
police officer, including a limited duty officer, or other personnel duly
authorized by the City Manager.



   (E)   A parking violation notice or citation may be served
personally upon the operator of the vehicle, upon the registered owner of the
vehicle by attaching the notice to the vehicle, or by ordinary mail addressed
to the registered owner.



   (F)   After receiving a parking violation notice or citation, a
defendant may:



      (1)   Pay the applicable fine and/or penalty pursuant to the
instructions on the parking violation notice or citation; or



      (2)   File a written appeal with the Bureau or its authorized
agent.



   (G)   If a defendant has not filed a written appeal with the Bureau
or its authorized agent and has not otherwise disposed of the parking
violation notice within ten days after its issuance, a penalty in the amount
proscribed by § 72.99 shall be levied.



   (H)   If a defendant has not filed a written appeal with the Bureau
or its authorized agent or has not otherwise disposed of the parking
violation notice within 15 days after its issuance, then the Bureau or its
authorized agent shall send a second written notice by ordinary mail to the
address of the registered owner. This second written notice shall contain the
same facts and information contained within the first notice, but shall also
include the amount of any penalty levied.



   (I)   Those defendants who have filed a written appeal with the
Bureau or its authorized agent within 15 days after the issuance of the
original notice shall not receive a second written notice as described in
division (H) above.



   (J)   If a defendant has not filed a written appeal with the Bureau
or its authorized agent and has not otherwise disposed of the parking
violation notice within 30 days after its issuance, then the Bureau or its
authorized agent shall send written notice by ordinary mail that the amount
owed has been marked delinquent and the matter will proceed to collections.



   (K)   The Bureau or its authorized agent is authorized to collect
any penalties due hereunder in any manner allowed by law, including, but not
limited to, the use of a third party or agency.



   (L)   Appeal process.



      (1)   Within three days of the date of receipt of a parking
violation notice or citation, a defendant wishing to appeal the notice and
the associated fee may do so by filing a written appeal with the Bureau or
its authorized agent.



      (2)   Within ten days from its receipt of the appeal, the
Bureau or its authorized agent shall make a determination on the appeal
request and shall notify the defendant of its decision in writing.



      (3)   In the event the defendant is not satisfied with the
decision rendered by the Bureau or its authorized agent, within ten days of
the determination the defendant may appeal the determination in a court of
competent jurisdiction.



      (4)   In such cases, the court may order the payment of costs
in addition to any authorized penalties in accordance with the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. § 257.907.



(Prior Code, § 72.55)  (Ord. D-1628, passed 2-11-1991, effective 2-21-1991;
Ord. O-42, passed 1-9-2006, effective 1-19-2006; Ord. O-141, passed
8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.51  PRESUMPTION.



   In any proceeding for violation of §§ 72.01, 72.02, 72.03, 72.15(A),
72.16, 72.17, 72.18, 72.19, 72.21, 72.22, or 72.24 as now existing or as
hereafter amended, or of any rule or regulation adopted in furtherance of any
of said sections, the registration plate displayed on such vehicle shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such
vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in the manner and at
the point where the violation occurred.



(Prior Code, § 72.56)  (Ord. D-1709, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 70.99.



   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by the fines established by Council and posted in the Office of
the City Clerk.



   (C)   In addition to the fines and penalties set forth in divisions
(A) and (B) above, any or all of the following actions may be taken in an
effort to collect unpaid parking fines.



      (1)   The Bureau may forward the unpaid fines to a collection
agency for action. Upon forwarding the fines to the collection agency, an
administrative fee equal to 30% of the unpaid fine will be added to the
balance due.



      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle owner has more than three unpaid
parking citations an immobilization device may be placed on the vehicle when
found. The device will be removed only after all unpaid fines and penalties
have been satisfied, along with an immobilization device removal fee
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk. The
vehicle owner may contest the immobilization by following the procedures in
§ 70.32. Failure to comply with these requirements after the passing of 48
hours will result in the impoundment of the vehicle in accordance with the
procedure in § 70.31. An impounded vehicle may be redeemed only after all
unpaid fines and penalties have been satisfied, the immobilization device
removal fee has been paid, and towing and storage fees have been paid.



         (b)   An immobilization device may only be removed by
personnel duly authorized by the City Manager. The penalty for unauthorized
removal of said device shall constitute a criminal misdemeanor punishable by
up to 90 days imprisonment and/or up to a $500 fine and other costs as
allowed by the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. §
257.907, including, but not limited to, costs relating to damaged
immobilization devices.



(Prior Code, § 72.99)



   (D)   (1)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any
provision of § 72.23 is responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth Ch. 37 of this
code, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37.



      (2)   Authorized city official. The Chief Inspector and/or his
or her designees are hereby designated as the authorized city officials, as
defined in Ch. 37 of this code, to issue municipal civil infraction citations
or municipal civil infraction violations notices as provided in Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 72.28)



   (E)   Violation of § 72.21 shall be a civil infraction punishable
as provided in § 70.99(A).



(Prior Code, § 72.26)



(Ord. D-536, passed 8-22-1960, effective 9-1-1960; Ord. D-1301, passed
5-29-1979, effective 6-8-1979; Ord. D-1789, passed 11-18-1996, effective
12-2-1996; Ord. D-1791, passed 1-6-1997, effective 1-16-1997; Ord. O-6,
passed 6-16-2003, effective 6-26-2003; Ord. O-21, passed 5-17-2004, effective
5-27-2004; Ord. O-42, passed 1-9-2006, effective 1-19-2006; Ord. O-141,
passed 8-27-2012, effective 9-6-2012)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   73.01   Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices
restricted



Bicycles



   73.15   Definitions



   73.16   General provisions; registration required



   73.17   Regulations and equipment



   73.18   Administration



 



   73.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing the street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as
play streets.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
criminal misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in § 70.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 73.01)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Parking Regulations, see Ch. 72



   Snowmobiles, see Ch. 74



   Traffic Regulations, see Ch. 71



BICYCLES



§ 73.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.



   BICYCLE. A vehicle with two or more wheels in tandem and typically
propelled by pedals, having handlebars for steering and a saddle-like seat.



   CERTIFICATE OF TITLE. A document issued at the time of bicycle
registration which states the name and address of the owner, the serial
number, and the license number of the bicycle.



   DEALER. Every person engaged in the business of purchasing, selling,
exchanging, or dealing in bicycles of a type required to be registered
hereunder and every person who negotiates the purchase, sale, deal of
exchange of such bicycles and who has an established place of business for
such purposes in this city.



   LICENSE. A decalcomanic print displaying an identification number which
is securely affixed to a bicycle in a conspicuous place on the seat pole or
the handle bar pole of the bicycle.



   POLICE CHIEF. Includes the Police Chief or any police officer
designated by him or her.



   SERIAL NUMBER. The number which a manufacturer stamps into the frame of
a bicycle unless said number is determined not to be a unique number or if
there is no manufacturer’s serial number, in which case a number assigned
to a bicycle by the Police Chief and stamped into the frame of the bicycle.



(Prior Code, § 73.10)  (Ord. D-1184, passed 4-26-1976, effective 5-6-1976)



§ 73.16  GENERAL PROVISIONS; REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No resident of the city shall operate a bicycle upon any
street, alley, or public place of this city unless such bicycle is registered
as hereinafter provided and properly displays a license and serial number.



   (B)   Bicycle certificates of title shall be issued by the Police
Chief or by any designated dealer as hereinafter provided but only after
ascertaining that the bicycle desired to be registered is in good mechanical
condition.



   (C)   A bicycle registration shall be permanent so long as it is
owned by the licensee. The fee for such registration shall be established by
Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (D)   (1)   The application for registration hereunder shall be
on a form furnished by the Police Chief. Said application shall be in
duplicate and shall constitute a certificate of title, one copy of which
shall be given to and retained by the applicant, and the other of which shall
be placed on file with the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall also furnish
a license, which must be displayed on the registered bicycle at all times and
shall not be used on, or transferred to, any bicycle other than that for
which it was issued.



      (2)   All bicycle dealers located within the city shall be
required to issue a certificate of title and a license and to record the make
and serial number for any bicycle sold by the dealer to a resident of the
city.



      (3)   All sales of bicycles to residents of the city by
bicycle dealers located within the city shall be reported semi-monthly to the
Police Chief. The reports shall be on forms provided by the Police Chief
which shall include, among other things, the make of the bicycle, the serial
number of the bicycle, the license number, and the purchaser’s name,
address, and phone number.



      (4)   No bicycle dealer shall purchase or accept in trade a
bicycle unless licensed as a secondhand dealer under Ch. 110 of this code.



   (E)   No person who sells or transfers ownership of any registered
bicycle shall fail to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police
Chief the certificate of title issued therefor, together with the name and
address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred. Such
report shall be made within five days from the date of the sale or transfer.
It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee to apply for transfer of
registration within seven days after the sale or transfer. The transfer of
registration shall be made upon the condition that the bicycle is in good
mechanical condition. The charge for a transfer of title shall be established
by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (F)   No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy,
mutilate, or alter the serial number, or the license issued under this
section.



   (G)   (1)   A replacement serial number or license shall be
issued by the Police Chief in the event the original serial number or license
is lost, removed, defaced, or destroyed, upon repayment of the initial sum of
registration.



      (2)   A duplicate certificate of title shall be furnished to
the owner at no cost by the Police Chief in the event that the original
certificate of title is lost, defaced, or destroyed.



(Prior Code, § 73.11)  (Ord. D-1184, passed 4-26-1976, effective
5-6-1976)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.17  REGULATIONS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person riding a bicycle shall fail to obey the instructions
of the traffic regulations of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle
except as to special provisions contained in this subchapter and except as to
those provisions of the traffic regulations which by their nature can have no
application.



   (B)   No person operating a bicycle shall fail to obey the
instructions of official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices
applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (C)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U-turns are permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction or any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



   (D)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, unless it be a
tandem bicycle especially built for two.



   (E)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.



   (F)   No person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall fail to
ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising
due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.



   (G)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or
building shall stop the same immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or
into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way
to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk area, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching said
roadway.



   (H)   Persons operating bicycles upon a sidewalk shall ride in
single file.



   (I)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



   (J)   In the event that the Police Chief shall determine that
conditions believed to be temporary make bicycle riding on any sidewalk or
roadway unduly hazardous to either the bicycle riders or to the public, he or
she is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the
riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place,
no person shall disobey them.



   (K)   No person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall fail to yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing or before meeting such pedestrian.



   (L)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a
Class C civil infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Ch. 37 of
this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 73.12)  (Ord. D-1184, passed 4-26-1976, effective
5-6-1976)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.18  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered by the
Police Chief.



   (B)   Any police officer of the city shall have the power at any
time to seize and to take into custody any bicycle found upon the streets,
alleys, or public places of the city which does not properly display its
license and serial number, and anyone found using or operating any such
bicycle shall give the police officer his or her name and address upon
request and also a statement as to whether or not said bicycle is registered.
Upon such seizure, an investigation shall be made to determine whether said
bicycle has been properly registered, and if it is found that it is
registered, may be returned to the owner thereof. If the same has not been
registered, the owner thereof, upon showing satisfactory proof of ownership,
may be permitted to register the same. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the prosecution of anyone using or operating a bicycle without registration.



   (C)   No person being the parent or guardian of any child under 17
years of age shall knowingly permit or authorize such child to violate any of
the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   All revenues derived from the registration of bicycles shall
be used in financing the provisions of this subchapter and in the promotion
of bicycle safety education.



   (E)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to the approval
of the Council, to make reasonable and necessary rules and regulations
consistent with the provisions of this subchapter regarding the use,
operation, and maintenance of any bicycle. No person shall violate any such
rule or regulation.



   (F)   Public notice of all rules and regulations which are made
hereunder shall become effective when notice of the same shall have been
given by publication in the official newspaper of the city.



(Prior Code, § 73.13)  (Ord. D-1184, passed 4-26-1976, effective
5-6-1976)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 70.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 73.17 shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 73.12)  (Ord. D-1184, passed 4-26-1976, effective 5-6-1976)



CHAPTER 74:  SNOWMOBILES



Section



   74.01   Authority for regulation



   74.02   Definitions



   74.03   Registration requirement



   74.04   Identification number



   74.05   Equipment required



   74.06   Operating restrictions



   74.07   Report of accidents



   74.08   Permitting unlawful operation



   74.09   Enforcement



§ 74.01  AUTHORITY FOR REGULATION.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted in Part 821 of
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of
1994, being M.C.L. § 324.82101 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 74.01)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective 1-31-1974)



§ 74.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
public way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   OPERATE.   To ride in or on and to control the operation of a
snowmobile.



   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.



   OWNER. Any of the following:



      (1)   A person who holds the legal title to a snowmobile;



      (2)   A vendee or lessee of a snowmobile which is the subject
of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of
purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with
an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee;
or



      (3)   A person renting a snowmobile or having the exclusive
use of a snowmobile for more than 30 days.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of
its agencies or subdivisions, and any body of persons whether incorporated or
not.



   SNOWMOBILE. Any motorized vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow
or ice steered by wheels, skis, or runners, and also includes vehicles
designed for travel on a cushion of air steered by fins.



(Prior Code, § 74.02)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective 1-31-1974)



§ 74.03  REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.



   Except as otherwise provided, no snowmobiles shall be operated within
the city unless registered by the owner with the state as required by Part
821 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451
of 1994, being M.C.L. §§ 324.82101 et seq. No registration is required for
a snowmobile operated exclusively on lands owned or under the control of the
snowmobile owner.



(Prior Code, § 74.03)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective 1-31-1974)



§ 74.04  IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.



   The owner of any snowmobile having been issued a certificate of
registration for the snowmobile by the state shall paint on or attach in a
permanent manner to each side of the forward half of the snowmobile the
identification number issued by the state in block characters of good
proportion, not less than three inches in height, reading from left to right.
The numbers shall contrast so as to be distinctly visible and legible. No
number other than the number awarded to a snowmobile by the state, or granted
reciprocity under Part 821 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L. §§ 324.82101 et seq.,
shall be painted, attached, or otherwise displayed on either side of the
forward half of the snowmobile.



(Prior Code, § 74.04)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective
1-31-1974)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.05  EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a snowmobile unless it has at least one
headlight, one taillight, and adequate brakes capable of one of the following
while the snowmobile travels on packed snow and carries an operator who
weighs 175 pounds or more:



   (A)   Stopping the snowmobile in not more than 40 feet from an
initial steady speed of 20 mph; or



   (B)   Locking the snowmobile’s traction belt or belts.



(Prior Code, § 74.05)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective
1-31-1974)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Operation on streets and highways. No person shall operate a
snowmobile upon the streets or highways within the city as defined in this
chapter with the following exception: snowmobiles may be operated on a street
or highway during a period of emergency when travel by conventional
automotive equipment is not possible.



   (B)   Operation on municipal property prohibited. No person shall
operate a snowmobile upon city park or cemetery property or other municipally
owned or controlled property.



   (C)   Other restrictions. No person shall operate a snowmobile:



      (1)   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper
having due regard for conditions then existing;



      (2)   When under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs or barbital or any derivative of barbital;



      (3)   During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and a
lighted taillight. This provision does not apply to a snowmobile of a model
25 years or older;



      (4)   When the operation of a snowmobile creates excessive or
unusual noise and/or annoying smoke;



      (5)   While transporting thereon a bow or firearm within; or



      (6)   On any property without permission of the owner or
person in control thereof.



(Prior Code, § 74.06)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective
1-31-1974)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.07  REPORT OF ACCIDENTS.



   The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in
injuries to or death of any person, or property damage in an estimated amount
of $100 or more, or some person acting for him or her, or the owner of the
snowmobile having knowledge of the accident, shall immediately by the
quickest means of communication notify the Police Department of the city.



(Prior Code, § 74.07)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective 1-31-1974)



§ 74.08  PERMITTING UNLAWFUL OPERATION.



   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a snowmobile owned by him
or her or under his or her control to be operated in violation of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 74.08)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective
1-31-1974)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   Police officers may use the procedure set forth in Part 821 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994,
being M.C.L. §§ 324.82101 et seq., as amended, in enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 74.09)  (Ord. D-1092, passed 1-21-1974, effective 1-31-1974)



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Truck routes



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   As used in this section TRUCK shall mean “truck”, “truck
tractor”, “trailer”, “semi-trailer”, as defined in the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. §§ 257.1 et seq., or any
combination thereof.



   (B)   The operation of any truck exceeding 30 feet in length or 12
tons gross weight (including operator and cargo) is prohibited upon every
street in the city except the following:



 

Street
 
From
 
To




Frank N. Andersen Bridge
 
Ezra Rust Drive
 
Hamilton Street


Bay Street
 
State Street
 
North city limit


Carroll Street
 
Wadsworth Avenue
 
North Washington Avenue


Congress Avenue
 
Hill Street
 
North Michigan Avenue


Court Street
 
Hamilton Street
 
Michigan Avenue


Davenport Avenue
 
Passolt Street
 
Johnson Street Bridge


East Holland Avenue
 
Saginaw River
 
East city limit


East Remington Street
 
East Holland Avenue
 
Saginaw River


East Street
 
South Washington Avenue
 
South city limit


Elmwood Avenue
 
Hess Avenue
 
Gallagher Street


Ezra Rust Drive
 
South Washington Avenue
 
Saginaw River


Fifth Avenue
 
Wadsworth Avenue
 
Genesee Avenue


Fitzhugh Street
 
North Jefferson Avenue
 
North Seventh Street


Fraser Street
 
West Center Street
 
South Michigan Avenue


Gallagher Street
 
Elmwood Avenue
 
Douglass G. Schenck Bridge


Genesee Avenue
 
Hill Street
 
Washington Avenue


Genesee Avenue
 
South Second Avenue
 
South city limit


Gratiot Avenue
 
South Michigan Avenue
 
West city limit


North Hamilton Street
 
West Remington Street
 
North Michigan Avenue


Hess Avenue
 
Douglass G. Schenck Bridge
 
East city limit


Hill Street
 
Clark Street
 
Congress Avenue


I-675
 
East city limit
 
North city limit


Janes Avenue
 
South Water Street
 
East Genesee Avenue


Jefferson Avenue
 
Symphony Lane
 
Janes Avenue


Johnson Street and Johnson Street Bridge
 
Davenport Avenue
 
North Fifth Avenue


Michigan Avenue
 
West city limit
 
North city limit


Rust Avenue and Rust Avenue Bridge
 
South Warren Avenue
 
Saginaw River


Douglass G. Schenck Bridge
 
Gallagher Street
 
West Center Street


Schaefer Street
 
Weiss Street
 
Clark Street


Second Avenue
 
East Genesee Avenue
 
Wadsworth Avenue


Sheridan Avenue
 
East Remington Street
 
South city limit


North Sixth Avenue
 
Fitzhugh Street
 
North Washington Avenue


State Street
 
West city limit
 
Davenport Avenue


Stephens Street
 
Gratiot Avenue
 
Rust Avenue


Symphony Lane
 
North Washington Avenue
 
North Jefferson Avenue


Thompson Street
 
South Fifth Avenue
 
East Genesee Avenue


Troy Street
 
Sheridan Avenue
 
Maplewood Avenue


Vermont Street
 
South Michigan Avenue
 
West Center Street


Veterans Memorial Parkway
 
Southerly boundary of I-675
 
North city limit


Wadsworth Avenue
 
North Seventh Street
 
Carroll Street


Warren Avenue
 
Troy Street
 
East Remington Street


Warren Avenue
 
Janes Avenue
 
Wadsworth Avenue


Washington Avenue
 
East Street
 
East city limit


Weiss Street
 
Carrollton Street
 
Michigan Avenue


West Center Street
 
Queen Street
 
Douglass G. Schenck Bridge


West Holland Avenue
 
North Michigan Avenue
 
East Holland Avenue


West Remington Street
 
East Remington Street
 
North Michigan Avenue


Williams Street
 
Rust Avenue
 
Gratiot Avenue


Williamson Street
 
Gallagher Street
 
South city limit




 



   (C)   The operation of trucks exceeding 22 feet in length or five
tons gross weight (including operator and cargo) is prohibited upon every
street in the city except those streets listed in division (B) above and
except the following:



 

Street
 
From
 
To




Bay Street
 
State Street
 
Court Street


Brockway Street
 
South Woodbridge Street
 
Gratiot Avenue


Cherry Street
 
East Genesee Avenue
 
South Sixth Avenue


Congress Avenue
 
Court Street
 
Hill Street


Congress Avenue
 
Mackinaw Street
 
Court Street


Court Street
 
State Street
 
Michigan Avenue


Fifth Avenue
 
North Washington Avenue
 
Wadsworth Avenue


Fraser Street
 
South Michigan Avenue
 
Moore Street


Gratiot Avenue
 
South Michigan Avenue
 
Williams Street


Houghton Avenue
 
North Mason Street
 
North Woodbridge Street


Hoyt Avenue
 
South Washington Avenue
 
East Genesee Avenue


Janes Avenue
 
East Genesee Avenue
 
East city limit


Jefferson Avenue
 
Janes Avenue
 
Hoyt Avenue


Jefferson Avenue
 
Holden Street
 
Williamson Street


Johnson Street
 
North Sixth Avenue
 
North Fifth Avenue


Lapeer Avenue
 
Veterans Memorial Parkway
 
Nineteenth Street


Mackinaw Street
 
Malzahn Street
 
Davenport Avenue


Malzahn Street
 
North Wheeler Street
 
Mackinaw Street


Marquette Street
 
Moore Street
 
South Wheeler Street


Mason Street
 
Brockway Street
 
Davenport Avenue


Nineteenth Street
 
Lapeer
 
Janes Avenue


Owen Street
 
Williamson Street
 
Meredith Street


Perkins Street
 
East Genesee Avenue
 
East city limit


Seventeenth Street
 
Janes Avenue
 
East Holland Avenue


Sixth Avenue
 
Cherry Street
 
Fitzhugh Street


Vermont Street
 
South Wheeler Street
 
South Michigan Avenue


Veterans Memorial Parkway
 
Southerly boundary of I-675
 
Lapeer Avenue


Warren Avenue
 
East Remington Street
 
Janes Avenue


Warwick Street
 
State Street
 
Davenport Avenue


Webber Street
 
South Washington Avenue
 
East city limit


Weiss Street
 
Michigan Avenue
 
West city limit


West Holland Avenue
 
North Woodbridge Street
 
North Michigan Avenue


West Remington Street
 
North Michigan Avenue
 
North Mason Street


Wheeler Street
 
West Michigan Avenue
 
Malzahn Street


Williams Street
 
Gratiot Avenue
 
South Woodbridge Street


Woodbridge Street
 
Davenport Avenue
 
Gratiot Avenue




 



   (D)   No provision of this section shall prohibit:



      (1)   The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in
the city;



      (2)   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city,
public utilities, any contractor or material man while engaged in the repair,
maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or street
utilities within the city;



      (3)   The operation of a truck upon any officially established
detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established;



      (4)   Any truck which is taking departure from or proceeding
to a destination on a prohibited street from operating on such prohibited
streets as may be reasonably necessary in traveling to or from, as the case
may be, the nearest street intersection on a street wherein such truck is
permitted to operate; or



      (5)   Any truck while engaged in one or more local pickups or
deliveries from using such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary
in so doing, provided, that such truck shall upon completion of the last
pickup or delivery return by the shortest route to the nearest street upon
which it is permitted to operate.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of any person who shall be driving or in
charge or control of any truck which may at that time be upon any street in
the city upon which truck travel is limited or restricted, upon the demand of
any police officer, to proceed to any public or private scale available for
the purpose of weighing and determining whether the weight thereof is in
excess of the weight limit permitted upon such street.



(Prior Code, Ch. 76, Sch. I)  (Ord. D-1723, passed 8-22-1994, effective
9-1-1994; Ord. D-1857, passed 6-5-2000, effective 6-15-2000; Ord. O-15,
passed 12-8-2003, effective 12-18-2003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ALARMS



      91.   CEMETERIES AND PARKS



      92.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PUBLIC SAFETY



      93.   NON-DISCRIMINATION



      94.   NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SAFETY



      95.   TREES, SHRUBS, AND PLANTS



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   WATERCRAFT CONTROL



      98.   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES



      99.   SPECIAL EVENTS REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 90:  ALARMS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Permits and fees



   90.03   Licenses



   90.04   Shut-off of alarms



   90.05   False alarms



   90.06   False alarms: response fees



   90.07   Exceptions to alarm fees



   90.08   False alarms: violation notice and appeal



   90.09   Defective alarms



   90.10   Billing and collection



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM. A detection device or an assembly of equipment or devices
arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to
which police officers and/or Fire Department personnel are expected to
respond. The term ALARM SYSTEM shall encompass burglar alarms and fire
alarms. However, alarm systems on motor vehicles shall be excluded from the
definition and operation of this chapter unless the motor vehicle alarm is
connected to an alarm system at the premises owned and/or leased by the user.
Also excluded are internal alarm systems designed solely to alert or signal
persons within the premises. If such an internal system, however, also
employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon
designed to signal persons outside the premises such an ALARM SYSTEM is
within the provisions of this chapter.



   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, or corporation who is the owner, and any
person, firm, or corporation who is a lessee of said owner, of premises in
which an alarm system as defined in this section is installed and maintained.



   BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm within the definition of alarm system in this
section which is designed to detect an unwarranted intrusion into a premises
or an attempted robbery or other violent act at a premises. The term BURGLAR
ALARM includes the terms AUTOMATIC HOLD-UP ALARM, INTRUSION ALARM,
DISTURBANCE ALARM, PANIC ALARM, ROBBERY ALARM, HOLD-UP ALARM, and LOCAL ALARM.



   FALSE ALARM. Activation of an alarm system through mistake, mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of prudent maintenance, or
through the negligence of the occupant of the residence and/or building in
which the alarm system is located, including their employees or agents. FALSE
ALARM shall also mean any activation of an alarm system which indicates a
crime or situation other than that which it was designated to indicate, or in
the case of fire alarm, any condition not resulting from a fire or potential
hazard. An intruder alarm triggered by an animal from the outside of the
building where the alarm is located shall constitute a FALSE ALARM.



   FIRE ALARM. An alarm system within the definition of alarm system in
this section which is designed to detect and provide warning of a fire
emergency, including local alarms. Smoke detectors or other internal fire
suppression equipment designed to monitor products of combustion and
temperature rise and, at a predetermined measurement, discharge fire
extinguishing substances are excluded from the definition and coverage under
this chapter. If, however, such smoke detectors or fire suppression devices
are connected to or are part of a system designed to signal persons outside
the premises in which such detection equipment is located that a fire hazard
exists on said premises then such internal detection and suppression
equipment is within this definition.



   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system within the definition of alarm system in
this section which employs audible signals designed to alert persons outside
the premises in which the alarm system is located.



(Prior Code, § 90.01)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. D-1906, passed
12-3-2001, effective 12-13-2001)



§ 90.02  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Alarm permits and permit fees.



      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who presently owns,
shall take ownership, lease, or occupy a premises in which a burglar and/or
fire alarm system has been installed and/or maintained shall be required to
obtain a permit for such burglar and/or alarm system through the city’s
authorized agent, regardless of any prior or existing permit or registration.



      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation maintaining or
operating an alarm system at more than one premises within the city shall
obtain an alarm permit for each separate premises.



      (3)   A non-refundable permit fee shall be established by
Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk for each permit required
by this chapter to help defray the costs incurred by the city in the
administration, maintenance, and supervision of the provisions of this
chapter. The permit fee shall be waived for any person, firm, or corporation,
who has registered its burglar and/or alarm system prior to the effective
date of this section, however, a delinquent or late fee shall be established
by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk incurred for a person,
firm, or corporation which fails to reregister with the city’s authorized
agent within 30 days of notification of reregistering by the city’s
authorized agent.



      (4)   If at any time a registered alarm is relocated or
changes ownership, the person, firm, or corporation who owns, takes
ownership, or leases or occupies the premises in which the alarm was
relocated, shall be required to reregister such alarm and pay the fee in the
same manner as set forth in this division (A).



   (B)   Application for permit.



      (1)   The permit application must be completed by the alarm
user of the premises on which the alarm system is maintained.



      (2)   The application shall include the following information:



         (a)   The address and telephone number of the premises
on which the alarm system is maintained;



         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
owner of the premises;



         (c)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
alarm user, if different than owner of premises;



         (d)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
person, firm, or corporation installing and/or servicing the alarm system;



         (e)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all
persons responsible for resetting or turning off the alarm or device,
checking the premises, or responding to notice from the Police and/or Fire
Department(s) of an activation of the alarm system;



         (f)   A description of the alarm system; and



         (g)   Such additional information as the Police and/or
Fire Department may require.



      (3)   The application shall also contain a statement that the
applicant(s) have read the copy of this chapter provided by the city or its
authorized agent and are submitting the application with full knowledge and
understanding of the provisions of this chapter and that said applicants will
comply with this chapter. Submission of the application to city or its
authorized agent shall serve as confirmation of this statement.



      (4)   The owner and the alarm user shall be required to keep
all application information current.



(Prior Code, § 90.02)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. O-104, passed
10-25-2010, effective 11-4-2010)



§ 90.03  LICENSES.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of
providing for the installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a burglar
and/or fire alarm system and/or a combined alarm monitoring sales facility
unless properly licensed by the state pursuant to the Private Security
Business and Security Alarm Act, Public Act 330 of 1968, being M.C.L. §§
338.1051 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 90.03)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  SHUT-OFF OF ALARMS.



   Local alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off device,
deactivating audible signals within 30 minutes. Whenever any local alarm
continues to emit audible signals, whether continuously or on a regularly
repeating basis, for over 30 minutes, and persons listed on the permit
application for the alarm system cannot be contacted by the Police Department
and/or Fire Department, or do not respond within 30 minutes of being
contacted, and the audible signal creates a nuisance or disturbance to peace
and tranquility of the surrounding area, the alarm user responsible for such
alarm shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, the Police Department
and/or Fire Department shall be authorized to disconnect or otherwise disable
such local alarm by cutting such wires, disconnecting such speakers, or
disabling such other components of the alarm system as are located on the
exterior of the premises.



(Prior Code, § 90.04)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  FALSE ALARMS.



   No person shall knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other
emergency to be transmitted to any official agency or organization which
deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property. The penalty for
violation of this section shall be the penalty established by § 109.3 of the
International Fire Code, as adopted and amended in § 92.30(F).



(Prior Code, § 90.05)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. O-104, passed 10-25-2010, effective 11-4-2010)



Cross-reference:



   False alarms, see § 92.05



§ 90.06  FALSE ALARMS: RESPONSE FEES.



   Every alarm user, operating an alarm system which signals a false alarm
as defined in § 90.01 in excess of two incidents within one calendar year
beginning January 1 of each year, shall pay to the city a false alarm
response fee and/or shut off fee in order to defray a portion of the cost of
response to such alarm incidents.



(Prior Code, § 90.06)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. D-1906, passed
12-3-2001, effective 12-13-2001; Ord. O-104, passed 10-25-2010, effective
11-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  EXCEPTIONS TO ALARM FEES.



   Alarm conditions existing under the following circumstances shall not
constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be assessed for:



   (A)   False alarms recorded in the first 60 days after initial
installation are not counted for enforcement purposes;



   (B)   False alarms recorded as a result of storms, earthquakes, or
other violent conditions beyond the control of owners and/or alarm users;



   (C)   Alarm conditions being activated by a person working on the
alarm system with prior notification to the City Police Department and/or
Fire Department as appropriate; and



   (D)   Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by
disruption or disturbances of telephone company facilities or motor
vehicle-utility pole accidents.



(Prior Code, § 90.07)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992)



§ 90.08  FALSE ALARMS: VIOLATION NOTICE AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Within ten days of the date of receipt of a notice of alarm
violation, an alarm user wishing to appeal a false alarm violation and the
associated fee as a result of a condition described in § 90.07 may do so by
a written appeal request.



   (B)   The appeal request, directed to the Police or Fire Department,
shall contain documentation of the applicable condition as described in §
90.07.



   (C)   The Police Chief or Fire Chief, or a designated
representative, shall make a determination on the appeal request and shall
notify the alarm user of the decision in writing.



   (D)   In the event the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision
rendered by the Police or Fire Chief, or a designated representative, the
alarm user, within ten days of the determination of the Police or Fire Chief,
may file with the City Manager a written request that the determination be
reconsidered.



   (E)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall decide whether
to uphold or set aside in whole or in part the decision reached by the Police
or Fire Chief. The alarm user shall be notified of that decision in writing.
If the alarm user believes it is necessary to appeal the decision, he or she
may have the opportunity to personally be present and may be heard on the
matter by the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (F)   In determining appeals, the Police or Fire Chief, or the City
Manager or his or her designee, shall take into account the following
criteria:



      (1)   The definition of FALSE ALARM set forth in § 90.01, and
exceptions thereto set forth in § 90.07;



      (2)   The provisions of § 90.06 and 90.99 respecting false
alarm fees;



      (3)   All police reports and other records respecting the
alleged false alarms; and



      (4)   The credibility of testimony and other evidence
presented at the appeal.



   (G)   An alarm user aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager to
require payment of a false alarm fee may appeal the decision of the City
Manager in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 90.08)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. D-1719, passed
7-25-1994, effective 8-4-1994; Ord. D-1906, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  DEFECTIVE ALARMS.



   (A)   An alarm system signaling more than five false alarms within a
calendar year shall be inspected and/or repaired. Upon written notice, the
owner or alarm user of the building or residence shall have the alarm system
inspected, at the owner or user’s expense, by a licensed alarm system
contractor within ten days of receipt of the fifth notice of alarm violation
and shall forward to the Police Department and/or Fire Department said
contractor’s report of the probable cause of the false alarms and the
measures instituted to eliminate same.



   (B)   Failure to have an alarm system inspected after notice of five
false alarms within a calendar year may result in the issuance of a civil
infraction as set forth in § 90.10(B)(2).



(Prior Code, § 90.09)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. O-104, passed
10-25-2010, effective 11-4-2010)



§ 90.10  BILLING AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Billing procedure. False alarm and shut off/response invoices
shall be mailed and become due and payable 30 days following the billing
date. A late payment fee shall be established by Council and posted in the
Office of the City Clerk and shall be added to any invoice not received by
city’s authorized agent by the date due.



   (B)   Collection, penalties, and remedies. In addition to any other
penalty or remedy provided for in this code, or other city ordinances, the
city or its authorized agent shall have the authority to take the following
actions against any alarm user, which fails to obtain a permit or fails to
pay any fees incurred under this chapter:



      (1)   Forward the unpaid fines to a collection agency for
action. Upon forwarding the fines to the collection agency, an administrative
fee equal to 30% of the unpaid fine will be added to the balance due;



      (2)   Cause to be issued a Class C civil infraction citation.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation
occurs. (Note: in the event a Class C civil infraction is issued, additional
penalties, fees, and court costs will be incurred.);



      (3)   Cause the unpaid charges to become a lien against the
real property being serviced by the alarm system and shall be collected as
provided in § 33.21; and



      (4)   In the case of a business, cause said business to cease
operations at its location, including, but not limited to, having persons
vacate the premises, padlocking said premises, or terminating water service
to said premises, with reasonable costs charged to the business owner.



(Prior Code, § 90.10)  (Ord. O-104, passed 10-25-2010, effective 11-4-2010)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 30.99.



   (B)   Amount of fee.



      (1)   The false alarm responses or shut off of local alarm
occurrences fee schedule is established by Council and available in the
office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   After the second false alarm response or shut off of
local alarm occurrence, in a calendar year, beginning January 1, the
department charging the fee (or the city’s authorized agent) shall notify
the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises, in writing, of this section
and the amount of the fee at that time charged and the fee charged for
subsequent responses as set forth above. All alarm permits shall be set to
“zero” occurrences on January 1 of each year.



   (C)   Penalty for response to unregistered alarm. In the event a
response is made to an unregistered alarm, the person, firm or corporation
maintaining or operating the alarm system shall be assessed a penalty fee
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk for failing
to register and/or obtain a permit prior to a response. Such penalty shall be
waived if the person, firm or corporation registers the alarm within ten days
of the response incident.



(Prior Code, § 90.06)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1681, passed 12-21-1992, effective 12-31-1992; Ord. D-1906, passed
12-3-2001, effective 12-13-2001; Ord. O-104, passed 10-25-2010, effective
11-4-2010)



CHAPTER 91:  CEMETERIES AND PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Rules and regulations



   91.02   Concessions



Cemeteries



   91.15   Establishment of cemeteries



   91.16   Plats



   91.17   Privileges of lot owners



   91.18   Purchase of lots



   91.19   Restrictions on burial



   91.20   Forfeiture of rights and interest



Parks



   91.35   Damaging park property



   91.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall within any park or city cemetery erect any
structure, hold or participate in any meeting, parade, or exhibition, or
speak publicly without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Facilities Administrator as appropriate.



   (B)   No person shall drive or operate within any park or city
cemetery a motor vehicle used solely for commercial purposes unless upon park
or cemetery business.



   (C)   No person shall use any park, boulevard, or city cemetery
drive for the purpose of demonstrating, teaching the driving of, or learning
to drive any vehicle.



   (D)   No person shall tow another vehicle within any park or city
cemetery except in case of a breakdown therein.



   (E)   No person shall, within a park, drive or operate any motor
vehicle except on a designated roadway and no person shall park any motor
vehicle except in a designated parking area.



   (F)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to approval by
the Council, to make such rules and regulations pertaining to the conduct and
use of parks, park facilities, boulevards, and city cemeteries as are
necessary to administer the same or to protect public property or the safety,
health, morals, or welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply
with any such rule or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 91.01)  (Ord. D-1698, passed 7-26-1993, effective
8-5-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  CONCESSIONS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or rent, or attempt to sell or rent, any
service, merchandise, or object in any park or city cemetery without first
entering into contract with the city to operate a park or cemetery
concession, except that a group or organization may, on special occasion,
sell to its own members, provided a written permit therefor has first been
obtained from the Facilities Administrator as appropriate.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to operate any park concession it
deems desirable. Where practical, concessions not operated by the city shall
be awarded by competitive bidding and shall be awarded by the Council upon
recommendation of the City Manager. No official or employee of the city shall
be interested, directly or indirectly, in any such concession contract.



(Prior Code, § 91.02)  (Ord. D-1017, passed 4-17-1972, effective
4-27-1972)  Penalty, see § 91.99



CEMETERIES



§ 91.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF CEMETERIES.



   The city’s cemeteries known as Brady Hill, Forest Lawn, and Oakwood
are continued, as heretofore established.



(Prior Code, § 91.15)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



§ 91.16  PLATS.



   Plats of certain areas of the city’s cemeteries heretofore platted
are hereby continued and recorded in the office of the Controller and
Cemeteries Division. Said plats shall be recorded on a master map of each
cemetery, to be prepared before January 1, 1942, and filed with the
Controller and Cemeteries Division. The Council shall from time to time fix
the price on all platted cemetery lots by resolution. The Council may from
time to time plat additional cemetery lots or replat those already platted.
Any Council resolution fixing the price of lots, platting, or replatting the
same shall also amend the master map of the cemetery involved.



(Prior Code, § 91.16)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



§ 91.17  PRIVILEGES OF LOT OWNERS.



   Purchasers of any lot or lots shall acquire only the privilege or
license to make interments in said lot or lots. The owner of any lot or lots
shall not allow any interment therein for remuneration, and interments are
restricted to members of the family and relatives of the owner thereof unless
written permission is first obtained from the Facilities Administrator and
filed with the Cemeteries Division to waive this provision.



(Prior Code, § 91.17)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



§ 91.18  PURCHASE OF LOTS.



   Any person purchasing a cemetery lot shall secure a certificate from
the Sexton or Supervisor indicating that the desired lot is available for
purchase. Thereupon the person shall make a request to the Cemeteries
Division for the purchase of said lot. Upon full payment of the proper fees
which may be established by the Council by resolution, the Cemeteries
Division shall deliver to the purchaser a deed to the lot in question signed
by the City Clerk and countersigned by the Controller. A complete record of
the transaction shall be kept by the Cemeteries Division.



(Prior Code, § 91.18)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



§ 91.19  RESTRICTIONS ON BURIAL.



   No person shall inter or cause to be interred a corpse of any deceased
person anywhere in said city except in the public cemeteries aforesaid or in
a cemetery controlled by a religious society or corporation organized and
equipped for that purpose.



(Prior Code, § 91.19)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.20  FORFEITURE OF RIGHTS AND INTEREST.



   Whenever the owner of any burial space or spaces containing no
interment in any public cemetery shall have failed and neglected for a period
of seven years or more to care for and maintain such space or spaces in
accordance with rules and regulations issued pursuant to this code, the City
Council may institute proceedings for the termination and forfeiture of the
right and interest of such owner in the manner and form prescribed by state
law and rules and regulations adopted hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 91.20)  (Ord. D-18, passed 1-27-1941, effective 2-13-1941)



PARKS



§ 91.35  DAMAGING PARK PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with, damage, displace, or remove any building, structure, sign, piece
of equipment, tree, shrub, or plant in any public park.



   (B)   The City Manager is authorized, in his or her discretion to
pay a reward of $25 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of
any person violating division (A) above.



(Prior Code, § 91.31)  (Ord. D-660, passed 7-27-1964, effective 8-6-1964) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 30.99.



   (B)   (1)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any
provision of § 91.35 is responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to the payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37,
plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37.



      (2)   Authorized city official. The Director of Public
Services, the Chief of Police and/or their designees are hereby designated as
the authorized city officials, as defined by Ch. 37 of the code, to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil violation notices as
provided in Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 91.32)



(Ord. O-54, passed 12-18-2006, effective 12-28-2006)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



Fire Regulations



   92.01   State laws, rules, and regulations



   92.02   Fire inspections



   92.03   Waste receptacles and storage of combustible waste materials



   92.04   False alarms; equipment



   92.05   Fire hydrants



   92.06   Hotel and dwelling fires



   92.07   Explosives



   92.08   Pyrotechnics



   92.09   Fire exits



   92.10   Tents



   92.11   Fire cost reimbursement



   92.12   Outdoor and open burning



International Fire Code



   92.30   Adopted; Fire Code amendments



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Dry cleaning, see § 114.01



   Fire Department, see § 11.17



   Garage and repair shops, see § 114.02



   Gasoline service stations, see §§ 114.15 through 114.21



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



FIRE REGULATIONS



§ 92.01  STATE LAWS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.



   No person shall violate any law of the state, nor any rule or
regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state, pertaining to
fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, or fire waste.



(Prior Code, § 92.01)



§ 92.02  FIRE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief is hereby empowered to enter at any and all
reasonable times upon and into any premises, building, or structure for the
purpose of examining and inspecting the same, and to ascertain the condition
thereof with regard to fire hazards and the condition, size, arrangement, and
efficiency of any and all appliances for firefighting.



   (B)   If such inspection shall disclose any fire hazard or any
deficiency in firefighting appliances, the Fire Chief shall order the
condition remedied.



   (C)   The Fire Chief is hereby empowered to appoint members of the
regular personnel of the Fire Department to make the inspections hereinbefore
provided for, who shall report in writing the results of the inspections to
the Fire Chief and who are hereby empowered to make such written order in
respect to the conditions found by them upon inspection as is hereby
authorized to be made by the Fire Chief. Such order shall be complied with
forthwith. Should any person receiving such order consider himself or herself
aggrieved thereby he or she may, within ten days after the receipt of said
order, appeal to the Fire Chief who shall thereupon make such written order
in the premises as he or she may deem right and reasonable.



   (D)   No person shall fail to comply forthwith with any such order
of the Fire Chief or of his or her authorized representative.



(Prior Code, § 92.02)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  WASTE RECEPTACLES AND STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE WASTE MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person owning or being responsible for any premises shall
permit any waste paper, ashes, oil, rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any
material of a similar nature to accumulate thereon, unless contained in
fireproof receptacles.



   (B)   No person owning or being responsible for any private garage
shall permit any waste paper, ashes, oil, rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any
material of a similar nature to accumulate therein.



(Prior Code, § 92.03)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940) 
Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  FALSE ALARMS; EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall turn in, sound, or cause to be communicated to the Fire
Department a false alarm of fire; or molest any firefighting apparatus or
equipment, or anything pertaining to the fire alarm system, or make, or have
in his or her possession an impression or duplicate of any key belonging to
the Fire Department, without the express permission of the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 92.05)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross-reference:



   False alarms, see § 90.05



§ 92.05  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Obstruction of. No person shall place any building material or
any other obstruction whatever, nor shall any person responsible for such
material or obstruction permit the same to remain, within 15 feet of any fire
hydrant.



   (B)   Unlawful to open or take water from.



      (1)   No person, except members of the Fire Department or of
the Department of Public Services, shall use any fire hydrant, except in case
of emergency, without first securing permission from the Maintenance and
Services Division for such use, and paying or agreeing to pay for the water
to be used.



      (2)   In no case shall any wrench or tool be used on any fire
hydrant other than a regulation Fire Department hydrant wrench.



(Prior Code, § 92.06)  (Ord. D-1008, passed 12-13-1971, effective
12-23-1971)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  HOTEL AND DWELLING FIRES.



   (A)   Hotels: fires in.



      (1)   In all hotels providing 25 or more beds for occupants,
the licensee shall at all times have a person (who may also be the licensee)
on duty or on call on the licensed premises, who shall be charged with the
duty of immediately notifying the Fire Department of the city when a fire
occurs therein. Any person therein who discovers such a fire shall
immediately notify the Fire Department or the person on duty or on call
therein.



      (2)   Any person who shall carelessly, recklessly, or
negligently set fire to any hotel, rooming house, lodging house, place of
public abode or to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, or furnishings
therein so as to endanger life or property in any way, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



      (3)   In a conspicuous place in each room and lobby of any
hotel to which this division (A) is applicable, the licensee thereof shall
post a plainly printed notice advising as to the provision of divisions
(A)(1) and (A)(2) above.



   (B)   Setting fires in certain buildings.



      (1)   Any person who shall carelessly, recklessly, or
negligently set fire to any hotel providing less than 25 beds, rooming house,
lodging house, place of public abode serving transients, two-family dwelling
or multiple dwelling as defined in § 153.021 as any dwelling containing more
than two dwelling units, or to set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains,
drapes, or household furnishings therein so as to endanger life or property
in any way, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



      (2)   In each public room and in each sleeping room of all
such hotels, rooming houses, lodging houses, and places of public abode
serving transients, a plainly printed notice stating the provisions of
division (B)(1) shall be posted.



(Prior Code, § 92.07)  (Ord. D-122, passed 9-8-1947, effective 9-18-1947;
Ord. D-295, passed 9-22-1952, effective 10-2-1952; Ord. D-1877, passed
10-9-2000, effective 10-19-2000)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   State laws, rules, and regulations. No person shall violate
any law of the state, nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly
authorized agency of the state, pertaining to explosives.



   (B)   Blasting. No person shall blast or carry on any blasting
operations without first having obtained a written permit from the Director
of Public Services. Before any such permit is issued the applicant therefor
shall furnish a bond deemed adequate by the Director of Public Services,
which bond shall become available in the payment of any damage to public or
private property and the payment for any personal injuries resulting from
said blasting.



(Prior Code, § 92.08)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  PYROTECHNICS.



   (A)   Definitions.The word PYROTECHNICS, whenever used in this code,
means devices made for professional use that are similar to consumer
fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for
consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not
labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 C.F.R.
§172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS mean fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. Parts
1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or
3.5. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not include low-impact fireworks.



   (B)   Prohibited. No person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation
shall use, explode, or cause to explode, or manufacture, pyrotechnics or
consumer fireworks within the city except as provided:



      (1)   The items described in the following exclusive list are
deemed exempt from this section:



         (a)   A starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare
designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation;



         (b)   Low impact fireworks, including ground and
handheld sparkling devices, as that phrase is defined under APA standard
87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5; and



         (c)   Novelties as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2,
3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and including all of the following:



            1.   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in
sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than
one-quarter of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to
indicate the maximum explosive content per cap;



            2.   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy
trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in division
(B)(1)(c)1. above are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come
in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not
designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the
explosion;



            3.   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not
exceeding one-eighth inch in diameter; and



            4.   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed
in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and
if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed
on the box; and toy smoke devices.



      (2)   The City Council may issue a written permit to a
properly qualified person for giving a pyrotechnic or consumer firework
display/show in a suitable open place. The permits shall be on forms provided
by the State Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. Permits so
issued shall impose such restrictions as may be necessary to properly
safeguard life and property. Before any such permit is issued, the applicant
therefor shall furnish a bond or insurance deemed adequate by the Council,
which bond or insurance shall become available in the payment of any damages
to public or private property and the payment for any personal injuries
resulting from said pyrotechnic or consumer firework display. All applicants
will have complied with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act and other
applicable laws.



      (3)   This section does not pertain to the use of consumer
fireworks on the following days after 11:00 a.m.:



         (a)   December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.



         (b)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding
Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.



         (c)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of
those days.



         (d)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday,
until 11:45 p.m.



         (e)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding
Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.



(Prior Code, § 92.09)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940;
Ord. D-1345, passed 6-9-1980, effective 6-9-1980; Ord. D-1716, passed
5-16-1994, effective 5-26-1994; Ord. O-136, passed 6-11-2012, effective
6-11-2012; Ord. O-148, passed 8-19-2013, effective 8-29-2013; Ord. O-206,
passed 3-4-2019, effective 3-14-2019)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.09  FIRE EXITS.



   (A)   No obstruction shall be permitted in the way of, or upon, any
fire escape, balcony, or ladder intended as a means of escape from fire.



   (B)   (1)   No inflammable material shall be permitted under or
at the bottom of any stairway, elevator, or other part of any building.



      (2)   Nor shall any such material be permitted where burning
would obstruct or render hazardous egress from a building.



   (C)   No obstruction shall be permitted in hallways of tenement or
apartment houses.



   (D)   No person shall obstruct any door, aisle, or passageway of any
theater, church, or other place of public assemblage with any furniture or
article.



   (E)   No person shall sit or stand in any such place of assemblage
in any aisle, or in any exit or passage required for the safe exit of the
assemblage.



   (F)   Clear passage from all exits and on sidewalks must be
maintained outside of all such places of public assemblage.



   (G)   No aisle, passageway, or stairway in any store shall be
obstructed with tables, showcases, or other obstructions during hours said
store is open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 92.12)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.10  TENTS.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   No tent exceeding 120 square feet in area shall be
erected, maintained, operated, or used except under a license issued by the
City Clerk. Such license shall not be issued for a period exceeding 90 days
subject to removal as hereinafter provided, and shall be revokable for cause.
Application shall be made on proper form and, when determined to be necessary
by the Fire Department, shall include plans drawn to scale, showing exits,
aisles, and seating arrangements and details of structural support of the
tent, seats, platforms, and the like. No license shall be issued until the
provisions of this section have been complied with, and the Fire Department
shall have certified that the tent and related structures comply with all
applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations.



      (2)   Any license issued under division (A)(1) above may be
renewed for an additional period of not to exceed 90 days upon inspection and
certification as required by division (A)(1) above.



   (B)   Location, construction, and material.



      (1)   Tents exceeding 120 square feet in area shall be located
so as to comply with all applicable provisions of the current adopted edition
of the Fire Code. All tents shall be constructed and erected to withstand a
wind pressure of ten pounds per square foot. All canvas, curtains, cloth,
rope, netting, and decorative material shall be rendered flameproof, a test
being made of the tent by the Fire Department prior to each erection and on
the decorative and other materials before they are attached to or placed
therein. In lieu of such test, the Fire Department may accept a certificate
from the manufacturer that the material has been tested by Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc., or some other recognized laboratory, and found to be
permanently flame-proofed, provided the material has proper identification
markings and is not more than three years old or has not been waterproofed
subsequently by a process which increases its flammability.



      (2)   Where tents are used as places of assembly with a
capacity of 200 or more persons, the seats, chairs, jacks, and other
appurtenances, if of wood, must be suitably treated to reduce the fire hazard
by a suitable application of a surface treatment or by impregnation.



      (3)   No tier of seats shall rise to a height exceeding 12
feet.



      (4)   All lighting shall be by electricity, with lamps
properly guarded to prevent ignition by radiation. In places of assembly,
emergency lighting facilities must be as provided in the building and
electrical codes for theaters.



      (5)   All wiring conductors shall be of a type approved for
the class of service and be protected against over-current. Loads for feeders
and branch lines shall be limited in accordance with the carrying capacities
as specified in the National Electrical Code. When deemed necessary by the
Electrical Inspector, conductors shall be trenched and covered.



      (6)   Tents in which persons sleep, and mess tents, shall not
be used for any exhibition purposes.



   (C)   Exits, aisles, and seats.



      (1) A minimum of two exits shall be provided where a tent is used
as a place of assembly with a capacity of 100 or more persons, in any tent
where ten or more persons sleep and in any tent involving conditions
hazardous to life. When tents are used as a place of assembly with a capacity
in excess of 500 people, each exit shall be not less than nine feet wide, and
the number of exits shall be based upon the ration of one exit to each 500
persons or major fraction thereof which the tent is designed to seat or hold.
Such exits shall be placed not over 75 feet apart and exitways serving such
exits shall not be less than nine feet in clear width.



      (2)   Aisles not less than 44 inches in width shall be
provided so that there are not more than ten seats between any seat and an
aisle. Where individual seats are not provided a distance of 18 inches along
any bench or platform shall constitute one seat in computing required aisles
and exits. Every aisle shall lead directly to an exitway, or to a cross aisle
running parallel with the seat rows and leading to an exitway. Such aisles
shall not be less in width than the combined width of aisles that they
connect. In tents having a capacity of 1,000 or over facilities must be
provided for admitting patrons on opposite sides of ends convenient to their
seating locations.



      (3)   Aisles and exitways shall be used only for passage to
and from seats and for vendors carrying their wares. No poles or ropes shall
be permitted in aisles and exitways and all exitways and exits shall be kept
unobstructed at all times and so maintained as to not present a hazard from
fire. The area for a distance of 20 feet beyond any exit shall be kept free
and clear and be made readily passable.



      (4)   Where two or more tents adjoin, with an opening between,
an exit to the outside shall be provided at the point of juncture.



   (D)   Marking and lighting of exits. All required exits, other than
those normally used for entrance shall be plainly marked during hours of
darkness, as to be readily distinguished. Required exitways shall also be
kept adequately lighted at such times, including the immediate area outside
the exits.



   (E)   No smoking. Signs prohibiting smoking shall be prominently
displayed at all entrances and at other locations within any tent used as a
place of assembly, so that they may be clearly visible to all occupants. It
shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to enforce no smoking rules.



   (F)   Motion pictures. No motion picture film of the nitro-cellulose
type shall be used, stored, or exhibited within a tent. Such exhibitions,
when held within a tent, shall be restricted to the use of safety film only.



   (G)   Automobiles, trucks, tractors, lighting equipment, and other
equipment using gasoline. All such appliances shall be filled with approved
safety cans or by hose from fixed pumps, from wheeled tanks with pumps, or a
pump from a tank wagon located not closer than 25 feet to any tent.



   (H)   Extinguishers.



      (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall survey, or cause
to be surveyed, each tent for which a permit has been granted, after it is
erected and, if it is to be used as a place of assembly, before it is
occupied. He or she shall require the installation of fire extinguishers as
deemed necessary, and designate their location.



      (2)   Fire extinguishers shall be properly distributed and
readily accessible. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of each
exhibition to properly train sufficient responsible employees in the use of
fire extinguishers so that they can be quickly put in operation; the Chief of
the Fire Department may require these employees to prove their fitness.



   (I)   Inspection and supervision by Fire Department. Uniformed Fire
Department personnel shall be detailed to all circuses, carnivals, or other
exhibitions where large crowds assemble. They shall familiarize themselves
with all fire protection facilities and fire prevention features and with the
condition of exits, and shall patrol the entire area of the tent during the
time it is occupied. Special police or firefighters should see that
overcrowding is not permitted, that aisles and exitways are kept open, and
that no-smoking rules are observed.



(Prior Code, § 92.14)  (Ord. D-77, passed 9-4-1945, effective 9-14-1945;
Ord. D-1753, passed 9-11-1995, effective 9-21-1995)



§ 92.11  FIRE COST REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   Authority. This section is authorized pursuant to the Police
and Fire Protection Act, Public Act 33 of 1951, being M.C.L. §§ 41.806a,
and the Home Rule City Act, Public Act 279 of 1909, being M.C.L. § 117.4j,
which provide for the collection of fees for emergency response services.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the city
to seek reimbursement for the actual costs of emergency response services,
either directly or through a third party provider, and to recover the costs
of such services.



   (C)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this section shall have these meanings ascribed to them.



      EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES. Includes all services and equipment
which are used by the city, or by a private individual or corporation
operating at the request of the city or state, including, but not limited to,
services provided by another governmental entity, in response to a utility
interruption or other situation necessitating a response of fire services.



      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Includes any individual, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, government entity, or other legal entity which is
either:



         (a)   Responsible for a utility interruption;



         (b)   Is an owner, tenant, occupant, or party in control
of property in which there has been a utility interruption; or



         (c)   Receives, requires, or otherwise necessitates or
causes the use of emergency response services.



      UTILITY INTERRUPTION. Includes a downed power line, a broken gas
line, a downed electronic or telephone cable, or any other similar condition
to which an emergency response service is needed.



   (D)   Recovery of costs. The city is entitled to recover the costs
of emergency response services from a responsible party. These costs shall
include, but are not limited to, use of any emergency fire and/or rescue
personnel, tools, equipment, materials and vehicles.



   (E)   Determination of costs. The reimbursement rates for the
recoverable costs shall be established by the city.



(Prior Code, § 92.15)  (Ord. O-124, passed 7-25-2011, effective 8-4-2011;
Ord. O-179, passed 5-23-2016, effective 6-2-2016)



§ 92.12  OUTDOOR AND OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is intended to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living
conditions, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating the
air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor burning.



   (B)   Title. This section shall be known as the “City of Saginaw
Outdoor and Open Burning Ordinance”.



   (C)   Applicability. This section applies to all outdoor burning and
open burning within the city.



      (1)   This section does not apply to grilling or cooking food
using charcoal, wood, propane, or natural gas in cooking or grilling
appliances.



      (2)   This section does not apply to burning for the purpose
of generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace, or other heating device
within a building used for human or animal habitation.



      (3)   This section does not apply to the use of propane,
acetylene, natural gas, gasoline, or kerosene in a device intended for
heating, construction, or maintenance activities.



   (D)   Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this section shall not be affected.



   (E)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CLEAN WOOD. Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished,
or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with
preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.



      CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Building waste materials,
including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house,
commercial or industrial building, or other structure.



      FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the City of Saginaw Fire Department or
other person designated by the City Manager.



      FIRE PIT. A brick, masonry, cement, or stone constructed
fireplace or metal fire ring for open burning the upper surface of which is
not more than 18 inches above the surrounding grade, with an inside bottom
surface that is not more than six inches below the surrounding grade, and
with an inside dimension where combustion can take place that is not more
than nine square feet of area at either the top or bottom.



      MUNICIPALITY. A county, township, city, or village.



      NUISANCE. A foul or obnoxious odor, the emission of smoke that
obstructs vehicle or pedestrian traffic on a nearby public road, sidewalk, or
walkway; the emission of smoke that interferes unreasonably with the peaceful
enjoyment of the adjacent properties, or any other by-product of outdoor or
open burning that creates a nuisance as defined by § 94.001 by this code of
ordinances.



      OPEN BURNING. Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or a chimney. This includes burning in a burn barrel.



      OUTDOOR BURNING. Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired
boiler, patio wood burning unit, or approved fire pit.



      OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER. A wood-fired boiler, stove, or furnace
that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or
domestic animals.



      PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT. A chimnea, patio warmer, or other
portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating.



      REFUSE. Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps,
leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter.



   (F)   General prohibition on outdoor burning and open burning. Open
burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the city unless the burning is
specifically permitted by this section.



   (G)   Agricultural burning. Open burning of weeds, brush, and crop
stubble on agricultural lands is allowed if conducted in accordance with
other applicable provisions of this section.



   (H)   Prescribed burning.



      (1)   PRESCRIBED BURN means the burning, in compliance with a
prescription and to meet planned fire or land management objectives, of a
continuous cover of fuels. A PRESCRIPTION means a written plan establishing
the criteria necessary for starting, controlling, and extinguishing a burn.



      (2)   Fires set for forest, prairie, and wildlife habitat
management are allowed only if conducted in accordance with Part 515 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994,
being M.C.L. §§ 324.51501 et seq.



      (3)   The owner of the property where the prescribed burn is
to occur shall first obtain a permit as required in division (L) below.



   (I)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers. An outdoor wood-fired boiler may
be installed and used in the city only in accordance with all of the
following provisions.



      (1)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be installed and
used only in an area zoned for R-1A use and consistent with other zoning
requirements.



      (2)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall not be used to burn
refuse.



      (3)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least
100 feet from the nearest building which is not on the same property as the
outdoor wood-fired boiler and at least 25 feet from the nearest building
which is on the same property.



      (4)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall have a chimney that
extends at least ten feet above the ground surface. If there are any
residences within 300 feet of the outdoor wood-fired boiler, the chimney
shall also extend at least as high above the ground surface as the height of
the roof of the tallest of such residences. The Fire Chief may approve a
lesser height on a case-by-case basis if necessary to comply with the
boiler’s manufacturer recommendations and if the smoke from the lower
chimney height does not create a nuisance for adjacent neighbors.



      (5)   The owner of the outdoor wood-fired boiler shall obtain
an annual permit from the Fire Chief in accordance with division (L) below.



   (J)   Patio wood-burning units. A patio wood-burning unit may be
installed and used in the city only in accordance with all of the following
provisions.



      (1)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn
refuse.



      (2)   The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood.



      (3)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least 25
feet from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the
patio wood-burning unit.



      (4)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a nuisance
to neighbors.



      (5)   The owner of the property where the patio wood-burning
unit is used has obtained a permit as required in division (L) below.



      (6)   A fire contained in an approved patio wood-burning unit
shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at least
18 years of age until the fire is extinguished and is cold. The person shall
have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be
necessary for the total control of the fire.



   (K)   Fire pits. Fire pits shall not be constructed in the front
yard of a residence or business and they shall be located at least 25 feet
from any structure or fence.



   (L)   Burning permits.



      (1)   No person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning or
open burning covered under this section without a permit issued by the Fire
Chief.



      (2)   No person shall use a patio wood-burning unit without
first having obtained a one-time patio wood-burning unit permit issued by the
Fire Chief. The fee for each one-time burning permit shall be established by
City Council and posted in the Fire Department. The permit shall only allow
use of the unit for which it is issued and shall apply only to the use of
that patio wood-burning unit on the property for which it was issued.



      (3)   The owner or occupant of the property shall obtain an
annual burning permit for each wood-fired boiler as appropriate and as
required by division (I)(5) above before using the outdoor wood-fired boiler.
The fee for each annual burning permit shall be established by City Council
and posted in the Fire Department. An annual permit expires on June 1 of each
year.



      (4)   When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief may
temporarily suspend issuing burning permits and may temporarily suspend
previously issued burning permits for open or outdoor burning.



      (5)   A permit issued under this division (L) shall require
compliance with all applicable provisions of this section and any additional
special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (6)   Any violation of the conditions of a permit shall be
deemed a violation of this section. Any violation of this section or the
permit shall void the permit.



      (7)   Before conducting an outdoor burning or open burning or
using a patio wood-burning unit, the property owner, or other person needing
a permit, shall contact the Fire Chief for an inspection of the property
and/or any outdoor burning appliance to obtain the required permit. A permit
will not be issued until an inspection has been conducted by the Fire Chief
or his or her designee.



   (M)   Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining a fire as an
outdoor or open burn shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and
any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.



   (N)   Right of entry and inspection.



      (1)   The Fire Chief or any authorized person who presents
credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this section.



      (2)   Any person applying for a permit for a patio
wood-burning unit shall permit inspection by the Fire Chief or any authorized
person of the unit and the location where it will be located for compliance
with this section before using the unit.



   (O)   Enforcement. The Fire Chief or any authorized officer, agent,
employee or representative of the city is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 92.16)  (Ord. O-152, passed 10-23-2013, effective
11-2-2013)  Penalty, see § 92.99



INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE



§ 92.30  ADOPTED; FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   A certain document on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Saginaw (City Clerk’s File) being marked and
designated as “International Fire Code 2015 Edition” and Appendix B,
Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix H,
Appendix I, Appendix J, Appendix K, Appendix L, Appendix M and to include all
charts, tables, and indexes affixed thereto, published by the International
Code Officials, hereinafter referred to in its entirety as the
“International Fire Code” or “this Code”, be and the same is hereby
adopted as the fire regulations of the city and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



      (2)   A printed copy of said International Fire Code, 2015
Edition, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for
inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.



      (3)   The International Fire Code 2009 Edition, Ordinance
D-1750, in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict is hereby
repealed.



   (B)   Section 103.1, (page 2) Chapter 1, of the International Fire
Code, 2015 Edition, (City Clerk’s File) hereinafter referred to as the
International Fire Code, or “this Code” is hereby amended to read as
follows:



   Fire Prevention Division.



   Sec. 103.1. A Fire Prevention Division is established within the Fire
Department under the direction of the Fire Chief, which shall consist of a
Fire Marshal, and such number of Deputy Fire Marshals as may be assigned
thereto by the Fire Chief. The function of this Division shall be to assist
the Fire Chief in the administration and enforcement of the Fire Prevention
provisions of this code.



   (C)   Section 105.1, (page 4) Chapter 1 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Permits or License Required.



   Sec. 105.1.



Permit: A permit or license shall be approved by the Fire Prevention Division
prior to engaging in any of the activities stated in Section 105.6, or other
provisions of this Code and after payment of appropriate fees.



   (D)   Section 105.6 (page 6), Chapter 1 is hereby amended to read as
follows:



   Section 105.6.



   Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained or approved of any license
required herein from the Fire Prevention Division prior to engaging in the
following activities, operations, practices, or functions:



      (a)   Automobile Wrecking Yard: Any person engaging in the
business of dealing or processing for resale scrap metal, other scrap
materials, used auto parts, or any form of goods commonly considered as junk,
or assembling same in one location for the purpose of sale, shall obtain a
license as provided in Chapter 110, Appendix 1. Application shall be filed at
the office of the City Clerk.



      (b)   Bowling Pin or Alley Refinishing: To conduct a bowling
pin refinishing or bowling alley resurfacing operation involving the use and
application of flammable liquids or materials. Fees for Bowling Pin or Alley
Refinishing shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire
Department. See Chapter 24.



      (c)   Combustible Material Storage: To store more than 2,500
cubic feet of total volume of boxes, barrels, pallets, or similar containers
of rubber or cork, or other similar combustible material inside building or
outside in an open area. Fees for Combustible Material Storage shall be
established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See Chapter 32.



      (d)   Compressed Gases: To store, transport on site, dispense,
use or handle at normal temperatures and pressures compressed gases in excess
of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.8. Fees for Compressed Gases shall be
established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See Chapter 53.



      (e)   Cryogen: Except where federal or state regulations apply
and except for fuel systems of the vehicle to produce, store or handle
cryogen in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.11. Fees for Cryogens
shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See
Chapter 55.



      (f)   Dry-Cleaning and Dry Dyeing: Any person carrying on any
business of dry-cleaning or dry dyeing shall obtain a license under Chapter
110, Appendix 1. Application shall be filed at the office of the City Clerk.
Also see Chapter 21.



      (g)   Explosives or Blasting Agents: For permits for
explosives or blasting agents, see Chapter 33. Fees for Explosives or
Blasting Agents shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire
Department.



      (h)   Fireworks Outdoors: Fireworks utilized for pyrotechnic
displays require a written permit from the City Council in accordance with
the method prescribed by § 92.09(B)(2).



      Fireworks Indoors: Fireworks utilized for pyrotechnic indoor
displays, see Chapter 33, Section 5608.



      Supervision Fee: A fee shall be charged to help defray the cost
incurred by the city to determine and maintain compliance with all safety and
fire regulations. All cost associated with such fire and life safety
inspection shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible
for said indoor or outdoor, public or private display. The cost for on-site
inspection to determine compliance with all safety and fire regulations shall
be established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See Chapter
56, Section 5601.5.



      (i)   Flammable or Combustible Liquids and Tanks:



         1. To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of ten
gallons inside a building, except that a permit is not required for the
following:



            A. The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile
heating plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the Fire Chief or his
or her designee, would cause an unsafe condition.



            B. The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or
similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance,
painting, or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days. Fees for
storage, handling, or use of Class I liquids shall be established by City
Council and posted in the Fire Department.



         2.   To store, handle, or use Class II or Class III-A
liquids in excess of 25 gallons in a building or in excess of 60 gallons
outside a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning
equipment. Fees for storage, handling, or use of Class II or Class III-A
liquids shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire
Department.



         3.   To remove Class I and Class II liquids from
underground storage tanks used for fueling motor vehicles by means other than
the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.
Fees for removal of Class I and Class II liquids from underground storage
tanks used for fueling motor vehicles by means other than the approved,
stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes shall be
established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department.



         4.   To change the type of contents stored in any
flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material other than that for which
the tank was designed and constructed. Fees to change the type of contents
stored in any flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material other than
that for which the tank was designed and constructed shall be established by
City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See Chapter 57.



      (j)   Hazardous Materials: To store, transport on site,
dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed
in Table 105.6.21 or to install, repair, abandon, remove, place temporarily
out of service, close, or substantially modify a storage facility or other
area regulated by Chapter 50 when the hazardous materials in use or storage
exceed the amounts listed in Table 105.6.21. Fees for Hazardous Materials
shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department.



      (k)   Highly Toxic Pesticides: To store any amount of high
toxic pesticides. Fees for Highly Toxic Pesticides shall be established by
City Council and posted in the Fire Department. See Chapter 50.



      (l)   High-Piled Combustible Stock: To use any building or
portion thereof exceeding 2,500 square feet for the storage of high-piled
combustible stock. (See definition). A floor plan showing the dimensions and
location of the stockpiles and aisles shall be submitted with the application
for such permits. Fees for High-Piled Combustible Stock storage shall be
established by City Council and posted in the Fire Department See Chapter 32.



      (m)   Liquefied Petroleum: Except for portable container of
less than 120 gallons water capacity, a permit is required to install or
maintain any LP gas container. Where a single container or the aggregate
capacity of interconnected containers is over 1,200 gallons water capacity,
the installer shall submit plans for such permits. See Chapter 61. Fees to
install or maintain any LP gas container, where a single container or the
aggregate capacity of interconnected containers is over 1,200 gallons water
capacity, shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire
Department.



      (n)   Oil and Natural Gas Wells: To drill, own, operate, or
maintain an oil or natural gas well. See Chapter 57. Fees for Oil and Natural
Gas Wells shall be established by City Council and posted in the Fire
Department.



      (o)   Tents and Air-Supported Structures: No tent exceeding
120 square feet in area shall be erected, maintained, operated, or used
except under a license issued in accordance with § 92.14. See Chapter 31.
Application shall be filed at the office of the City Clerk.



      (p)   Tire Storage: To store in excess of 2500 cubic feet
gross volume of used or new tires. Fees for Tire Storage shall be established
by City Council and posted in the Fire Department.



   (E)   Section 108.1 (page 11), Chapter 1 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Board of Appeals.



   Sec. 108.1.



      (a)   In order to determine the suitability of alternate
materials and type of construction and to provide for reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of this Code, the Board of Fire Code
Appeals, created and empowered as provided in § 12.15 shall, upon
application, hear and determine any written appeal made to it by a person
considering himself or herself aggrieved by any action or decision of any
official acting under the provisions of this Code. Service of an appeal shall
be made on the Secretary of the Board within ten days after such action or
decision appealed from. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its investigations pursuant hereto and shall
render all decisions in writing to the Fire Chief with the duplicate copy to
the appellant and may recommend to the City Council such new legislation as
is consistent herein.



      (b)   Reconsideration: The Board of Fire Code Appeals is
without jurisdiction to reconsider an appeal; therefore no petition to grant
reconsideration of an appeal will be entertained by the Board.



      (c)   The Board of Fire Appeals will not entertain an appeal
asking for relief that has been denied by the Board within five years unless
there has been a relevant change in this Code or in conditions since the
original hearing.



   (F)   Section 109.3 (page 13), Chapter 1 of this Code be amended to
read as follows:



   Penalties.



   Sec. 109.3.



      (a)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate of permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Chief, his or her delegate, or by
the Court, within the time fixed herein, or who shall fail to obey parking
regulations as they relate to fire lanes or fire safety, or who shall fail to
obey housing regulations, shall be responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37 of this
code of ordinances, Ord. O-1, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided
in Ch. 37.



      (b)   The Fire Chief or any person delegated by him or her is
designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil
infraction citations or municipal civil infractions violation notices as
provided by Ch. 37.



      (c)   The application of the above infraction procedure shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of any prohibited condition or
any other legal action to secure compliance with this Code.



   (G)   Section 202, Chapter 2 Chief of the Fire Prevention Division,
Chapter 2, Definitions and Abbreviations (page 15) of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   The Fire Marshal is the head of the Fire Prevention Division.



   (H)   Section 202, Fireworks, Chapter 2, Definitions and
Abbreviations (page 15) of this Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



   FIREWORKS means any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles of
pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects.



   (I)   Section 202, (page 15) Chapter 2, Definitions and
Abbreviations of this Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



   Sec. 202: Jurisdiction.



      (a) Jurisdiction is the City of Saginaw, located in the County of
Saginaw, State of Michigan.



      (b) Jurisdictional area is within the territorial boundaries of
the City of Saginaw, County of Saginaw, and State of Michigan.



   (J)   Section 307 (page 50) Chapter 3 is amended to read as follows:



   A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or
maintained any open burning, except as provided in § 92.16.



   (K)   Section 603.1, (page 77) Chapter 6, is amended to read as
follows:



   Sec. 603.1. Fuel-pumping equipment. Heating equipment using gas, oil,
or solid fuel may be installed in the lubrication or service room where there
is no dispensing or transferring of Class I or Class II liquid, if the
equipment is installed not less than eight (8) feet above the floor.



   Exception: Heating equipment separated from other use areas by
construction having minimum one-hour fire resistive rating.



   (L)   Section 605.1, (page 81) of Chapter 6 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Abatement of Electrical Hazards.



   Sec. 605.1. When any electrical hazards are identified, measures to
abate such conditions shall be taken. All identified hazardous electrical
conditions in permanent wiring shall be brought to the attention of the City
of Saginaw Electrical Inspector. If the conditions warrant, by order of the
Fire Chief, the electrical service may be ordered disconnected immediately.



   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances and other equipment which are
modified or damaged and constitute an electrical shock or fire hazard shall
not be used.



   (M)   Section 901.2.1, (page 103) Chapter 9 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Approval and Testing.



   Sec. 901.2.1. Fire alarm systems, fire hydrant systems;
fire-extinguishing systems, including automatic sprinkler systems and wet and
dry standpipes; halon systems and other special types of automatic
fire-extinguishing systems; and other fire protection systems and
appurtenances thereto shall meet the approval of the Fire Department as to
installation and location and shall be subject to such periodic tests as
required by the Fire Chief.



   Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the fire department for
review and approval prior to construction. Fees for plans and specification
review and approval shall be established by City Council and posted in the
Fire Department.



   Condition of approval of halon systems shall be satisfactory passage of
a test conducted in accordance with nationally recognized standards prior to
final acceptance of the system.



   (N)   Section 901.5, (page 103) Chapter 9 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Installation of Fixed Fire Protection Systems



   Sec. 901.5.



      a.   General: All fire extinguishing systems required by this
Code or the State Building Code shall be installed by a State of Michigan
Certified Firm (Act #: 144, P.A. 1982) and in accordance with the
requirements of this article. Proof of certification shall be submitted to
the Fire Department on demand. The location of the Fire Department hose
connections shall be approved by the Chief. All fire hose threads used in
connection with fire-extinguishing systems shall be National Standard Hose
thread. In buildings used for high-piled combustible storage, fire protection
shall be in accordance with the Code.



   (O)   Section 903.4, (page 112) Chapter 9 of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   Sprinkler and Fire Alarm Systems Supervision.



   Sec. 903.4.



      (a) Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Automatic sprinkler systems
shall be supervised by an approved central, proprietary, or remote station
service, or a local alarm which will give an audible signal at a constantly
attended location when the number of sprinklers is:



         1.   20 or more in Group I, Division I occupancies.



         2.   100 or more in other occupancies.



      (b)   Permit: A permit is required by this code and the City
of Saginaw Code of Ordinances, Title IX, General Regulations, Chapter 90,
Alarms, and shall be obtained at the office of the City Clerk.



   (P)   Section 907.2.8, Required Installations, (page 123) of Chapter
9, Group R, Division I Occupancies of this Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:



   Group R Occupancies.



   1.   Approved Automatic Fire Alarm and Smoke Detection System:



   An approved automatic fire alarm and smoke detection system shall be
installed in common areas of:



      A.   All buildings which contain three or more dwelling units
or guest rooms or any combination thereof equal to three or more and which
are three stories or more in height.



      B.   All buildings which contain 15 or more dwelling units or
guest rooms or any combination thereof equal to 15 or more, regardless of
height.



      Exceptions:



         1.   An automatic smoke detection system need not be
installed in buildings not over two stories in height and all dwelling units
are separated from each other including attic and crawl space or basements by
at least one-hour fire resistive occupancy separations and each individual
dwelling unit or guest room has an exit directly to a public way, exit court,
or exterior stairway.



         2. An automatic smoke detection system need not be
installed in buildings which are protected throughout by an approved
supervised automatic sprinkler system with quick response residential
standard sprinkler heads installed in all dwelling units and guest rooms in
accordance with this code.



   2.   System Equipment and Installation: Fire alarm and automatic
smoke detection systems and all component parts thereof, shall be constructed
and installed in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code.



   Such systems shall include provisions for smoke detection and manual
pull stations in interior corridors or hallways and automatic detection in
storage rooms, laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and all similar interior common
areas.



   Location requirements for automatic smoke and heat detectors shall be
as specified in Title XV, Land Usage, Chapter 151, Housing Regulations, §
151.090, Smoke Detectors of the City of Saginaw Code of Ordinances.



   Exception: Manual pull stations need not be installed in occupancies
containing less than 15 dwelling units or guest rooms or any combination
thereof.



   (Q)   Section 2301, (page 229) of Chapter 23, of this Code is hereby
added to read as follows:



   Service Station.



   Sec. 2301.1. This section applies to both automotive and marine service
stations and in addition, no person shall fail to comply with the
requirements of §§ 114.15 et seq. or to violate any law of the State of
Michigan nor any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of
the State of Michigan pertaining to Service Stations.



   (R)   Section 2205.3, (page 211) Chapter 23, of this Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



   (b)   Crankcase Drainings: Crankcase drainings and flammable or
combustible liquids shall not be dumped into sanitary or storm sewer systems.
Crankcase drainings shall be stored in tanks or tight drums outside of
buildings until properly removed from the premises.



   (S)   Chapter 34 (page 301), Tire-Rebuilding and Tire Storage is
hereby amended as follows:



   Storage of Rubber Tires.



   Permits.



   Sec. 3401.2. For permits to store rubber tires, see Section 105.6.



   Storage Indoors.



   Sec. 3409.1. Storage of rubber tires when stored indoors shall comply
with all other requirements of this Code and the provisions of NFPA 231D as
to construction, separation, and fire protection systems. See Chapter 34.



   (T)   Section 5003.3.1.4, (page 324), Chapter 50 of this code is
hereby amended to read as follows:



   Unauthorized Discharges.



   Sec. 5003.3.1.4.



   Responsibility for Cleanup. The person, firm, or corporation
responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all
actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge,
whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the City of Saginaw. When deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief, cleanup may be initiated at the direction of the
Fire Marshal or other member of the Fire Department. All costs associated
with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person
responsible for the unauthorized discharge to include but not limited to:
personnel, apparatus, equipment, supplies, etc.



  (U)  Section 307 (page 50) Chapter 3, Section 1025 of Chapter 10 (Page
183), Section 2001.3 (Page 215) of Chapter 20, Section 2101.2 (Page 223) of
Chapter 21, Section 2201.2 (Page 227) of Chapter 22, Section 2401.2 (Page
245) of Chapter 24, Section 2501.2 (Page 257) of Chapter 25, Section 2601.2
(Page 259) of Chapter 26, Section 2701.5 (Page 261) of Chapter 27, Section
2801.2 (Page 271) of Chapter 28, Section 2901.2 (Page 275) of Chapter 29,
Section 3001.2 (Page 279) of Chapter 30, Section 2301.2 (Page 229) of Chapter
23, Section 3201.2 (Page 287) of Chapter 32, Section 3501.2 (Page 303) of
Chapter 35, Section 5001.5 (Page 315) of Chapter 50, Section 5101.2 (Page
337) of Chapter 51, Section 3701.3 (Page 309) of Chapter 37, Section 5301.2
(Page 345) of Chapter 53, Section 5401.2 (Page 353) of Chapter 54, Section
5501.2 (Page 355) of Chapter 55, Section 5701.4 (Page 379) of Chapter 57,
Section 5801.2 (Page 359421) of Chapter 58, Section 5901.2 (Page 427) of
Chapter 59, Section 6001.2 (Page 429) of Chapter 60, Section 6201.2 (Page
443) of Chapter 62, Section 6301.2 (Page 447) of Chapter 63, Section 6401.2
(Page 453) of Chapter 64, Section 6501.2 (Page 455) of Chapter 65, Section
6601.2 (Page 457) of Chapter 66, Section 6701.2 (Page 459) of Chapter 67, of
this Code is hereby repealed.



   (V)   (1)   All proceedings pending and all rights and
liabilities existing, acquired, or incurred under any ordinance hereby
repealed at the time this section takes effect are hereby retained, and such
proceedings may be consummated under and according to the ordinance in force
at the time such proceedings are or were commenced.



      (2)   It is the intent that this section shall not be
construed to alter, affect, or abate any pending prosecution or prevent
prosecution hereinafter instituted under such ordinance or any section
thereof for offenses committed prior to the effective date of this section,
and all prosecution instituted after the effective date of this section may
be continued or instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinance or sections thereof in force at the time of the commission of such
offenses.



(Prior Code, § 92.20)  (Ord. O-127, passed 9-26-2011, effective 10-6-2011;
Ord. O-136, passed 6-11-2012, effective 6-11-2012; Ord. O-153, passed
10-23-2013, effective 11-2-2013)



   § 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   The minimum penalty for any violation of § 92.04 shall be a
Class C Municipal Civil Infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set
forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances, for each infraction. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37 of this
code of ordinances. Each violation with any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 92.05)



   (C)   A violation of § 92.08 shall be deemed a municipal civil
infraction subject to a civil fine of $1,000.  Five hundred dollars of the
fine collected under this division (C) shall be remitted to the city.



(Prior Code, § 92.09)



   (D)   Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of § 92.12 or fails
to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant to § 92.12 shall be
deemed to be responsible for a Class C Municipal Civil Infraction, subject to
payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances,
plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.
Each violation with any provision of the chapter shall constitute a separate
violation.



(Prior Code, § 92.16)



(Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940; Ord. D-1345, passed
6-9-1980, effective 6-9-1980; Ord. D-1716, passed 5-16-1994, effective
5-26-1994; Ord. O-136, passed 6-11-2012, effective 6-11-2012; Ord. O-148,
passed 8-19-2013, effective 8-29-2013; Ord. O-152, passed 10-23-2013,
effective 11-2-2013; Ord. O-206, passed 3-4-2019, effective 3-14-2019)



CHAPTER 93:  NON-DISCRIMINATION



Section



Discrimination in Housing



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Effect of provisions



   93.03   Definitions



   93.04   Discriminatory housing practices; exceptions



   93.05   Administration and powers



   93.06   Complaint and investigation



   93.07   Enforcement



Sex Discrimination in Places of Public Accommodation, Resort or Amusement,
Including Certain Clubs



   93.20   Purpose



   93.21   Definitions



   93.22   Illegal discrimination



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Determination. It is hereby found that discrimination
adversely affects the continued development, renewal, growth, and progress of
the people of the city, and of the city, and that such discrimination is
injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and
the people thereof.



   (B)   Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in
the exercise of its police power and under the provisions of the Federal
Civil Rights Act of 1866 (42 U.S.C. §§ 1981 through 1985) and 1968 Fair
Housing Law (Title VIII and IX) of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 3601 et seq., 42 U.S.C. § 3631, as amended by the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq. and other
applicable law, for the protection of the public safety, public health, and
general welfare, for the maintenance of business and good government, and for
the promotion of the city’s trade, commerce, and manufacture, to assure
equal opportunity to all persons to live in adequate housing facilities, and
to that end to prohibit discrimination in housing.



(Prior Code, § 93.01)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984)



§ 93.02  EFFECT OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to
supersede, compete with, or conflict with any of the provisions of the Civil
Rights Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 1981 through 1985) or any law of this state or
this nation relating to discrimination because of race, color, creed,
national origin, age, marital status, pregnancy, disability, or source of
income.



   (B)   All parts of this subchapter are severable, and if any one
part is held invalid, all others shall remain in such full force and effect
as can be without the involved provision or application.



(Prior Code, § 93.02)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984)



§ 93.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGE. Chronological age, including the status of being a minor.



   BONA FIDE. The term BONA FIDE is not to mean the continuation of a
practice which, while neutral on its face, tends to or in fact does continue
in practice a form of discrimination not sanctioned by this subchapter.



   COMPLAINANT. Any person or group of persons, association, agency,
partnership, or corporation, public or private, including the city, who
claims to have been injured or who believes that he or she will be
irrevocably injured under this subchapter.



   DISABILITY. A determinable physical or mental condition of an
individual or a history of such condition which may result from disease,
accident, condition of birth, or functional disorder which constitutes a
physical or mental limitation which is unrelated to an individual’s ability
to acquire, rent, or maintain property (as defined by the Persons with
Disabilities Civil Rights Act, Public Act 220 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§
37.1101 et seq.)



   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. To make a decision, offer to make a
decision, or refrain from making a decision, or to make any difference in
treatment of individuals or groups or of the friends or associates of such
individual or group based in whole or in part on the race, color, creed,
religion, ancestry, national or sectional origin, sex, sexual orientation,
age (including emancipated minors), condition of pregnancy, marital status,
disability (as defined by the Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act,
Public Act 220 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 37.1101 et seq.), source of income
of the individual or group applying for the purchase, lease, rental, or
financing of housing units, real estate, or housing accommodations.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. The term means any person regularly engaged in
the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans on real property.



   HOUSING UNIT, FACILITY, OR ACCOMMODATION. Any dwelling unit or facility
used for a person to regularly sleep and keep personal belongings, including,
but not limited to, a house, apartment, rooming or boarding house, housing
cooperative, hotel, motel, mobile home, retirement home, or nursing home.



   MARITAL STATUS. The state of being married, unmarried, divorced, or
widowed.



   PERSON. Includes an association, partnership, agency, organization, or
corporation, public or private, including all employees thereof as well as
any natural person. The term, when applied to partnerships, associations, and
corporations, includes members and officers.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER AND AGENT. Any person who, for a fee or other
valuable consideration, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, negotiates, or
attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange, or rental of real
property or holds himself or herself out as licensed in the business of
selling, purchasing, exchanging, or renting the real property of another.



   RESPONDENT. The person, group of persons, association, agency,
partnership, or corporation who allegedly commits a violation of this
subchapter.



   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality, or
bisexuality, by preference or practice.



   SOLICITATION. The following actions are prohibited only to the extent
that they have the effect of committing a discriminatory housing practice
under § 93.04(A). This subchapter does not prohibit:



      (1)   Going in or upon the property of the individual to be
solicited, except when requested in writing not to do so by such individual;



      (2)   Communicating with the individual to be solicited by
mail, telephone, telegraph, or messenger service, except when requested in
writing not to do so by such individual;



      (3)   Canvassing in streets or other public places;



      (4)   Distributing handbills, circulars, cards, or other
advertising matter;



      (5)   Using loud speakers, sound trucks, or other
voice-amplifying equipment;



      (6)   Displaying signs, posters, or other advertising devices
upon a real estate office; or



      (7)   Nondiscriminatory advertising in newspapers of general
circulation, magazines, billboards, radio, television, or telephone
directories.



   SOURCE OF INCOME. Any legal source from which a person obtains money.
This does not preclude a good faith business determination involving a
person’s ability to meet the financial burdens involved.



   TRANSFER. To sell, rent, lease, sublease, or in any other way assign
any interest in real property.



(Prior Code, § 93.03)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984)



§ 93.04  DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Discriminatory housing practices. The following practices
shall be violations of this subchapter.



      (1)   No person shall discriminate in renting, leasing,
selling, or otherwise making available any housing units, facilities, or
accommodations or refuse to engage in good faith in a real estate transaction
with any person.



      (2)   No person shall discriminate in the terms, conditions,
maintenance, or repair in providing any housing facility.



      (3)   No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, maintenance, or repair of any real
property solely because of the location in the city of such real property or
other discriminatory practice as named in § 93.03.



      (4)   No person shall promote real estate transactions by
representing that changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect
to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, nor that the presence of
individuals of any particular race, color, creed, religion, ancestry,
national or sectional origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, condition of
pregnancy, marital status, disability, or source of income in an area will or
may result in:



         (a)   A lowering of property values in the area;



         (b)   A change in the area as to the race, color, creed,
religion, ancestry, national or sectional origin, sex, sexual orientation,
age, condition of pregnancy, marital status, disability, source of income of
its owners or occupants;



         (c)   An increase in criminal or anti-social behavior in
the area; or



         (d)   A change in the racial or ethnic composition of
schools or other public facilities or services in the area.



      (5)   No person shall discriminate against another by
representing to another person that any real property or housing
accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in
fact it is so available or by refusing to supply all property listings which
he or she has available or by refusing to permit any person to inspect such
property.



      (6)   No person shall discriminate against another by placing
a sign or other display on any real property which indicates that the
property is for sale without authority from the owner of said property.



      (7)   No person shall adopt, enforce, or employ any policy or
requirement, or publish, post, or broadcast any advertisement, sign, or
notice, which discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing.



      (8)   No person shall discriminate in the publication or
distribution of advertising material, information, or solicitation regarding
housing accommodations.



      (9)   No agent, broker, or any other intermediary shall
discriminate in making referrals, listings, or printing information with
regard to housing accommodations. A report of a conviction of any such person
for a violation of this subchapter shall be made to the applicable licensing
or regulatory agency for such person or business.



      (10)   No person shall refuse to receive or fail to transmit a
bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from any person based
in whole or in part on the race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national
or sectional origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, condition of pregnancy,
marital status, disability, or source of income.



      (11)   No person shall coerce, threaten, or retaliate against
any individual or organization for making a complaint or assisting in the
investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this subchapter,
nor require, request, conspire with, or assist or request, coerce another
person or persons to retaliate against any individual or organization for
making a complaint or assisting in any investigation pursuant to this
subchapter.



      (12)   No person shall conspire with, assist, coerce, or
request another person to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this
subchapter.



      (13)   No person shall discriminate against another by
knowingly or intentionally presenting false or substantially misleading
statements or by presenting statements for which the person has no factual
proof to any individual or groups applying for the purchase, lease, rental,
or financing of housing units, real estate, or housing accommodations. No
person shall file a false or misleading claim or make false or misleading
statements in a claim under penalty of this subchapter.



      (14)   No person shall discriminate against another by
continuing to solicit the sale or listing for sale of real property by
telephone, mail, or personally, with notice that the property owner has
requested in writing the solicitor or the company the solicitor represents to
cease such solicitation.



      (15)   No person, corporation, association, partnership,
reciprocal exchange, or any other legal entity engaged in or attempting to
engage in the business of making insurance or surety contracts in the city
shall:



         (a)   Refuse to insure, refuse to continue to insure, or
limit the amount of coverage available to an individual or risk on a
discriminatory basis, including the location of the risk; or



         (b)   Charge a different rate for the same coverage
based on discrimination as defined in this subchapter.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The following practices shall not be violations of this
subchapter:



         (a)   For a religious organization or institution to
restrict any of its facilities of housing or accommodation which are operated
as a direct part of religious activities to persons of the denomination
involved;



         (b)   For the owner of an owner-occupied one-family or
two-family dwelling or a housing facility or public accommodation facility,
respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of
individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex;



         (c)   To limit occupancy in a federally funded housing
project or to provide federally funded public accommodations, assistance, or
services to persons of low income, over 50 years of age, or who are disabled;



         (d)   To rent a housing accommodation for not more than
12 months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by said owner or
lessor and maintained as the owner’s or lessor’s home for at least three
months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily
vacated while maintaining legal residence;



         (e)   For an educational institution to limit the use of
its facilities to those affiliated with such institution; and



         (f)   The rental of a housing accommodation in a
building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families
living independently of each other if the owner or members of his or her
immediate family reside in one of such housing accommodations, or to the
rental of a room or rooms in a single housing unit by an individual if the
lessor or a member of the lessor’s



immediate family resides therein. IMMEDIATE FAMILY for the purpose of this
section shall mean a spouse, parent, child, or sibling.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit
any affirmative action laws or programs instituted by any level of government
or private person or group.



      (3)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent securing civil
rights guaranteed by laws other than those set forth herein.



(Prior Code, § 93.04)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective
5-31-1984)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  ADMINISTRATION AND POWERS.



   (A)   Authority. The authority for administration of this subchapter
is derived from the city’s police powers and from the Federal Civil Rights
Act of 1866 (42 U.S.C. 1981 §§ through 1985), and the 1968 Fair Housing Law
(Titles VIII and IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1968; 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et
seq., 42 U.S.C. § 3631), as amended by the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 53.01 et seq. and other applicable law.



   (B)   Powers. Subject to the policies established by the city, the
powers and duties of the city to implement and enforce this subchapter shall
be:



      (1)   To receive, investigate, make findings and
recommendations upon complaints, and initiate its own investigations and
complaints of violations of this subchapter;



      (2)   To issue or cause to be issued appropriate corrective
orders, including orders to cease and desist, and to compel through court
authorization compliance with the orders; and



      (3)   To promulgate and publish rules, guidelines, and
procedures for the conduct of its business; to issue publications and reports
of investigations and research.



(Prior Code, § 93.05)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984)



§ 93.06  COMPLAINT AND INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured under this
subchapter may file a written or oral complaint with the city. Complaints
shall be in writing or, if oral, shall be reduced to writing, shall be
verified, shall contain such information and be in such form as the city
requires, and shall specify the section of this subchapter alleged to be
violated.



   (B)   The city shall take steps to investigate the complaint and
give notice in writing to the complainant and to the respondent of the
investigation and the actions, if any, which will be taken. The city may
defer its investigation to state or federal authorities when the same or
similar complaint has been filed with state or federal authorities.



   (C)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180
days after the alleged violation of this subchapter. Complaints may be
amended reasonably and fairly at any time. A respondent may file an answer to
the complaint within 20 days after receipt of the complaint and, with leave
of the city or its designee, reasonably amend the answer. All complaints and
answers shall be verified.



   (D)   Housing complaints which tend to be supported by the evidence,
after investigation by the city, may be referred to a hearing panel
consisting of five persons representing various interests in the housing
field. The panel for each case shall be selected by the City Manager from a
standing committee of 11 members, including, if possible, representatives of
all city organizations related to housing. The committee shall have been
selected jointly by the Fair Housing Advisory Board and the Housing Committee
of the Saginaw Human Relations Commission.



   (E)   After the hearing, the panel shall refer its findings and
recommendations to the City Manager for action.



   (F)   No person shall provide false or substantially misleading
information to any authorized person investigating a complaint regarding a
violation of this subchapter, or sign a complaint for violation of this
subchapter based upon false or substantially misleading information.



(Prior Code, § 93.06)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984)



§ 93.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate any rules and regulations deemed necessary to implement the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The city may commence an action to obtain injunctive relief to
prevent discrimination prohibited by this subchapter, to enforce corrective
orders and conciliation agreements authorized by this subchapter.



   (C)   The city, through the appropriate judicial processes, may
compel a person to produce books, papers, records, or other documents which
may be relevant to a violation or alleged violation of this subchapter.



   (D)   (1)   In cases involving alleged violations of this
subchapter, the city may enter into agreements whereby persons agree to
methods of terminating alleged discrimination.



      (2)   The form of such agreement may be reviewed jointly by
the Housing Committee of the Human Relations Commission and the Fair Housing
Advisory Board. Violations of such agreements shall be violations of this
subchapter and may be punishable through the appropriate judicial processes.



      (3)   Such agreements shall be a part of public record, and
the city shall maintain the right to make any and all parts of such
agreements public.



(Prior Code, § 93.07)  (Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective
5-31-1984)  Penalty, see § 93.99



SEX DISCRIMINATION IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, RESORT OR AMUSEMENT,
INCLUDING CERTAIN CLUBS



§ 93.20  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council hereby finds and declares that the city has a
compelling interest in providing its citizens an environment where all
persons, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, or sex, have a
fair and equal opportunity to participate in the business and professional
life of the city. Although city, state, and federal laws have been enacted to
eliminate discrimination in employment, women and minority group members have
not attained equal opportunity in business and the professions. One barrier
to the advancement of women and minorities in the business and professional
life of the city is the discriminatory practices of certain membership
organizations where business is conducted and valuable business contacts are
made.



   (B)   While such organizations may avowedly be organized for social,
cultural, civic, or educational purposes, and while many perform valuable
services to the community, the commercial nature of some of the activities
occurring therein and the prejudicial impact of these activities on business,
professional, and employment opportunities of minorities and women cannot be
ignored.



   (C)   The Council recognizes the interest in private association
asserted by club members. However, the Council finds that this interest does
not overcome the public interest in equal opportunity. Membership in certain
private clubs and associations extends far beyond the symbolic value attached
to it; there is an integral relationship between certain private clubs
located within the city and achievement within one’s profession, job, or
business. Executives of many of the city’s major corporations, banks, and
trade and professional associations frequently use the facilities of such
private clubs, rather than public facilities, for business meetings of all
kinds, both formal and informal. Membership in these clubs and associations
affords an individual the opportunity to make business and professional
contacts, and to get to know and be known by colleagues, competitors, and
governmental leaders. Membership in such clubs or organizations provides an
informal channel or network of communication through which it is frequently
decided who will be considered for a job opening, or given a business contact
or leadership role in the business community. Also, work on club committees
and participation in their programs offers members the opportunity to
demonstrate their respective abilities and to achieve distinction and
prominence in their endeavors which, in turn, frequently leads to recognition
within the city’s business community.



   (D)   Some private membership clubs and associations in the city,
although avowedly organized for other purposes, have distinctly public
characteristics and commercial attributes. Business-related and commercial
activities are central to the maintenance of such organizations, particularly
where clubs have more than 200 members, provide meal service, and rent their
facilities, directly or indirectly, to business firms and professional and
trade associations for entertainment, conferences, or business meetings which
may be attended by non-members. The commercial nature of some private
membership clubs and associations is further evidenced by the fact that many
members’ dues and other club expenses are paid by their employers because
the primary benefit conferred on employers is the promotion of their business
and professional interests through the employees’ membership in the club.
In fact, business firms and individuals in many cases deduct the costs of
membership in such clubs and associations as a legitimate business expense
for income tax purposes.



   (E)   Such clubs and the organizations also rent their facilities
through members for use as conference rooms for business meetings attended by
non-members. Organizations where such practices occur provide benefits to
business entities and persons other than members and thus are not in fact
“private” in their nature. For this reason, the Council has determined to
amend this code to prohibit discrimination based on sex by organizations
which have more than 200 members, provide regular meal service, and regularly
receive payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals, or
beverages from or on behalf of non-members for the furtherance of trade or
business.



   (F)   It is not the Council’s purpose to dictate the manner in
which certain private clubs conduct their activities or select their members,
except insofar as is necessary to ensure that clubs do not automatically
exclude persons from membership or enjoyment of club accommodations,
advantages, and facilities on account of invidious discrimination. Nor is it
the Council’s purpose to interfere in club activities or subject club
operations to scrutiny beyond what is necessary in good faith to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (G)   In order to remove discriminatory barriers to economic
advancement and provide an environment where all persons are able to
participate fully in the city’s business and professional life and avail
themselves of the city’s economic and employment opportunities, it is
necessary that appropriate legislation be enacted.



(Prior Code, § 93.20)  (Ord. D-1566, passed 10-12-1987, effective
10-22-1987)



§ 93.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATE AGAINST. Treating differently.



   DISCRIMINATION BASED ON SEX. Discrimination because of sex includes
sexual harassment. SEXUAL HARASSMENT means unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or
communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions:



      (1)   Submission to the conduct or communication is made a
term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment,
public accommodations or public services, education, or housing;



      (2)   Submission to or rejection of the conduct or
communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the
individual’s employment, public accommodations or public services,
education, or housing; and



      (3)   The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect
of substantially interfering with an individual’s employment, public
accommodations or pubic services, education or housing, or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, public
services, educational, or housing environment.



   MEAL SERVICE. The provision, either directly or under a contract with
another person, of breakfast, lunch, or dinner on three or more days per week
during two or more weeks per month during six or more months per year.



   MEMBER. Any individual belonging to a club or place of public
accommodation regardless of class of membership. Class of membership shall
include, but not be limited to, full membership, resident membership,
nonresident membership, temporary membership, family membership, honorary
membership, associate membership, membership limited to use of dining or
athletic facilities, and membership of members’ minor children or spouses.



   PAYMENT DIRECTLY FROM A NONMEMBER. Payment made to a club, institution
or place of accommodation by a non-member for expenses incurred by a member
or non-member for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals, or
beverages.



   PAYMENT FOR THE FURTHERANCE OF TRADE OR BUSINESS. Payment made by or on
behalf of a trade or business organization, payment made by an individual
from an account which the individual uses primarily for trade or business
purposes, payment made by an individual who is reimbursed for the payment by
the individual’s employer or by a trade or business organization, or other
payment made in connection with an individual’s trade or business,
including entertaining clients or business associates, holding meetings, or
other business-related events.



   PAYMENT INDIRECTLY FROM A NON-MEMBER. Payment made to a member or
non-member by another non-member as reimbursement for payment made to a club,
or any place of accommodation for expenses incurred for dues, fees, use of
space, facilities, meals, or beverages.



   PAYMENT ON BEHALF OF A NON-MEMBER. Payment by a member or non-member
for expenses incurred for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services,
meals, or beverages by or for a non-member.



   PERSON. Includes an association, partnership, agency, organization, or
corporation, public or private, including all employees thereof as well as
any natural person. The term, when applied to partnerships, associations, and
corporations, includes members and officers.



   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, RESORT, OR AMUSEMENT.



      (1)   Includes a business, educational institution,
refreshment, entertainment, recreation, transportation, or health facility of
any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities,
privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or
otherwise made available to the public, or which receives financial support
through solicitation of the general public or through governmental subsidy of
any kind.



      (2)   A club shall be considered a PLACE OF PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION if it has more than 200 members, provides regular meal service,
and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities,
services, meals, or beverages directly or indirectly from or on behalf of
non-members for the furtherance of trade or business.



   PRIVILEGES. Includes, but not limited to, membership in a club,
institution, or place of accommodation, regardless of the class of
membership, or the enjoyment of the accommodations, including the advantages
of business contacts and enhanced employment and promotional opportunities,
and facilities of a place of public accommodation.



(Prior Code, § 93.21)  (Ord. D-1566, passed 10-12-1987, effective
10-22-1987)



§ 93.22  ILLEGAL DISCRIMINATION.



   It is hereby declared to be illegal to discriminate against any person
on the basis of sex as to admission to membership, or the rights and
privileges of belonging to any club or any place of public accommodation,
resort, or amusement, as defined herein.



(Prior Code, § 93.22)  (Ord. D-1566, passed 10-12-1987, effective
10-22-1987)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   (1)   Criminal enforcement. Violation of §§ 93.01 through
93.07 shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each violation of §§ 93.01 through
93.07 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment of not
more than 90 days, or both.



      (2)   Civil enforcement. If, 30 days after a complaint has
been filed, or after the expiration of any other period of time set for
voluntary compliance under §§ 93.01 through 93.07, there has been no
voluntary compliance, then the person aggrieved may commence a civil action
in any appropriate court to enforce the rights created or protected by §§
93.01 through 93.07, as well as other applicable federal, state, or local
laws. Upon request or upon its own motion, the court may enter such orders as
are appropriate to the enforcement of §§ 93.01 through 93.07 and other
applicable laws, including enjoining respondents from engaging in practices
in violation of §§ 93.01 through 93.07 and the granting of actual damages,
plus costs and attorney’s fees.



(Prior Code, § 93.07)



   (C)   (1)   Violation of §§ 93.20 through 93.22 shall be deemed
a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Each violation of §§ 93.20 through 93.22 shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment of not more than 90 days,
or both.



(Prior Code, § 93.23)



(Ord. D-1454, passed 5-21-1984, effective 5-31-1984; Ord. D-1566, passed
10-12-1987, effective 10-22-1987)



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



Public Nuisances



   94.001   Nuisance defined



   94.002   Prohibition



   94.003   Smoke and steam



   94.004   Animals, birds, and bees



   94.005   Restrictions as to trapping



   94.006   Handbills, stickers, dodgers, and the like



   94.007   Restrictions as to posting



   94.008   Obstruction to visibility at intersections



   94.009   Drive-in restaurants



   94.010   Interference with police animals



Dangerous Dogs



   94.025   Definitions



   94.026   Registration



   94.027   Exclusions



   94.028   Standards



   94.029   Reporting requirements



   94.030   Authority to deputize



   94.031   Violations



Noise



   94.045   Purpose



   94.046   Prohibition generally



   94.047   Noises prohibited



Environmental Improvement



   94.060   Purpose



   94.061   Limitation



   94.062   Declaration



   94.063   Definitions



   94.064   Unlawful storage of trash and abandoned property



   94.065   Unlawful storage of building materials



   94.066   Removal from public premises



   94.067   Removal from private premises



   94.068   Removal of trash, abandoned property, or building materials
from street right-of-way



Sanitation



   94.080   Abatement of health nuisance



   94.081   Sewerage disposal



   94.082   Water supply required



   94.083   Prohibitions



 



   94.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Notice to abate nuisance, see § 36.02



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 94.001  NUISANCE DEFINED.



   (A)   Whatever annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health,
comfort, or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with,
obstructs, or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake, or
stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to,
whatever is forbidden by any provision of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 94.01)



§ 94.002  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   No person shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance.



   (B)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter, unless
otherwise specified, is responsible for a Class C municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37 of this code, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 94.02)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.003  SMOKE AND STEAM.



   No person who is responsible therefor shall permit the emission from
any chimney or smokestack of dense smoke or smoke containing soot or other
substance in sufficient quantity to noticeably permit the deposit of soot or
other substance within the city. The emission of smoke or other substance as
herein described shall constitute a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 94.03)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940) 
Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.004  ANIMALS, BIRDS, AND BEES.



   (A)   No person shall be cruel to any animal or bird.



   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on
any exposed public or private place where it may endanger any animal, bird,
or bee.



   (C)   No person shall harbor or keep any swine.



   (D)   No person shall harbor or keep any animal, bird, or bee which
causes annoyance in the neighborhood, either by:



      (1)   Barking, howling, braying, crowing, or other sound
common to its species;



      (2)   Failure of the owner, caretaker, or custodian to
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin, and
free from objectionable odor, all structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein
any animal, fowl, or bee is kept; or



      (3)   In the case of bees, stinging or molesting any persons.



   (E)   No person shall deposit, place, or throw any dead or fatally
sick or injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, or
into or on the banks of any stream, lake, pond, sewer, well, or other body of
water.



   (F)   No person shall carry or convey any dead animal through or
upon any street, alley, or public place unless the same is so covered that no
part of it is exposed to view and no odors can emanate therefrom.



   (G)   All kennels or pens erected to house or confine dogs or other
domesticated animals when outdoors must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the city.



   (H)   In the case of dog(s), the following standards shall apply.



      (1)   Leash. No person shall permit a dog to go outside its
kennel, pen, or fenced yard, unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash
of adequate strength to restrain the dog.



      (2)   Tethering. Dogs cannot be tethered as a primary means of
confinement. Tethers can be used as a secondary means of control within a
fenced yard or pen or at the residence of a dog owner without a properly
fenced yard when the owner is present or nearby in the yard or residence to
render assistance or further control of the dog. Such tethering devices must
not cause harm or injury. Owners who tether for a secondary measure subject
themselves to other local, state or federal regulations designed to prevent
cruelty to the animal or harm to humans or other animals.



      (3)   Confinement. All dogs shall be securely confined indoors
or in a securely enclosed outside structure maintained in such a manner as to
effectively prevent the dog(s) from escaping the confines of the enclosure,
except when leashed or tethered as above provided. Such pen or kennel shall
not be constructed to interfere or obstruct access to any metering device
provided by the city or other public agencies. All such structures must be
adequately lighted and ventilated.



      (4)   Confinement indoors. No dog may be kept on a porch,
patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to
exit such building on its own volition.



      (5)   Limit on ownership. No person shall own, possess,
control, or otherwise have charge or custody of more than three dogs over the
age of four months at any time regardless of breed. If a person owns,
possesses, controls, or has custody of more than three dogs at the time of
the enactment of this section, that person may maintain such specific dogs,
but may not own, possess, control, or have custody of any other or additional
dog that would raise this number above three. This limit does not apply to
lawful animal care or control facilities, humane societies, rescue groups,
certain service and hunting dog breeders, or registered animal foster homes.
A person may not operate a commercial dog breeder or broker operation without
first registering with the City Clerk and receiving a business license.



(Prior Code, § 94.04)  (Ord. D-1657, passed 5-4-1992, effective 5-14-1992;
Ord. O-119, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.005  RESTRICTIONS AS TO TRAPPING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      TRAP. Any mechanical device, snare, or contrivance which is
spring-operated and steel-jawed, sometimes referred to as “leg hold”,
“steel-jaw”, “conibear”, or “spring-line.”



      TRAPPING. The setting, laying, or using of a trap anywhere within
the city to catch, snare, or otherwise restrain the free movement of animals,
birds, or wildlife.



   (B)   No person shall engage in trapping anywhere within the city
except as otherwise permitted herein.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to governmental representatives
acting within the course of their employment and within the scope of their
authority who may be required to trap, catch, snare, kill, or otherwise
restrain the free movement of any animal, wildlife, or birds for humane or
other authorized purposes.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to a person who may employ a trap
on property in which the person has a property interest to prevent an unsafe
or unhealthy condition, or the waste or destruction of the property, provided
the person has complied with any applicable laws or regulations of the state.



(Prior Code, § 94.05)  (Ord. D-1390, passed 5-10-1982, effective
5-20-1982)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.006  HANDBILLS, STICKERS, DODGERS, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall distribute, throw, drop, or scatter in any
street, alley, or public place any posters, handbills, cards, samples, or
other matter used for the purpose of advertising in such a manner as to
result in the littering of any street, alley, or public place.



   (B)   No person shall distribute handbills, cards, samples, or other
advertising matter on private property in such a manner as to cause the
littering of any street, alley, or public place or of any private property
not his or her own.



(Prior Code, § 94.06)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.007  RESTRICTIONS AS TO POSTING.



   (A)   No persons shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, or paste
any sign, advertisement, or other matter upon any lamp post, electric light,
railway, telephone or telegraph pole, shade tree, fire hydrant, or boxing
covering them; or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk, or crosswalk, public
building, or any property or thing belonging to the city, or any article or
thing within any park; provided, that this division shall not be construed to
prevent any public officer from so doing for any public purpose.



   (B)   No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, or paste
any sign, advertisement, or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate,
post, or tree-box without first obtaining the written permission of the
owner, agents, or occupants of the premises and having complied with the
building and zoning regulations.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the abutting property
owner or anyone authorized by him or her from painting the number assigned to
the premises on the curb in front of said premises. Property numbers are not
required on the curb and may be damaged or destroyed by street sweeping,
maintenance, or snow removal. Numbers placed on curbs will not be maintained
or replaced at public expense.



(Prior Code, § 94.07)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.008  OBSTRUCTION TO VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall plant, erect, place, install, grow, keep,
maintain, or store or allow the planting, erecting, placing, installing,
growing, keeping, maintaining, or storing of any sign, fence, hedge,
shrubbery, natural growth, or other thing which obstructs or tends to
obstruct vehicular or pedestrian view at any street intersection, within any
triangle bounded by the curb lines extended to the point of intersection
thereof and by a base line intersecting each curb 60 feet from said point of
intersection. Where no curb exists, the edge of the roadway shall be
considered a curb within the meaning of this section.



   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to any:



      (1)   Permanent building;



      (2)   Public utility pole;



      (3)   Hedge or other plant or natural growth maintained at a
height of less than 30 inches above sidewalk grade;



      (4)   Trees kept trimmed to a height of not less than eight
feet above sidewalk grade;



      (5)   Official traffic-control device;



      (6)   Place where the contour of the ground is such that there
can be no cross visibility in the triangle;



      (7)   Sign mounted nine feet or more above the ground, the
supports of which do not constitute an obstruction;



      (8)   Fence, sign, or other object which does not extend
beyond 30 inches above sidewalk grade;



      (9)   Fence when the ratio of the solid portion of the fence
to the open portion does not exceed one to four per foot;



      (10)   Triangle where traffic is authorized to approach the
intersection along only one of its sides;



      (11)   Triangle or part thereof which is located in a zone
having other than an “R” designation under the zoning regulations; or



      (12)   Legally parked motor vehicle.



   (C)   No obstruction within the terms of this section shall be
deemed to be excepted from the application of this section because of its
being in existence at the time of the adoption hereof.



   (D)   Any obstruction within the terms of this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.



   (E)   Any public nuisance under this section shall be abated by the
owner of the premises upon which such nuisance is located or which abuts that
portion of the street where such nuisance is located. Abatement shall, except
as to proceedings under division (G) below, be in compliance with notice from
the City Manager, or a person designated by the City Manager, specifying the
action required to abate the nuisance and stating the reasonable time within
which abatement shall be accomplished. Notice shall be served in accordance
with the provisions of § 36.02(A).



   (F)   If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the
owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the City Manager, or a
person designated by the City Manager, may cause the requirements of said
notice to be carried out. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against
the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of §
33.21.



   (G)   The City Manager may abate any such public nuisance without
giving notice if the public health or safety requires immediate action.
Thereafter the cost of abating such nuisance shall be charged against the
premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 94.08)  (Ord. D-1342, passed 5-27-1980, effective
6-6-1980)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.009  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or person in
charge of any drive-in restaurant to cause, create, allow, or maintain any
nuisance or its parking area, whereby the peace of good order of the
neighborhood is disturbed or persons owning or occupying property in the
neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any patron of a drive-in restaurant
or any other person, while parking on or adjacent to the premises thereof, to
race the motor of any vehicle, to suddenly start or stop any vehicle, to blow
any horn, or to make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise,
nuisance, or disturbance whereby the peace or good order of such premises or
of the neighborhood is disturbed or persons owning or occupying property in
the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.



(Prior Code, § 94.09)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.010  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE ANIMALS.



   No person shall hinder, harass, injure, annoy, or interfere with a dog
or other animal being used for law enforcement purposes.



(Prior Code, § 94.10)  (Ord. D-1741, passed 5-22-1995, effective
5-1-1995)  Penalty, see § 94.999



DANGEROUS DOGS



§ 94.025  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply. Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number.



   DANGEROUS DOG.



      (1)   Any dog with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other domestic animals;



      (2)   Any dog that attacks, attempts to attack or that, by its
actions, gives indication that it is liable to attack a human being or other
domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or



      (3)   Any dog of a breed that appears on the list of the
breeds established by City Council. The list shall include any dog that by
physical appearance could be believed by any reasonable person to have
sufficient physical or temperamental characteristics or behaviors to be a
“mix” of any of the breeds listed or a “mix” with a non-listed dog
where the mixture exhibits the dominant physical appearance of a dog on the
list, and any other dog that has the substantial physical characteristics and
appearance of those breeds on the list. Such list shall be available on the
city’s website and in the City Clerk’s office.



   GUIDE/SERVICE DOGS. Any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog
individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an
individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding
individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing
to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling
a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT DOG. A dog trained to aid the police, in duties such as
tracking, disabling or detaining criminals or detecting controlled substances.



(Prior Code, § 94.11)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011)



§ 94.026  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Registration required. It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor,
own, or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the city, any
dangerous dog four months of age or older, without first registering the dog
with the City Clerk, paying the registration fee as established by City
Council and obtaining the necessary sign.



   (B)   Registration form.



      (1)   Registration for dangerous dogs shall be made on a form
provided by the City Clerk and shall include the following information:



         (a)   Name, breed, and county license number of dog;



         (b)   Name, address, and phone number of owner;



         (c)   Name, address, and phone number of
landlord/property owner if different from above; and



         (d)   Detail of any prior attacks or attempted attacks
by the dog.



      (2)   Such registration shall require the signature of the
owner of the dangerous dog. A separate registration shall be required for
each dog. Upon receipt of a registration application for a dangerous dog, the
City Clerk shall issue the applicant a license permitting the applicant to
own, harbor, or possess the dangerous dog under the terms of this division.
The owner of the dog must at all times be able to present the license upon
request.



(Prior Code, § 94.12)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective
6-30-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.027  EXCLUSIONS.



   The following are excluded from complying with the terms and conditions
of this subchapter:



   (A)   Guide/service and law enforcement dogs, however, the owner of
such dog, upon request, must provide pictured identification certifying that
the dog was trained by a qualified organization or trainer;



   (B)   Veterinarian offices;



   (C)   Animal control centers;



   (D)   Humane society and/or animal shelter facilities, provided the
dog(s) are securely contained;



   (E)   Dog obedience schools; and



   (F)   Pet shops.



(Prior Code, § 94.13)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011)



§ 94.028  STANDARDS.



   The keeping of such dog(s), and any other dangerous dog(s), is subject
to the following standards.



   (A)   Leash. No person shall permit a dangerous dog to go outside
its kennel, pen, or fenced yard, unless such dog is securely leashed with a
leash of adequate strength to restrain the dog. No person shall permit such a
dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside its kennel,
pen, or fenced yard, unless a person is in physical control of the leash.
Dogs outside their kennel, pen, or fenced yard may not be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, and the like.



   (B)   Confinement. All dangerous dogs shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when
leashed as above provided. Such pen, kennel, or structure must have secure
sides of at least four feet in height above ground. All structures used to
confine such dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such
dog(s) are within the structure. Such structure must be constructed and at
all times maintained in such a manner as to effectively prevent the dog(s)
from escaping the confines of the enclosure. Such pen or kennel shall not be
constructed to interfere or obstruct access to any metering device provided
by the city or other public agencies. All structures erected to house such
dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All
such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean
and sanitary condition.



   (C)   Confinement indoors. No registered dangerous dog may be kept
on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow
the dog to exit such building on its own volition.



   (D)   Signs. All owners, keepers, or harborers of dangerous dogs
within the city shall, within five days of registration, display one sign
provided by the City Clerk’s Office at the time of registration, which
shall be mounted in a prominent place on the front of the premises visible
from the street. The charge for the signs shall be included in the
registration fee at no additional cost to the applicant. A fee as established
by City Council shall be incurred by the licensee for the replacement of any
sign due to loss or damage.



(Prior Code, § 94.14)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective
6-30-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.029  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   All owners, keepers, or harborers of dangerous dogs must notify the
City Clerk’s office within one business day of the occurrence of any one of
the following events:



   (A)   The dog(s) have escaped;



   (B)   The dog(s) have attacked a human being or other animal;



   (C)   The dog(s) have been sold, given, or transferred permanently
to another person or address within the city;



   (D)   The dog(s) have died;



   (E)   There has been a birth of an offspring of the dog(s); or



   (F)   The dog(s) are permanently leaving the city.



(Prior Code, § 94.15)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011)



§ 94.030  AUTHORITY TO DEPUTIZE.



   The City Manager may deputize and authorize any person of his or her
choosing to write and issue citations for violations of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 94.16)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective
6-30-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.031  VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall violate any law of the state nor any rule or regulation
adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state pertaining to dogs.



(Prior Code, § 94.17)  (Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011)



NOISE



§ 94.045  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or
unusually loud noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has
existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises are increasing.



   (B)   The making, creation, or maintenance of such excessive,
unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises which are prolonged,
unusual, and unnatural in their time, place, and use affect and are a
detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and
prosperity of the residents of the city.



   (C)   The necessity in public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity and the peace and quiet
of the city and its inhabitants.



(Prior Code, § 94.20)  (Ord. D-1770, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



§ 94.046  PROHIBITION GENERALLY.



   (A)   Excessive noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any
loud, unnecessary, and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person
of normal sensitivity residing in the area.



   (B)   Excessive noise standard. The standard which may be considered
in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists
may include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The level of noise;



      (2)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



      (3)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;



      (4)   The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;



      (5)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping
facilities;



      (6)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



      (7)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which
the noise emanates;



      (8)   The time of the day and night the noise occurs;



      (9)   The duration of the noise; and



      (10)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or
constant.



(Prior Code, § 94.21)  (Ord. D-1770, passed 9-30-1996, effective
11-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.047  NOISES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
unnecessary, and excessive noises in violation of this subchapter in
consideration of the excessive standards enumerated in § 94.046, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:



   (A)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like. The sound of any horn
or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any
street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation
by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable
period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand
or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by
engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for
any reason held up;



   (B)   Sound amplifying-equipment.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         MOBILE SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any sound amplifying
equipment capable of being operated while being transported from place to
place and shall include without limitation any sound amplifying equipment
upon or in any vehicle, including motorcycle or moped.



         SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human noise, music, or any other sound.



         STREET. Includes a public or private highway or other place
open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles; however, it
shall not include that portion of a public street temporarily closed to
vehicular traffic by public authority to accommodate or permit a public
assembly.



      (2)   No person shall use or permit the use of any sound
amplifying equipment or mobile sound amplifying equipment the sound of which
is cast upon any street, alley, or public property so as to produce sound
that is already audible more than 50 feet from the point of amplification.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit:



         (a)   The use of any such device by a governmental
agency in the furtherance of its authorized function;



         (b)   The use of such device to warn of imminent danger;



         (c)   The reasonable use of any such device by a church
or other non-profit religious organization upon its premises for the
dissemination of music or bell tones as a call to, recessional from, or
integral part of a religious service;



         (d)   The use of a chime to indicate the time at not
more frequent intervals than 15 minutes; and



         (e)   The dissemination of sound during a parade,
outdoor band concert, or theatrical performance provided the volume of sound
is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to
persons more than 50 feet from the point of amplification.



   (C)   Loudspeakers; amplifiers for advertising. The using,
operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier,
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure;



   (D)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling,
hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;



   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or
bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity;



   (F)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or
steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request
of proper city authorities’



   (G)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;



   (H)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile,
motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise;



   (I)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers;



   (J)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection
(including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and
then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may be
granted for a period not to exceed three days while the emergency continues
and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the
emergency continues. If the Building Inspector should determine that the
public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and
highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he or she shall
further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in
interest, he or she may grant permission for such work to be done within the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the
permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work;



   (K)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church, court, or quiet zone, while the same are in use, or
adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, or court street;



   (L)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;



   (M)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, or sale;



   (N)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like. The operation between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of
which is attended by loud or unusual noise; and



   (O)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power
fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noises from
such blower or fan are muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden such noise.



(Prior Code, § 94.22)  (Ord. D-1770, passed 9-30-1996, effective
11-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 94.999



ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENT



§ 94.060  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is enacted for the purpose of protecting and promoting
the public health, sanitation, safety, and general welfare in the city; the
suppression of disease and contamination; the prevention of urban blight; to
protect against and lessen the danger to human life, health, and property
from fire, explosion, noxious fumes, infestations of insects and rodents,
accidents, and other hazards on private and public premises; and to protect
against and prohibit the creating or continuance of nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 94.35)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



§ 94.061  LIMITATION.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to repeal, suspend, or modify
the provisions of any other ordinance or provision relating to the
abandonment or keeping of item or materials of any kind which are hazardous
to public health, safety, or welfare upon any premises, nor to hinder or
limit availability of injunction against the storage, accumulation, or
maintenance of such item or materials.



(Prior Code, § 94.36)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



§ 94.062  DECLARATION.



   The presence of trash, abandoned property, and building materials as
prohibited herein is declared to be a hazard to public health, sanitation,
safety, and welfare, and a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 94.37)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



§ 94.063  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Deteriorated, wrecked, or derelict property in
unusable condition having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value, if
any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements, signs and the
associated sign structures when the business, product or service advertised
is no longer conducted, sold, or offered on the premises; or is no longer a
bona fide business conducted, product sold or service offered; trailers,
boats; machinery; refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures;
furniture; and any other similar articles in such condition.



   BUILDING MATERIALS. Any materials useful in the construction of
buildings or other structures and includes, but shall not be limited to,
lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric
wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete,
and cement.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any officer, investigator, or inspector of the
Inspections/ Environmental Division.



   OBLITERATE. To render indecipherable by means such as, but not limited
to, painting or sandblasting.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any premises owned by a private person or private
entity and any portion of a street right-of-way immediately adjoining such
premises which separates such premises from a roadway.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any premises, including but not limited to, streets
and alleys, owned by, in possession of, or under the control of the United
States of America, this state, the county, or the city, or any agency or
political subdivision of any said governments.



   REMOVE. To physically take away or, in the case of a sign which is a
conforming use under the zoning regulations, to obliterate the sign message.
In the case of a sign which is a nonconforming use under the zoning
regulations, REMOVE means to physically take away, except where the nature of
the sign is such that this cannot be done. In such cases, REMOVE means to
obliterate the sign message.



   TRASH. Consists of the following.



      (1)   ASHES. The residue left from the burning of paper,
leaves, weeds, wood, and coal.



      (2)   BRUSH. All tree and shrub parts including branches,
roots, stumps, and trunks; provided, however, that no tree or shrub part
shall measure more than four inches in diameter at its largest part.



      (3)   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



      (4)   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of
combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as (by way of illustration but
not limitation), paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, crockery, and
similar materials.



      (5)   TRIMMINGS. Any brush with a length of four feet or less.



      (6)   YARD WASTE. All grass clippings, leaves, weeds,
landscape trimmings, and other small plant waste items not more than one inch
in diameter measured at its largest part.



(Prior Code, § 94.38)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992;
Ord. D-1892, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 94.064  UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF TRASH AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   No person shall place or leave, or cause to be placed or left, trash or
abandoned property on public premises within the city, nor keep, store, or
cause or permit to be placed, left, kept, or stored trash and abandoned
property on private premises within the city, unless such storage is
explicitly permitted under the terms of the zoning regulations or Ch. 50 of
this code of ordinances or unless such property is kept within the confines
of a closed building.



(Prior Code, § 94.39)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992;
Ord. O-184, passed 2-20-2017, effective 3-2-2017)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.065  UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS.



   No person shall place or leave, or cause to be placed or left, building
materials on public premises within the city, nor keep, store, or cause or
permit to be placed, left, kept, or stored building materials on private
premises except within the walls of a previously erected building within the
city unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for
construction upon said property and said materials are intended for use in
such construction or unless such storage is explicitly permitted by the
zoning regulations or as otherwise provided in this code.



(Prior Code, § 94.40)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992;
Ord. O-184, passed 2-20-2017, effective 3-2-2017)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.066  REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC PREMISES.



   (A)   Removal of abandoned property and building materials from
public premises.



      (1)   When an enforcement officer shall find an item of
abandoned property or an accumulation of building materials on public
premises within the city, he or she shall cause a notice to be placed upon
such item or in the immediate vicinity of several such items in substantially
the following form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY: This
property, to-wit (setting forth brief description), is unlawful upon public
property known as (setting forth brief description of location), and in
violation of Section ____ of Chapter ____ of the Saginaw Code, and must be
removed within ten days from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be
presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and disposed of or
destroyed by order of the City of Saginaw.



      ________________________________________



Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice)



______________________________________________________________________



Signed   (Setting forth title, business address, and business telephone
number of Enforcement Officer)



      (2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall make
reasonable efforts to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the item
or items; and if such is reasonably available to the enforcement officer, he
or she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or before the date of
posting.



      (3)   If, at the end of ten days after posting such notice,
the owner or any person interested in the abandoned item or items described
in such notice has not removed them from the public premises, the enforcement
officer may cause the item or items of abandoned property to be removed,
destroyed, and disposed of, and the salvage value, if any, of such item or
items shall be retained by the city to be applied against the cost of
removal, storage, handling, destruction, and disposal thereof. In the event
the salvage proceeds exceed the cost of removal, storing, handling,
destruction, and disposal of the abandoned property, such excess shall be
held for a period of six months for the benefit of the former owner of the
property, upon proof of such ownership within six months of such removal,
destruction, or disposal of the property. If after six months such excess has
not been properly claimed, it shall be applied to the General Fund of the
city.



      (4)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the summary
removal of any property from public premises in order to alleviate emergency
conditions.



   (B)   Removal of trash from public premises. Trash on public
premises may be removed without notice or compensation.



(Prior Code, § 94.41)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



§ 94.067  REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PREMISES.



   (A)   Removal of abandoned property and building materials from
private premises.



      (1)   Whenever an enforcement officer shall find an item or
items of abandoned property or building materials on private premises, not
including street right-of-way, within the city in violation of this
subchapter, he or she shall cause a notice to be placed upon such item or in
the immediate vicinity of several such items in substantially the following
form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNERS AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY:
This property, to-wit (setting forth a brief description), located at
(setting forth brief description of location), is improperly stored in
violation of Section ____ of Chapter ____ of the Saginaw Code. Within ten
days, if this property is not removed or a hearing has not been requested at
the Inspections/Environmental Division upon the applicability of the above
ordinance to this property, it shall be deemed abandoned property and removed
and disposed of by order of the City of Saginaw. Cost of such removal and
disposition will be assessed to this premises.



      ________________________________________



Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice)



      ___________________________________________________________________
_____



Signed (setting forth name, title, business address, and telephone number of
the Enforcement Officer)



      (2)   Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall mail a
copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the abandoned
item or items are located, as shown by the records of the City Assessor, on
or before the date of posting of such notice and to the owner of the item or
items, if ownership can reasonably be ascertained.



      (3)   If at the end of ten days after posting such notice, the
owner or any person interested in the abandoned item or items described in
such notice has not removed the item or items and complied with the ordinance
provision cited in the notice or requested a hearing on the applicability of
this ordinance provision to the property in question, the enforcement officer
may cause the item or items of abandoned property or building materials to be
removed, destroyed, and/or disposed of, and the salvage value, if any, of
such items shall be retained by the city to be applied against the cost of
removal, storage, handling, destruction, and/or disposal of such abandoned
property. If the proceeds from the salvage of the property be less than such
costs, the deficiency shall be assessed and levied as a special assessment
against the premises from which the abandoned property was removed in the
manner described in § 33.21. In the event the salvage proceeds exceed said
costs, any such excess shall be held for a period of six months for the
benefit of the former owner of the abandoned property, upon proof of such
ownership within six months after such removal, destruction, or disposal of
the property. If after six months such excess has not been properly claimed,
it shall be applied to the General Fund of the city.



      (4)   If at the end of ten days after posting of such notice
by the owner of the private premises or a person claiming an interest in
personal property thereon, the City Manager shall appoint a hearings officer
to conduct a public hearing in order for the person requesting the hearing to
show cause why he or she should not remove the property in question or the
city should not dispose of said property.



      (5)   The hearings procedures shall be those established for
condemnation hearings by § 2-106(c) of the Michigan Building Code.



      (6)   The hearings officer shall make a decision with written
findings of fact based upon competent evidence and testimony determining
whether storage of the property in question is prohibited by the terms of
§§ 94.064 and 94.065. If he or she shall find that the storage of the
property in question is prohibited, he or she shall order the person
requesting the hearing to remove the property in question within a reasonable
time but not less than five days. If the property is not removed within the
period allowed in the order, the enforcement officer issuing the notice may
cause the item or items of abandoned property or building materials to be
removed, destroyed, or disposed of and excess costs to be assessed in the
manner prescribed in division (A)(3) above.



   (B)   Removal of trash from private premises.



      (1)   Whenever an enforcement officer shall find an
accumulation of trash on private premises not including the street
right-of-way within the city in violation of this subchapter, he or she shall
cause a notice to be placed conspicuously on those premises in substantially
the following form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNER OF THESE PREMISES AND TO ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN ITS
MAINTENANCE: Trash, to-wit; (setting forth a brief description) located at
(setting forth a brief description of the location) is improperly stored in
violation of Section ____ of Chapter ____ of the Saginaw Code, and must be
removed within ten days from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be
removed by the City of Saginaw, and the costs of removal shall be assessed to
these premises.



      (2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall mail a
copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the trash is
located, as shown by the records of the City Assessor, on or before the date
of posting of such notice and to the owner of the trash, if ownership can
reasonably be ascertained.



      (3)   If, at the end of ten days after posting such notice,
the trash described herein has not been removed, the enforcement officer may
cause such trash to be removed, and the costs of removal shall be assessed
and levied against the premises from which the trash was removed in the
manner prescribed in § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 94.42)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



§ 94.068  REMOVAL OF TRASH, ABANDONED PROPERTY, OR BUILDING MATERIALS FROM
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Whenever an enforcement officer shall find an accumulation of
trash, abandoned property, or building materials on the street right-of-way
immediately adjoining such premises which separates such premises from a
roadway, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such
item or in the immediate vicinity of several such items in substantially the
following form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNER OF THESE PREMISES AND TO ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN ITS
MAINTENANCE. Trash, to-wit (setting forth a brief description), located at
(setting forth a brief description), is improperly stored in violation of
Section ____  of Chapter ____ of the Saginaw Code, and must be removed
within 72 hours from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be removed
by the City of Saginaw, and the costs of removal shall be assessed to these
premises.



   (B)   (1)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by
ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal
exposure to the elements.



      (2)   In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall
mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the
trash is located, as shown by the records of the City Assessor, on or before
the date of posting of such notice and to the owner of the trash, if
ownership can reasonably be ascertained.



   (C)   If, at the end of 72 hours after posting such notice, the
trash described therein has not been removed, the enforcement officer may
cause such trash to be removed, and the costs of removal shall be assessed
and levied against the premises from which the trash was removed in the
manner prescribed in § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 94.43)  (Ord. D-1659, passed 7-27-1992, effective 8-6-1992)



SANITATION



§ 94.080  ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCE.



   (A)   The Health Officer, after investigation, may order the
abatement of any nuisance which is found to injure or endanger the health of
the public by giving notice to the owner of the premises, as indicated by the
records of the City Assessor, upon which such nuisance is located to abate
same within the time specified in said notice.



   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with any such notice, and each
day such nuisance continues to exist following the expiration of the time
limit specified in said notice for the abatement of said nuisance shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   (1)   If, after notice has been given as hereinabove
provided, and after the expiration of the time limit therein, the
requirements of the notice have not been complied with, the Health Officer
may carry out the same.



      (2)   The cost of such abatement may be charged against the
premises and the owner thereof and collection of such charges enforced in
accordance with the provisions of § 33.21.



   (D)   The Health Officer may abate any such public nuisance without
giving notice if the public health or safety requires immediate action.
Thereafter, the cost of abating such nuisance may be charged against the
premises and the owner thereof and collection of such charges enforced in
accordance with the provisions of § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 94.55)  (Ord. D-254, passed 3-26-1951, effective 4-5-1951)



§ 94.081  SEWERAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Sewerage facilities required.



      (1)   The term SEWERAGE FACILITIES, as used in this section,
shall include a sewer connection, a sewer extension, and toilet facilities,
together with such water supply as may be necessary for the disposal of waste
to the sewer main.



      (2)   No person shall fail to provide sewerage facilities on
any premises owned by him or her whereon there is any structure used for
human occupancy, employment, or recreation, provided connection can be made
to sewer and water mains within 100 feet of any part of said premises
measured along the shortest distance in the public way or easement.



      (3)   The Health Officer shall order the installation of
sewerage facilities in any structure required to have the same by giving
notice to the owner of the premises, as indicated by the records of the City
Assessor, to provide the same such reasonable time as the Health Officer
shall specify in said notice, but not less than 30 days after service of said
notice. Service of said notice shall be made in the manner provided in §
36.02.



      (4)   If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice,
the order has not been complied with, the Health Officer may cause such
structure or premises to be condemned and use thereof denied to all persons
until such sewerage facilities shall be provided, by securely affixing a
“Notice of Condemnation” of said structure in a conspicuous place
thereon. Thereafter, no person shall use said structure or permit the use
thereof for any of the purposes hereinbefore mentioned.



      (5)   After installation of sewerage facilities in any such
structure on or after the expiration of the time limit for said installation
as ordered by the Health Officer pursuant to this section, it shall be
unlawful to use or permit the use of any septic tank, vault, privy, or
cesspool on such premises for receiving any excrement or sewage; and any
privy pit on such premises shall be closed by removing the contents and
filling the pit with earth or other suitable material, or by filling such pit
with earth or other suitable material provided that the fill therein shall
extend downward from the level of the surrounding ground to a depth of at
least two feet. The Health Officer may order the closing of any such privy
pit by giving notice as provided in § 36.02 that the same shall be done
within 15 days after the service of said notice. If, at the expiration of the
time limit in said notice, the order has not been complied with, the Health
Officer may carry out the requirements of said notice, the cost of which
shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof, and such cost
collected in accordance with § 33.26.



   (B)   Other sewage disposed.



      (1)   No person shall construct any septic tank, vault, privy,
or cesspool for receiving any excrement, sewage, or other disposal without
first obtaining a written permit from the Health Officer.



      (2)   All septic tanks, vaults, privies, or cesspools shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the United States Public
Health Service.



(Prior Code, § 94.56)  (Ord. D-44, passed 3-16-1942, effective 3-27-1942;
Ord. D-254, passed 3-26-1951, effective 4-5-1951)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.082  WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall fail to provide an adequate water supply for
any structure or premises owned by him or her, wherein a water supply is a
necessary sanitary convenience.



   (B)   No person shall occupy or use any such structure hereafter
erected which is located within 100 feet of a sewer main unless the same be
provided with an adequate water supply.



(Prior Code, § 94.57)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.083  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Expectoration. No person shall expectorate in any public
place, except into a receptacle provided for that purpose.



   (B)   Washroom towels. No person owning, in charge of, or in control
of any lavatory or washroom shall provide in or about such lavatory or
washroom any towel for common use. The term COMMON USE as used in this
section shall mean use by more than one person without cleansing.



(Prior Code, § 94.58)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 94.002 shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of Ch. 37



   (C)   A person who violates any provision of the dangerous dogs
provisions, in §§ 94.025 through 94.031, is responsible for a Class D
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth
in § 37.07, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by § 37.07.



(Prior Code, § 94.17)



   (D)   Violation of § 94.047(A) and (G) shall be a civil infraction
and punishable as provided in § 70.99(A).



(Prior Code, § 94.22)



   (E)   Violations of §§ 94.060 through 94.068 shall be deemed a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of
prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment.



(Prior Code, § 94.44)  (Ord. D-1773, passed 9-30-1996, effective
11-11-1996; Ord. D-1770, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1786,
passed 11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996; Ord. O-117, passed 5-9-2011,
effective 5-19-2011; Ord. O-120, passed 6-20-2011, effective 6-30-2011; Ord.
O-184, passed 2-20-2017, effective 3-2-2017)



CHAPTER 95:  TREES, SHRUBS, AND PLANTS



Section



   95.01   Planting and protection of trees, shrubs, and plants



   95.02   Noxious weeds



   95.03   Abatement of nuisances



   95.04   Dutch elm disease



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 95.01  PLANTING AND PROTECTION OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND PLANTS.



   (A)   No person shall plant, remove, or destroy any tree or shrub in
any street, alley, or public place without first obtaining a written permit
to do so from the Superintendent of Streets and Bridges, except that no
permit shall be required to remove a tree which has been condemned as a
public nuisance under this chapter. The size, species, spacing, and placement
of any planting in any street, alley, or public place is subject to the
approval of the Superintendent of Streets and Bridges or his or her designee.



   (B)   No person shall plant on any property, public or private, any
cottonwood or box elder tree, or permit any such tree to be seeded naturally.



   (C)   No person in charge of the erection, repair, alteration, or
removal of any structure shall fail to guard or protect any tree in the
public street or on abutting property, public or private, in such manner as
to prevent injury to any such tree.



   (D)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to approval by
the Council, to make any additional rules and regulations pertaining to the
planting, removal, care, maintenance, and protection of trees, shrubs, and
plants as are necessary to protect public property or the health or safety of
the public, and no persons shall fail to comply with any such rule or
regulation.



   (E)   (1)   The legal title owner of record of real property in
the city may make a request in writing to the Superintendent of Street and
Bridges that the city plant one or more trees or shrubs in that portion of
the owner of record’s property that is reserved as the public right-of-way
for a street, alley, or other public place. The city shall review such
requests and shall, in its sole discretion, permit or deny the request.



      (2)   In the event the request is granted, the cost of the
planting shall be borne by the owner of record. The amount charged to the
owner of record shall be set by regulation by the City Manager. The owner of
record may request that the city incur the initial cost of the planting and
that such amount, as established by regulation, be therefor a lien assessed
against the property and collected as provided in § 33.21. The city reserves
the right to grant or deny such requests as the city, in its sole discretion,
may deem to be in the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. D-1583, passed 2-20-1989, effective
3-2-1989)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.02  NOXIOUS WEEDS.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of any lot or lands within the city shall
allow or permit thereon, or on that potion of a street or alley which adjoins
the same, any noxious weeds; that is, Canada thistle (Circium arvense),
dodders (any species of Cascuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard, and
Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota),
bindweed (Convolvulvus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis),
hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison oak
(Toxicodendron quercifolium), poison sumac (Rhus vernix), ragweed (ambrosia
elatior 1. and ambrosia trifida), dock weeds (Rumex crispus), milkweed
(Ascelepias syriaca), and goldenrod (Solidago odora).



   (B)   No owner or occupant of any lot or lands within the city shall
allow or permit thereon any growth of grass to a greater height than nine
inches.



(Prior Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. D-392, passed 6-4-1956, effective 6-14-1956;
Ord. D-1749, passed 7-24-1995, effective 8-3-1995; Ord. D-1768, passed
9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1784, passed 11-18-1996, effective
12-2-1996; Ord. O-31, passed 2-21-2005, effective 3-3-2005)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.03  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   (A)   Any tree, shrub, grass, or plant which endangers public
property or the health or safety of the public, or any noxious weed as
defined in § 95.02, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   Any public nuisance under this section shall be abated by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which such nuisance is located or
which adjoins that portion of a street or alley where such nuisance is
located. Abatement shall, except as to proceedings under division (D) below,
be in compliance with notice from the City Manager specifying the action
required to abate the nuisance and stating the reasonable time within which
abatement shall be accomplished. Notice shall be served in accordance with
the provisions of § 36.02.



   (C)   If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the
owner or occupant has not complied with the requirements thereof, the City
Manager may cause the requirements of said notice to be carried out. The cost
of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof
in accordance with the provisions of § 33.21.



   (D)   The City Manager may abate any such public nuisance without
giving notice if the public health or safety requires immediate action.
Thereafter the cost of abating such nuisance shall be charged against the
premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 33.21.



   (E)   Exemptions: exempt from this section are tree(s) within the
city’s right-of-way. The city shall assume the cost of removal of said
tree(s). No cost shall be placed upon the property owner under this section.



(Prior Code, § 95.03)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940;
Ord. D-392, passed 6-4-1956, effective 6-14-1956; Ord. D-646, passed
4-6-1964, effective 4-16-1964; Ord. D-1767, passed 9-30-1996, effective
11-11-1996; Ord. O-33, passed 4-4-2005, effective 4-14-2005)



§ 95.04  DUTCH ELM DISEASE.



   (A)   Any elm tree, whether located on public or private property
within the city, which is infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus
(Ceratostomella ulmi), is declared to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   Any elm tree or part thereof, whether located on public or
private property within the city, which harbors either of the bark beetles
(Scolytus multistriatus and Hylurgopinus rufipes), which carry and transmit
Dutch elm disease, is declared to be a public nuisance.



   (C)   Any public nuisance under this section shall be abated by the
owner of the premises upon which such nuisance is located or which adjoins
that portion of a street or alley where such nuisance is located within five
days after service of notice thereof on such owner by the City Manager in
accordance with the provisions of § 36.02(A).



   (D)   If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the
owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the City Manager shall
cause the requirements of said notice to be carried out. The cost of such
abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in
accordance with the provisions of § 33.21, except that such part of the cost
as the Council may have authorized shall be assumed by the city.



   (E)   Any person abating any nuisance under this section shall
comply with the provisions of the applicable laws of the state and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.



(Prior Code, § 95.04)  (Ord. D-367, passed 8-8-1955, effective 8-8-1955;
Ord. D-606, passed 4-22-1963, effective 5-2-1963; Ord. D-752, passed
10-31-1966, effective 11-10-1966)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   (1)   A person who violates any provision of § 95.02 is
responsible for a Class C municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a
civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances, plus costs and
other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to
increased fines as provided by Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Streets and Bridges and/or his or
her designees are hereby designated as the authorized city official(s), as
defined by Ch. 37 of this code, to issue municipal civil infraction citations
or municipal civil infraction violations notices as provided by Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. D-392, passed 6-4-1956, effective 6-14-1956;
Ord. D-1749, passed 7-24-1995, effective 8-3-1995; Ord. D-1768, passed
9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1784, passed 11-18-1996, effective
12-2-1996; Ord. O-31, passed 2-21-2005, effective 3-3-2005)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.001   Sidewalk and drive approach construction and repair



   96.002   Snow and ice removal



   96.003   Excavations



   96.004   Obstruction: permits, barricades, and lights



   96.005   Drainage structures



   96.006   Responsibility for alleys



Use of Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places



   96.020   Lifting via pulleys, ropes, and the like



   96.021   Curb service



   96.022   Food and beverage sales



   96.023   Banner petitions



   96.024   Work in the right-of-way or public easement



Curb Cuts



   96.035   Definitions



   96.036   Statement of policy



   96.037   Cuts in existing curbs



   96.038   Curbs under construction



   96.039   Requirements for curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings
for access to property



   96.040   Requirements for curb cuts for street parking



   96.041   General requirements for all curb cuts



   96.042   Curb restoration



   96.043   Authority of Board of Building Appeals



Encroachments



   96.055   Definitions



   96.056   Permits required



   96.057   Application for permit



   96.058   Encroachment permit classifications



   96.059   Existing encroachments



   96.060   Approval of encroachments by licensed inspector



   96.061   Permit fees



   96.062   Late payment penalty



   96.063   Insurance requirement



   96.064   Inspection



   96.065   Permit revocable at any time



   96.066   Removal of encroachment upon failure to apply for permit,
pay permit fee, or maintain liability insurance



   96.067   Removal of unsafe encroachments



   96.068   Temporary encroachments



   96.069   Delegation of authority



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, see § 36.02



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



   Street names; street vacations; street map, see § 32.15



   Street numbers, see § 32.16



   Street vacations, see TSO II



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.001  SIDEWALK AND DRIVE APPROACH CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.



   (A)   No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk, or drive
approach, in the public right-of-way except in accordance with the line,
grade, slope, and specifications established by the City Engineer, nor
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. Said person
shall at all times comply with the requirements of § 96.004(C). The fee for
such permit shall be established by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (B)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled. 



   (C)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (D)   All construction shall be in accordance with specifications
provided by the City Engineer.



   (E)   No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property
owned by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or be unsafe. A
property owner shall immediately notify the Call Center of any such condition.



   (F)   Whenever the City Engineer shall determine that a sidewalk is
unsafe for use, defective, or in disrepair or is in a condition determined by
the City Engineer to be likely to become unsafe for use, defective, or in
disrepair before the time of the next periodic inspection by the City
Engineer, notice may be given in accordance with the provisions of § 36.02.
Thereafter it shall be the duty of the owner to place said sidewalk in a
permanently safe state of repair. Such notice shall specify a reasonable
time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced and
shall further provide that the same shall be completed with due diligence. In
the event the owner fails to comply with said notice, the City Engineer may
have said sidewalk repaired. If the City Engineer determines that the
condition of said sidewalk is such that immediate repair is necessary to
protect the public, he or she may dispense with said notice. The cost of
repairs hereunder shall be charged against the premises and the owner
thereof, and shall be collected as provided in § 33.21.



   (G)   The Council may by resolution require the owners of lots and
premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting
upon such lots and premises, the expense of said sidewalks to be paid for by
such owner. Notice to such owner shall be given in the manner provided by §
36.02.



   (H)   If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any
particular sidewalk as mentioned and described in this section within such
time and in such manner as the Council shall require, the Council may cause
such sidewalk to be built and the expense thereof shall be charged to such
premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided in § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 96.01)  (Ord. D-1357, passed 11-17-1980, effective
11-28-1980; Ord. O-112, passed 4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)  Penalty, see
§ 30.99



§ 96.002  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.



   No person shall remove any snow or ice from any private property,
including any private driveway or private road, and deposit the same in or
upon any public property, including streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains,
ditches, and gutters.



(Prior Code, § 96.02)  (Ord. D-315, passed 7-27-1953, effective 8-6-1953;
Ord. D-1729, passed 11-21-1994, effective 12-1-1994)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.003  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Streets, cuts, and excavations.



      (1)   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or
under any street, alley, public place, within the right-of-way, or in a
public easement, without first obtaining a written permit from the Director
of Public Services. The fee for such permit shall be approved by City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



      (2)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit
fee being doubled. 



      (3)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval
of the work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in
the Engineering Office.



      (4)   Before any such permit is issued, the applicant therefor
may be required to furnish a bond deemed adequate by the Director of Public
Services, which bond shall become available in the payment of any damage to
public or private property and the payment for any personal injury resulting
from said excavation or opening or any work in connection therewith.



      (5)   The Director of Public Services may, if the public
safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street
cut or excavation, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following
business day and the provisions of this section shall be complied with.



      (6)   No person shall make any opening or excavation in or
under a paved street or alley within a period of five years after the
completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If the public safety
requires immediate action, the Director of Public Services may suspend the
operation of this provision.



      (7)   Whenever the Council shall determine that the paving or
resurfacing of any street or alley, or part thereof, is necessary, the
Director of Public Services shall serve notice upon all public utilities
requiring time to install all necessary underground work.



      (8)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to
approval by the Council, to make such additional rules and regulations
pertaining to the making of excavations or openings in any street, alley, or
public places as are necessary to protect property or the safety or welfare
of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rules or
regulations.



   (B)   Sewer and water connections in advance of paving.



      (1)   Whenever any paving or resurfacing upon any street or
alley or part thereof shall have been ordered, authorized, or declared
necessary by the Council, such sewer connections (as defined in Ch. 51 of
this code of ordinances) and water connections (as defined in Ch. 52 of this
code of ordinances) as are necessary to preserve such proposed paving or
resurfacing when the same shall have been laid and put down, by eliminating
insofar as possible the need for making any opening in or excavation under
the same, shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and
the cost thereof, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, shall be charged
against the premises to be served thereby and the owner thereof, shall be a
lien thereon, and shall be collected as provided in § 33.21.



      (2)   (a)   The necessity for such sewer and water
connections shall be determined by the engineer in charge of the Division of
Engineering of the Department of Public Services giving due consideration to
the factors which have a bearing on the demand for sewer and water
connections in such street or alley, including, but not limited to, the size,
shape, and area of each lot or parcel of land, the uses to which the same may
lawfully be put under the zoning regulations, existing structures on the
land, the adequacy of existing sewer and water connections, the character of
the locality and the probable development or use of each lot or parcel of
land. Any existing sewer or water connection which does not meet the
specifications of any applicable ordinance of the city shall not be
considered in determining what sewer and water connections are necessary.



         (b)   1.   Provided, however, that in cases where:



               a.   The future need for a connection is
dependent upon the relocation or alteration of an existing structure on the
premises to provide space for the erection of an additional residence
building thereon;



               b.   The zoning regulations would permit the
location of two residence buildings on a single parcel of land; or



               c.   The zoning regulations would permit the
location of a second residence building on adjoining land which is used as
part of and under the same ownership as land upon which an existing residence
building is located, the engineer in charge of the Division of Engineering in
the Department of Public Works may order one additional water connection or
one additional sewer connection or both made at city expense.



            2.   When any connection installed at city expense
is put to use, the current cost of such connection shall be charged against
the premises to be served thereby and the owner thereof, shall be a lien
thereon, and shall be collected as provided in § 33.21.



      (3)   Written notice of the intention to install such sewer
and water connections and to charge the cost of the same to the premises
shall be given to the owners, as indicated by the records of the City
Assessor, of each lot or parcel of land, and service of such notice shall be
made as now or hereafter provided in § 36.02.



      (4)   The objection of any property owner to any such sewer or
water connection shall be made within seven days after service of such
notice, and shall be heard by the engineer in charge of the Division of
Engineering of the Department of Public Works who shall, after considering
each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer
and water connections to be installed.



(Prior Code, § 96.03)  (Ord. D-278, passed 3-10-1952, effective 3-20-1952;
Ord. D-1558, passed 7-27-1987, effective 8-5-1987; Ord. O-115, passed
4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)



§ 96.004  OBSTRUCTION: PERMITS, BARRICADES, AND LIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall use any part of any street, alley,
right-of-way or public easement, for the temporary storage of materials or
obstruct the same by the construction, demolition, alteration, or repair of
an adjacent building, or otherwise, without first obtaining a written permit
from the City Engineer. Such obstruction shall be barricaded as required by
this section and as directed by the City Engineer to reasonably assure the
safety of the public.



   (B)   The fee for such permit shall be approved by the City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



   (C)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled. 



   (D)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of all persons doing construction,
excavation, public or private utility work, or repair work, storing materials
or equipment within a public street or alley, or obstructing any such public
street or alley by the construction, demolition, repair, alteration,
maintenance of an adjoining building or structure, or otherwise, to place or
cause to be placed such barriers, fences, or railings as are necessary to
give the public using said street or alley notice of the presence of such
work or such material or equipment in the public right-of-way; and shall be
in accordance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices
(MMUTCD).



(Prior Code, § 96.04)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940;
Ord. D-463, passed 8-11-1958, effective 8-21-1958; Ord. D-593, passed
12-26-1962, effective 1-5-1963; Ord. D-1558, passed 7-27-1987, effective
8-5-1987; Ord. O-116, passed 4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)  Penalty, see
§ 30.99



§ 96.005  DRAINAGE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   As used in this section, DRAINAGE STRUCTURE shall mean any
ditch, drain, driveway culvert, way for conveyance of surface waters, or any
combination thereof, in any street.



   (B)   No person shall construct or alter a culvert under a driveway
without first applying to the Department of Public Services for a permit. The
Department of Public Services shall establish the grade in each case and
shall not permit the use of a culvert of a size less than ten inches inside
diameter.



   (C)   No person shall permit any drainage structure which adjoins
any property owned by him or her to become obstructed or to fall into a state
of disrepair, or maintain any drainage structure which is not adequate to
permit the free and unrestricted passage of water therein.



   (D)   Whenever the Director of Public Services shall determine that
any drainage structure is obstructed, in a state of disrepair, or is not
adequate, notice may be given in accordance with § 36.02. Thereafter it
shall be the duty of the owner to remove such obstruction, make such repairs,
or replace or modify such inadequate drainage structure, as required by said
notice. In the event that the owner fails to comply with said notice within
five days after service of said notice, the Director of Public Works may
cause the requirements of said notice to be accomplished and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance
with the provisions of § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 96.05)  (Ord. D-145, passed 3-22-1948, effective
3-22-1948)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.006  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALLEYS.



   (A)   No person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any
premises bordered by an alley shall fail to care for said alley as far as the
centerline thereof.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to that
part of any alley which has been paved or hard-surfaced and the cost thereof
assessed to the benefitted property.



(Prior Code, § 96.06)  (Ord. D-938, passed 8-31-1970, effective
9-10-1970)  Penalty, see § 30.99



USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES



§ 96.020  LIFTING VIA PULLEYS, ROPES, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall raise anything from or lower anything to any street,
alley, or public place by means of a rope, chain, or pulley without first
obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Services. Before any
such permit is issued, the applicant therefor may be required to furnish a
bond deemed adequate by the Director of Public Services, which bond shall
become available in the payment of any damage to public or private property
and the payment for any personal injuries resulting from said raising or
lowering.



(Prior Code, § 96.15)  (Ord. D-1486, passed 7-15-1985, effective
7-25-1985)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.021  CURB SERVICE.



   No person shall exhibit any goods, persons, or things in any street,
alley, or public place or use any street or alley for the purpose of
furnishing curb service without first obtaining a license therefor in the
manner provided for in Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances. The term CURB
SERVICE shall mean the use of any street or alley by a person engaged in
business for the sale or solicitation of sales of goods, wares, or
merchandise. No such license shall be issued until the application therefor
and the location thereof has been approved by the City Manager; provided,
however, no location shall be approved if it interferes with traffic. The
City Council shall establish the rate for the license.



(Prior Code, § 96.16)  (Ord. D-1486, passed 7-15-1985, effective
7-25-1985)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.022  FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES.



   Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, no person
shall sell or offer for sale any food or beverage from a motor vehicle, as
defined in Title VII of this code of ordinances, within the street
right-of-way except upon those streets reflected on the map contained in City
Clerk’s File 183-C-7, which map is incorporated herein by reference, but in
no event within 500 feet of a school during the time that the school is in
daily session or one hour before or after said time, and except at special
events designated by the City Council. No person engaging in a sale hereunder
shall stop longer than reasonably necessary to complete the sale.



(Prior Code, § 96.17)  (Ord. D-1486, passed 7-15-1985, effective
7-25-1985)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.023  BANNER PETITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. To assist organizations in promoting special events,
the city has erected four pairs of poles for the display of banners in the
following locations:



      (1)   500 Block of Court Street;



      (2)   200 Block of West Genesee;



      (3)   300 Block of South Michigan; and



      (4)   1000 Block of East Genesee Avenue.



   (B)   Petition.



      (1)   Any organization wishing to display a banner promoting a
special event must first complete a petition for banner form and provide the
following information:



         (a)   Location(s) requested;



         (b)   Name of organization;



         (c)   Purpose of the banner;



         (d)   Message on the banner;



         (e)   Time period requested; note: may not exceed 30
days; and



         (f)   Petitioner(s)’ name and contact information.



      (2)   Organizations may only request two of the site locations
listed in division (A) above for any event. All requests will be considered
on a first-come, first-serve basis. The petition shall be filed with the City
Clerk’s office, by 12:00 noon, ten days prior to the City Council meeting
in which the petition will be presented to City Council for approval.
Petitions will not be accepted prior to six months before the event.



      (3)   Upon approval of the banner petition by City Council,
the City Clerk will notify the petitioner and the Engineering Division. A
calendar will be kept by the City Clerk and Engineering Division for each
street banner location to ensure that there will be no conflicts pertaining
to time and location.



   (C)   Banner specifications.



      (1)   Banners will be provided by the organization and must
meet the specifications established by the City Engineering Division, which
specifications will be provided to petitioner at the time of application.
Banners will not be displayed to advertise or promote “for profit”
businesses.



      (2)   The city reserves the right to refuse the display of any
banner deemed inappropriate and will not be responsible for damage caused to
any banner due to the elements or any damages caused by third parties.



   (D)   Fee. Banners will be physically erected and removed by the
City Engineering Division at a fee per location as approved by the City
Council and available in the City Clerk’s Office and Engineering Division.
The fees are payable to the Engineering Division prior to erection.



(Prior Code, § 96.18)  (Ord. O-68, passed 3-10-2008, effective 3-20-2008)



§ 96.024  WORK IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC EASEMENT.



   No person shall perform any type of work in the right-of-way or public
easement, without obtaining a written permit from the Engineering Division. 



   (A)   The fee for such permit shall be approved by City Council and
available in the Engineering Office.



   (B)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled. 



   (C)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



CURB CUTS



§ 96.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CURB CUT. Includes the making of any opening in or through an existing
curb and the leaving of voids in such curbs when the same are constructed in
any street or alley.



   RESTORED. As applied to curb cuts in this subchapter, shall include the
restoration of the gutter where combined with the curb, and shall include
such alteration and reconstruction in the area between the curb and the lot
line as may be found necessary to make the same reasonably safe and fit for
travel by the public.



(Prior Code, § 96.25)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958)



§ 96.036  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   (A)   It is recognized that, generally, provision must be made for
vehicular access to private property from streets and alleys, but in so doing
due consideration must be given to pedestrian and vehicle safety, the
resulting interference with the movement of vehicular traffic, and
interference with public improvements. In establishing permissible curb cuts
and sidewalk driveway crossing for access to private property, it shall be
the policy of the city not to authorize the same where they are unnecessary
or where they would unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public in
the adjacent street or alley, and in no event shall any such cut or crossing
be of greater width than necessary for reasonable access to the private
property to be served thereby.



   (B)   It is also recognized that curb cuts to permit street parking
are desirable in many locations, but in passing on applications for permits
for such curb cuts, due consideration shall be given to any resulting
interference with safe and free movement of vehicular traffic; and it shall
be the policy of the city not to authorize curb cuts for such purpose when
they would unreasonably interfere with vehicular traffic.



(Prior Code, § 96.26)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958)



§ 96.037  CUTS IN EXISTING CURBS.



   (A)   No opening in or through any existing curb of any street or
alley shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. Engineer. The fee for such permit shall be approved by City Council
and available in the Engineering Office.



   (B)   Failure to obtain the permit shall result in the permit fee
being doubled. 



   (C)   Failure to obtain the required inspection for approval of the
work shall result in a fine, approved by City Council and available in the
Engineering Office.



   (D)   Before any such permit is issued, the applicant therefor may
be required to furnish a bond deemed adequate by the City Engineer and
conditioned upon the prompt completion of the work in accordance with the
plans and specifications and restoration of the street.



(Prior Code, § 96.27)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958;
Ord. D-1559, passed 8-10-1987, effective 8-20-1987; Ord. O-114, passed
4-18-2011, effective 4-28-2011)



§ 96.038  CURBS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Leaving voids in curbs under construction. The City Engineer
shall, upon written request of the property owner, authorize the leaving of
voids in curbs under construction in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter. In the absence of such written request, the City Engineer may
order such voids as he or she finds necessary to serve existing driveways.



   (B)   New curb cuts; paving between curb and sidewalk required. On
and after February 1, 1958, any person obtaining a permit for a curb cut in
an existing curb or for whose property a void is provided in a new curb
pursuant to division (A) above shall cause the area between the curb cut or
void and nearer sidewalk line to be paved with concrete or asphalt in
accordance with regulations therefor established by the City Manager. In the
event such area is not paved as herein required, the City Engineer shall
cause the same to be done, giving the same notice required for the repair of
defective sidewalks and following the procedure now or hereafter established
for such sidewalk repair, including the assessing of the cost of paving such
area against the premises and the owner thereof.



(Prior Code, § 96.28)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958;
Ord. D-521, passed 5-16-1960, effective 5-26-1960)



§ 96.039  REQUIREMENTS FOR CURB CUTS AND SIDEWALK DRIVEWAY CROSSINGS FOR
ACCESS TO PROPERTY.



   Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private
property shall comply with the following.



   (A)   No single curb cut shall exceed 50 feet nor be less than ten
feet.



   (B)   The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public
crosswalk shall be five feet.



   (C)   The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving
residential property, shall be five feet.



   (D)   No single sidewalk driveway crossing shall exceed 30 feet in
width.



   (E)   The minimum distance between sidewalk driveway crossings,
except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet.



   (F)   The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway
crossing permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business, or enterprise shall
be 45% of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal
feet of street frontage plus 20% of the lineal feet of street frontage in
excess of 200 feet.



   (G)   No provision hereof shall authorize any curb cut or sidewalk
driveway crossing which, by reason of its location with reference to the
common property line, would prevent a similar installation for the abutting
property.



(Prior Code, § 96.29)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958) 
Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.040  REQUIREMENTS FOR CURB CUTS FOR STREET PARKING.



   Curb cuts to provide street parking shall comply with the following.



   (A)   In all cases where a public sidewalk exists or may be needed,
curb removed for street parking shall be replaced with a new curb not more
than nine feet from and parallel to (except for the curb return) the curb
removed so that only parallel parking can be accommodated.



   (B)   No curb shall be removed within a distance of 50 feet from the
nearest curb line of the next intersecting street in the line of travel
unless the curb cut is extended to the intersecting curb line.



   (C)   The area between the relocated curb and the pavement shall be
paved with concrete or asphalt in accordance with regulations therefor
established by the City Manager, and shall be maintained by the permittee so
long as parking is permitted thereon.



(Prior Code, § 96.30)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958)



§ 96.041  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CURB CUTS.



   Curb cuts for any purpose shall comply with the following.



   (A)   The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards,
fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other
public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to
the city.



   (B)   All construction shall be in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 96.31)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958)



§ 96.042  CURB RESTORATION.



   (A)   Restoration of unauthorized curb cuts. Any curb cut for which
any required permission or permit has not been obtained shall be restored by
replacement of the curb as herein provided.



   (B)   Permit fee. The fee for such permit shall be approved by City
Council and available in the Engineering Office.



   (C)   Failure to obtain permit. Failure to obtain the permit shall
result in the permit fee being doubled. 



   (D)   Failure to obtain inspection. Failure to obtain the required
inspection for approval of the work shall result in a fine, approved by City
Council and available in the Engineering Office.



   (E)   Restoration of abandoned curb cuts. Any curb cut which has
been abandoned shall be restored as hereinafter provided except where such
abandonment shall have been at the request of or for the convenience of the
city. Any curb cut shall be deemed to be abandoned where structural or other
changes on the adjoining premises make it no longer useful thereto.



   (F)   Notice to show cause. Whenever the City Engineer shall have
evidence that any curb cut exists in violation of the provisions of divisions
(A) or (E) above, he or she shall cause written notice to show cause why the
same should not be reconstructed and the expense thereof charged against the
adjoining premises to be given to the owners thereof as indicated by the
records of the City Assessor. Such notice shall be given in accordance with
the provisions of § 36.02, and shall set forth the time and place of the
hearing by the City Manager, or his or her designee, which time shall not be
less than five days after the service of the notice.



   (G)   Hearing. The owner of the premises, the person obligated to
pay the taxes thereon, any other person having an interest therein, and
counsel, if any, shall have an opportunity to show cause why the curb should
not be restored, and to cross-examine any witnesses and examine any evidence
produced to establish that the curb cut exists in violation of divisions (A)
or (E) above. The decision of the City Manager (or designee) shall be in
writing and shall be final and conclusive.



   (H)   Notice of decision; restoration of curb cut.



      (1)   The City Manager (or designee) shall cause a copy of the
decision to be served on the owner as shown by the records of the City
Assessor and on any other persons who are interested in the affected property
and who participated in the hearing, in accordance with the procedure
established for the service of notices by § 36.02.



      (2)   Thereupon, if the City Manager shall have found that the
curb cut is required by the provisions of this subchapter to be restored, the
city shall proceed to restore such curb cut by contract or force account and
to charge the cost of such restoration against the adjoining premises and the
owner thereof, and to collect such cost, all as provided in § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 96.32)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958;
Ord. O-192, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 96.043  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS.



   In order that the provisions of this subchapter may be reasonably
applied in instances where practical difficulties are apparent or unnecessary
hardship would result from carrying out the strict letter hereof, and in
cases where the applicant deems himself or herself aggrieved by the denial of
a curb cut, the Board of Building Appeals shall have the power to vary the
mandatory provisions hereof or to modify or reverse the decision of the City
Engineer in any specific case in such manner that substantial justice is done
and the spirit and purpose hereof, as set forth in § 96.036, are upheld.



(Prior Code, § 96.33)  (Ord. D-446, passed 1-27-1958, effective 2-6-1958)



ENCROACHMENTS



§ 96.055  DEFINITIONS.



   The term ENCROACHMENT as used in this subchapter shall mean any of the
following which is located on, over, in or under any roadway, sidewalk,
alley, public easement or other public right-of-way: architectural
projection, including belt course, planter, mansard, cosmetic wall covering,
roof cornice and wall buttress; awning; canopy; cellar entrance; coal hole;
fence; manhole; marquee; sidewalk elevator; step or stair; fire escape;
standpipe or sprinkler connection; sign; subgrade spread footing; underground
conduit (private); wall; loading dock, platform or facility; hoistway
opening; sidewalk vault; street vault; elevated craneway or walkway; any
device or object, or anything specifically permitted by the Council and
designated by it as an encroachment subject to the provisions of this
subchapter. The term ENCROACHMENT as used in this subchapter shall not
include any of the following facilities owned by a public utility: overhead
electric and telephone lines, poles and appurtenances; underground electric,
telephone, gas and steam lines, together with tunnels and conduits therefor;
nor shall said term include any encroachment by a public utility permitted by
the city and for which the utility company has agreed to hold the city
harmless.



(Prior Code, § 96.45)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1211, passed 1-17-1977, effective 1-27-1977; Ord. D-1836,
passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective
6-17-2010)



§ 96.056  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, build, maintain, or
relocate any encroachment as defined in this subchapter, without first
obtaining a permit from the licensed inspector of the Inspections Division or
by Council approval as provided in § 96.060(B), paying the permit fee as
required under § 96.061, and furnishing the necessary insurance certificate
as defined under § 96.063, if applicable. A permit will be required from
Public Services, if within the right-of-way, as required by § 96.024.



(Prior Code, § 96.46)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-533, passed 7-25-1960, effective 8-4-1960; Ord. D-1836,
passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective
6-17-2010)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 96.057  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Applications for encroachment permits (either existing or proposed)
shall be made on a form provided by the licensed inspector of the Inspections
Division and shall include the following information:



   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;



   (B)   Location and type of the existing or proposed encroachment,
building to which attached, or abutting lot which encroachment serves, or if
not abutting a privately owned lot, location of encroachment in street,
alley, or public way;



   (C)   Blueprints, computer-aided design (CAD), portable document
format (PDF), ink drawings, or electronic files showing the plans and
specifications of the proposed encroachment, if requested by the licensed
inspector, and will be provided to the City Engineer; and



   (D)   Such other information as the licensed inspector shall require
in order to ensure compliance with this subchapter and all other ordinances
of the city and laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 96.47)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.058  ENCROACHMENT PERMIT CLASSIFICATIONS.



   Upon receipt of an application for an encroachment permit, the licensed
inspector shall determine whether or not such encroachment, because of its
nature, shall or shall not require regular inspections due to public safety
and/or potential liability issues the encroachment may present. Those
encroachments not requiring routine inspections shall be graded Class I
encroachments and those requiring routine inspections shall be graded Class
II encroachments, and fees shall be set accordingly as defined in § 96.061.



(Prior Code, § 96.48)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.059  EXISTING ENCROACHMENTS.



   All existing encroachment permit holders shall be required to complete
an application for permit as defined in § 96.057, including those permitted
by special written agreement.



(Prior Code, § 96.49)  (Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.060  APPROVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS BY LICENSED INSPECTOR.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the licensed inspector and City
Engineer to review the proposed encroachment to ensure it does not pose an
adverse affect to public safety or convenience and where appropriate, shall
order any necessary repairs, alterations, or removal.



   (B)   When the encroachment meets all the requirements of this and
any other ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, §§ 150.20
and 150.21, referred to as the Sign Code, and the laws of the state, the
licensed inspector shall then issue an encroachment permit, provided the
applicant pays the required fee as defined in § 96.061 and furnishes the
necessary certificate of insurance as defined in § 96.063, if applicable. In
the event the licensed inspector does not believe granting the encroachment
permit would be in the best interest of the city, he or she may deny the
granting of a permit.



   (C)   If the applicant does not concur with the decision of the
licensed inspector either to make repairs, alterations, or removal, or the
licensed inspector’s decision to deny the application, the application
shall be transmitted to the City Council for approval or disapproval. The
decision of City Council shall be final.



(Prior Code, § 96.50)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1211, passed 1-17-1977, effective 1-27-1977; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.061  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Each applicant shall pay an application fee as established by
Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   A separate permit and fee will be charged for each
encroachment on any one parcel. Application fees are not prorated and are
non-refundable. All permits for encroachments now existing or issued prior to
the effective date of this subchapter shall expire on June 30, 2010. This
includes all encroachment permits issued at any time during the prior
three-year license term. All encroachment permits shall require renewal on or
before June 30 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 96.51)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-904, passed 1-19-1970, effective 1-29-1970; Ord. D-1836,
passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective
6-17-2010)



§ 96.062  LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.



   An additional late charge of 50% of the permit fee shall be incurred as
a result of the following:



   (A)   Failure to pay the initial encroachment permit fee within 15
days of application;



   (B)   Failure to apply for an encroachment permit within 15 days of
date of notice; and



   (C)   Failure to renew any/all encroachment permits within 15 days
of permit expiration.



(Prior Code, § 96.52)  (Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.063  INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any encroachment permit, the licensed
inspector shall determine if such encroachment may present possible claims
for personal injury, bodily injury, or property damage due to its nature, and
as a result may require the applicant to provide proof of liability insurance
in an appropriate amount by a company authorized and accepted to do insurance
business in the state, specifically naming the city as additional insured and
loss payee for any such claims.



   (B)   In the event such proof of liability insurance is required, it
shall be updated and provided to the city annually at the time of renewal.



(Prior Code, § 96.53)  (Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999;
Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.064  INSPECTION.



   The licensed inspector shall inspect, at such times as he or she deems
necessary, each encroachment permit granted to determine whether it is in
need of repair or removal, and the permit fee shall be deemed to cover the
costs of this inspection, whether inspection be made annually or at other
intervals.



(Prior Code, § 96.54)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-718, passed 3-21-1966, effective 3-31-1966; Ord. D-1836,
passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective
6-17-2010)



§ 96.065  PERMIT REVOCABLE AT ANY TIME.



   All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this
subchapter or any amendment thereto are mere licenses, revocable at any time
by the licensed inspector or the City Council under the terms and provisions
of this subchapter and all such permits shall contain this provision.



(Prior Code, § 96.55)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.066  REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT UPON FAILURE TO APPLY FOR PERMIT, PAY
PERMIT FEE, OR MAINTAIN LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Upon failure of any person to make application for an encroachment
permit where required, to pay the permit fee required herein, or maintain
liability insurance as required, the licensed inspector shall have the
authority to remove said encroachment immediately. Any item(s) confiscated
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be held by the city for a
period of 30 days. During the 30-day holding period, the owner of said item
may request the return of the item on a form provided by the City Clerk. The
licensed inspector shall check the inventory of confiscated items and if the
item is found to be held by the city, the applicant may pay a recovery fee
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk for each
item held, at which time the licensed inspector shall return the item to the
owner. After 30 days have passed, the licensed inspector may dispose of said
item(s) either by disposal in an appropriate landfill or by sale.



(Prior Code, § 96.56)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-718, passed 3-21-1966, effective 3-31-1966; Ord. D-1836,
passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101, passed 6-7-2010, effective
6-17-2010)



§ 96.067  REMOVAL OF UNSAFE ENCROACHMENTS.



   Any encroachment which has become unsafe or presents a hazard to the
general public by reason of deterioration, dilapidation, lack of repair or
maintenance, or any other cause, which results in an unsafe condition to the
general public in its use of the public right-of-way, is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and shall be abated in the manner provided for removal
of dangerous structures as provided in the “Ordinances for Abatement of
Dangerous Building, Structures or Parts Thereof”, as codified in §§
151.130 through 151.142 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 96.57)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.068  TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS.



   Applications and permits for temporary or intermittent encroachments
shall be obtained in the same manner as applications and permits are obtained
for permanent encroachments.



(Prior Code, § 96.58)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 96.069  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   Wherever in this subchapter an act or duty is required to be performed
by the licensed inspector of the Inspections Division, said act or duty may
be delegated by said licensed inspector to any employee of said Division.



(Prior Code, § 96.59)  (Ord. D-471, passed 11-17-1958, effective
11-28-1958; Ord. D-1836, passed 6-7-1999, effective 6-17-1999; Ord. O-101,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



CHAPTER 97:  WATERCRAFT CONTROL



Section



   97.01   Scope



   97.02   Signs marking no wake zone



   97.03   Definitions



   97.04   Prohibited act



   97.05   Enforcement



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  SCOPE.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to the operation motor boats on the
Saginaw River as “No Wake Zone”.



   (B)   On the waters of the Saginaw River, all within the City of
Saginaw, from the northern edge of the Douglas Schenck Bridge north to the
southern edge of the Rust Avenue (M-46) Bridge, City of Saginaw, County of
Saginaw, State of Michigan, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to
exceed a slow-no wake speed.



(Prior Code, § 97.01)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective
3-12-1996)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.02  SIGNS MARKING NO WAKE ZONE.



   The boundaries of the area described in § 97.01(B) shall be marked
with signs.



(Prior Code, § 97.02)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective 3-12-1996)



§ 97.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions will apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTORBOAT. A vessel propelled wholly or in part by machinery.



   OPERATE. To be in control of a vessel, while the vessel is underway and
is not secured in some manner such as being docked or at anchor.



   OPERATOR. The person who is in control or in charge of a vessel while
that vessel is underway.



   PEACE OFFICER. Any of the following:



      (1)   A sheriff;



      (2)   A sheriff’s deputy;



      (3)   A deputy who is authorized by the sheriff to enforce
this chapter and who has satisfactorily completed at least 40 hours of law
enforcement training specific to Part 801 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L. §§
324.80101 et seq.;



      (4)   An officer of the city’s Police Department;



      (5)   An officer of the state police; and



      (6)   The director of the Department of Natural Resources or
conservation officers employed by the department.



   NO WAKE ZONE. An area on the Saginaw River within the City’s limits
that is identified by appropriate signage located on the banks of the Saginaw
River as a “No Wake Zone.”



   SLOW-NO WAKE SPEED. A very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created
by the motorboat would be minimal.



(Prior Code, § 97.03)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective 3-12-1996)



§ 97.04  PROHIBITED ACT.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate a motorboat at a
speed in excess of slow-no wake speed in a no wake zone. Violators of this
section are subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 97.04)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective
3-12-1996)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   State, county, and local peace officers shall enforce this chapter in
accordance with Part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L. §§ 324.80101 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 97.05)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective 3-12-1996)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 or imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both.



(Prior Code, § 97.99)  (Ord. D-1760, passed 1-29-1996, effective 3-12-1996)



CHAPTER 98:  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   98.01   Purposes



   98.02   Declaration of nuisance



   98.03   Definitions



   98.04   Persons that the chapter applies to



   98.05   Vehicles not considered junk motor vehicles



   98.06   Prohibited parking



   98.07   Junk motor vehicles, storage regulations



   98.08   Removal of junk vehicles from private premises, public
premises, and street right-of- way



   98.09   Authorized city official



 



   98.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Junk motor vehicle diagrams



§ 98.01  PURPOSES.



   (A)   Vehicles which are or hereafter dismantled, partially
dismantled, wrecked or inoperative, in places other than junkyards or other
appropriate areas tend to interfere with the enjoyment of property, reduce
the value of property, create fire hazards, extend and aggravate urban blight
and result in hazard to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
welfare, and happiness of the residents of the city. It is the purpose of
this chapter to alleviate and correct such conditions and thereby enhance the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the residents of
the city.



   (B)   Furthermore, the purpose of this chapter is to restrict the
outdoor storage, parking, or unreasonable accumulation of junk, unused,
dismantled (partial/complete) of nonoperating motor vehicles upon premises
primarily used or zoned for any type of purpose within the city; to thereby
avoid injury and hazards to children and others; the devaluation of property
values; and the nesting of rodents and bees.



(Prior Code, § 98.01)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 98.02  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The presence of junk vehicles as prohibited herein is declared to be a
hazard to public health, sanitation, safety, and welfare, and a public
nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 98.02)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 94



§ 98.03  DEFINITIONS.



   As used to this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
prescribed in this section.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. The Chief Inspector, Chief of Police, and the
Superintendent of Streets and Bridges, and/or their designee(s).



   FRONT YARD. A space including all the area bounded by the side lot
lines, whether they are parallel or not, the front lot line and line drawn
parallel to the front lot line through that point on the principal building
nearest the front lot line. (See Figures 1 and 2 in Appendix A at the end of
this chapter.)



   INTERESTED PERSON. A person who has tangible interest in the property
due to an ownership interest in the vehicle or property. INTERESTED PERSON
also include tenants who are renting property.



   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE.



      (1)   Any motor vehicle assembled or not, which is incapable
of being self-propelled or which does not meet the requirements for operation
upon the public streets. This includes, but is not limited to, motor
vehicles, which are wrecked, inoperable, junked, partially or completely
dismantled and any parts thereof which make the vehicle incapable of moving
backwards and forwards which includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Vehicle has one missing tire;



         (b)   Vehicle has two flat tires if an automobile and
one if it is a motorcycle or anything similar to it;



         (c)   Vehicle has a missing door;



         (d)   Vehicle has missing windows;



         (e)   Is used for storage of materials;



         (f)   Creates a fire hazard;



         (g)   Constitutes an attractive nuisance as being a
hazard to the health and safety of children; or



         (h)   Tends to be a refuge or collector of water for
disease spreading insects or vermin.



      (2)   The absence of a current license plate or registration
shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle is inoperable.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, which is self-propelled and designed to
travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to,
automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors,
go-carts, golf carts, snowmobiles, and race cars.



   OCCUPANT. Any person, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or
having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   OWNER. The person listed on either the City Assessor’s card as the
property owner or the person who is the registered owner of the vehicle.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any premises owned by a private person or private
entity and any portion of a street right-of-way immediately adjoining such
premises which separates such premises from a roadway.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any premises, including but not limited to, streets
and alleys, owned by, in possession of, or under the control of, the United
States of America, the state, county, or city, or any agency or political
subdivision of any said governments.



   RACE CAR. Any motor vehicle designed for or modified for use on
racetracks.



   REAR YARD. A space including all the area bounded by the side lot
lines, whether they are parallel or not, the rear lot line and a line drawn
parallel to the rear lot line, through that point on the principal building
nearest the rear lot line, but excluding any portion of the lot that would be
included in the street side yard. (See Figures 1 and 2 in Appendix A at the
end of this chapter.)



   SEASONAL VEHICLE. Any operative vehicle normally licensed for only one
part of the year.



   STREET SIDE YARD. A space including all the area bounded by the front
yard, the rear lot line, the street side lot line, and a line drawn parallel
to the street through that point on the principal building nearest the street
lot line. (See Figures 1 and 2 in Appendix A at the end of this chapter.)



(Prior Code, § 98.03)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 98.04  PERSONS THAT THE CHAPTER APPLIES TO.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the owner of the motor
vehicle or the person having chain of custody, or control of the motor
vehicle and also the owner of the private premises on which the motor vehicle
or a part thereof is located, and both persons shall be responsible for the
removal thereof.



(Prior Code, § 98.04)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 98.05  VEHICLES NOT CONSIDERED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Motor vehicles subject to removal under the Michigan Vehicle
Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L. § 257.252, the stolen car
statute, are exempt from this chapter.



   (B)   This section is inapplicable to a motor vehicle or part
thereof in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the
operation of a business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage
place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.
Excepted vehicles also include those kept as the stock in trade of a
regularly licensed and established new or used automobile dealer or other
motorized vehicle and vehicles located upon the premises of a licensed and
established motor vehicle repair garage.



   (C)   The other exempt vehicles include:



      (1)   An operative seasonal vehicle;



      (2)   An operative unlicensed vehicle, temporarily stored
while the owner is temporarily absent from the premises because of school
attendance, in the military or confined to a hospital or other similar
institution, such as a nursing home; and



      (3)   An operative race car.



(Prior Code, § 98.05)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 98.06  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or
leaving, of any junk motor vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any public
or private property or a street right-of-way within the city. The presence of
a junk motor vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property or the
street right-of-way is hereby declared a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 98.06)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective
7-26-2001)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.07  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES, STORAGE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit the
storage or accumulation of junk vehicles on any private property in the city
except within a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a
properly zoned or legally operating, licensed or approved junk dealer, junk
buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk,
operator of an automobile repair garage and/or automobile wrecker business.



   (B)   Further, no person shall park, store, or place upon the public
right-of-way, public property, private property, or between the sidewalk and
curb within the city, any motor vehicle, house trailer, or tractor trailer or
new or used parts or junk therefrom, unless the same is wholly contained
within a fully enclosed building and does not violate any zoning or housing
laws of the city, county, or state, except for the following:



      (1)   Duly licensed and operable vehicles or trailers with
substantially all main component parts attached;



      (2)   Vehicles or trailers that are temporarily inoperable,
because of minor mechanical failure, but which are not, in any manner,
dismantled and have substantially all main component parts attached, which
may remain upon such private property not to exceed five days; and



      (3)   A vehicle which is in fully operating condition such as
a stock car or modified car that has been redesigned or reconstructed for a
purpose other than that for which it was manufactured, provided no building
or garage is located upon the premises in which the same could be parked or
stored. In no event shall any such vehicle be parked in the front or street
side yard area of any such residential premises.



   (C)   The storage of inoperative, dismantled, wrecked, unlicensed
vehicles and vehicles without tags located within the city is expressly
prohibited by this chapter unless contained within a garage, licensed
junkyard or a licensed storage facility which does not violate the zoning
regulations. Inoperable, wrecked, or partially dismantled motor vehicles may
remain upon private premises for a period not exceeding five days, if the
owner is obtaining a license, repairing the vehicle or is about to have it
repaired.



   (D)   Tires or parts of motor vehicles being removed, replaced, or
installed by the occupant working on his or her own vehicle on the premises
may be reasonably stored in an orderly manner on the premises for a period
not exceeding five days. Parts or tires to be discarded shall be removed
immediately.



   (E)   The presence of any inoperable, wrecked, or partially
dismantled vehicle, or parts or tires of motor vehicles, on any premises
contrary to this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



   (F)   A junk motor vehicle shall not be located outdoors for more
than five days on vacant property or on property with a residential or
commercial structure.



(Prior Code, § 98.07)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective
7-26-2001)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08  REMOVAL OF JUNK VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PREMISES, PUBLIC PREMISES,
AND STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Whenever an authorized city official finds junk motor vehicles
on private premises, public premises or the street right-of-way within the
city is in violation of this chapter, the authorized city official shall
cause a notice to be placed upon the vehicle in substantially the following
form:



      NOTICE TO THE OWNERS AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED
PROPERTY: This property, to-wit: (description of property) located at
(description of property) is deemed a junk motor vehicle. A junk motor
vehicle is defined (but is not limited to), partially dismantled vehicle(s),
missing vehicle parts, wrecked or inoperative vehicle(s), flat tire(s), used
for storage or absence of a current license plate, (shall be prima facie
evidence that a vehicle is a junk motor vehicle), which is deemed improperly
stored in violation of Ch. 98 of the Saginaw Code of Ordinances.



      The described junk motor vehicle must be removed within five days
from the date of this notice, or a hearing requested in writing, within that
time period at the Environmental Improvement Office to show cause why the
junk motor vehicle should not be removed. If the property is not removed and
an administrative hearing is not requested within the five-day period, the
vehicle(s) shall be deemed a junk motor vehicle(s) and shall be removed by
the City of Saginaw or its authorized agents and a municipal civil infraction
may also be issued by the City of Saginaw to the owner of the vehicle(s); and
costs for removal of the vehicle(s); shall be assessed against the owner of
the premises as set forth in § 33.21 of the Saginaw Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by ten inches
and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements. In addition to posting, the authorized city official shall mail a
copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the junk
vehicle is located, as shown by the records of the City Assessor, on or
before the date of posting of such notice and to the owner of the junk motor
vehicles, if ownership can be reasonably ascertained.



   (C)   If at the end of five days after posting such notice, the
owner or any person claiming an interest in the junk motor vehicle(s)
described in such notice has not complied with the notice and removed the
junk motor vehicle, the authorized city official may issue a municipal civil
infraction. If a court hearing is held and the court determines the owner has
violated the chapter and issues an order, the order shall state that if the
person places the junk motor vehicle in the same location, a show cause
hearing shall be held to determine if injunctive relief, specifically, no
parking of the junk motor vehicle in the same location, shall be issued.



   (D)   Further, within five days from the posting of such notice, the
owner of the private premises or a person claiming an interest in personal
property can request a formal hearing by providing written notice to the
Environmental Improvement Office. Afterward, the City Manager shall appoint a
hearings officer to conduct a public hearing in order for the person
requesting the hearing to show cause why he or she should not remove the
property or that the city shall not dispose of the junk motor vehicle.



   (E)   The hearings officer shall make a decision with a written
findings of fact based upon competent evidence and testimony determining
whether storage of the property in question is prohibited by the terms of §
98.07. If the hearings officer determines the storage of the property in
question is prohibited, the officer shall order the person requesting the
hearing within a reasonable time but not less than five days to remove the
junk motor vehicle(s). If the property in question is not removed within the
period allowed in the order, the authorized city official issuing the notice
may cause the junk motor vehicle to be removed and costs for removal of the
vehicle(s) will be assessed against the owner(s) of the premises as set forth
in § 33.21 of the code.



(Prior Code, § 98.08)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001;
Ord. D-1904, passed 11-5-2001, effective 11-15-2001)



§ 98.09  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL.



   The Chief Inspector, Chief of Police, and the Superintendent of Streets
and Bridges and/or their designee(s), are hereby designated as the authorized
city official(s), to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal
civil infraction violations notices as provided by Ch. 37 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 98.09)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any
provision of this chapter is responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in § 37.07, plus
costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by § 37.07.



   (B)   Injunctive relief. If a hearing is held in court and the court
determines the owner has violated this chapter, the order signed by the court
will state that if the person places the junk motor vehicle in the same
location, a show cause hearing will be held to determine if injunctive
relief, specifically, no parking of the junk motor vehicle in the same
location, will be issued.



   (C)   Special assessment. If at the end of five days, the junk motor
vehicle has not been removed from either private premises or a street
right-of-way, the authorized city official may cause such junk motor vehicle
to be removed and the costs of removal shall be assessed and levied against
the premises from which the junk motor vehicle was removed in the manner
prescribed in § 33.21.



(Prior Code, § 98.99)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective 7-26-2001)



APPENDIX A:  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE DIAGRAMS



   FIGURE 1







   FIGURE 2







(Prior Code, Ch. 98, App.)  (Ord. D-1891, passed 7-16-2001, effective
7-26-2001)



CHAPTER 99:  SPECIAL EVENTS REGULATIONS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Types of special events



   99.03   Conditions of use/application



   99.04   Written confirmation of requirements



   99.05   Responsibilities of the event sponsor



   99.06   Liability insurance requirements



   99.07   Additional requirements and/or restrictions



   99.08   Billings for special events



   99.09   Payment of fees



   99.10   Use of city-owned regional parks, community parks and
neighborhood parks



   99.11   Traffic control and safety requirements



   99.12   Special event vendor license



   99.13   Two or more applications for the same event date



   99.14   Reservation of annual event dates



   99.15   Cancellation of events



   99.16   Denial of future events



   99.17   Sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages



   99.18   Use of sound amplifying equipment



   99.19   City sponsorship/waiver of fees and insurance



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SPECIAL EVENT COMMITTEE. The Special Event Committee is established to
review and approve special event applications and make recommendations as to
the city services required to hold the event. The Committee members shall
consist of representative(s) from the following departments and/or divisions:
Department of Public Services; office of the City Clerk; Police Department;
and Fire Department. The Committee may request the assistance of other city
departments and/or divisions as it deems necessary.



   SPECIAL EVENT PROGRAM. A special event program is a program or activity
requiring authorized use of any city-owned property including parks, streets,
parking lots, or select public facilities that may or may not require city
services. Events in which the city is the primary sponsor or has
traditionally been a co-sponsor, are not exempt from this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 99.01)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.02  TYPES OF SPECIAL EVENTS.



   Types of special events include, but are not limited to, concerts,
parades, festivals, athletic events (i.e., walk-a-thons), marches, large
group picnics, religious ceremonies, block parties, skateboarding, and
fishing tournaments.



(Prior Code, § 99.02)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.03  CONDITIONS OF USE/APPLICATION.



   (A)   All requests for use of city parks, streets, parking lots, and
other public facilities or land controlled by the city or requiring city
services must be made by completing a special event application and
submitting it to the Department of Public Services with the non-refundable
application fee and any applicable park use fees. All special event
applications must be submitted 60 calendar days prior to the event.
Applications received less than 60 days in advance will be subject to
additional application fees as specified on the special events rate sheet.
Submitting an application does not guarantee an event will be approved.



   (B)   All special event applications must include the type of event,
event location, estimated attendance, dates and hours in which the event
shall be conducted, whether alcoholic beverages will be served, amplifying
equipment will be used, a detailed description of the event, and the specific
services the applicant is requesting from the city. Incomplete applications
will be rejected.



   (C)   The person(s) signing the special event application will be
considered the official event sponsor (hereinafter “event sponsor”). All
requests related to the event must be authorized and communicated by the
event sponsor. Unsigned applications will be rejected.



   (D)   If additional services are required after the event
application has been submitted, the event sponsor must submit a written
amendment to the Department of Public Services detailing the changes.



   (E)   Use of all city parks, streets, parking lots, or public
facilities for all special events shall comply with all rules, regulations,
and ordinances established by the city, and all existing laws of the state
and the United States.



   (F)   Submittal of a block party application is required when a
request is made to block off a city street.



(Prior Code, § 99.03)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective
5-30-2013)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  WRITTEN CONFIRMATION OF REQUIREMENTS.



   Upon receipt of the special event application, a written confirmation
shall be sent to the event sponsor outlining any special conditions that must
be met if the event is to be held. All fees must be paid and insurance
provided to the city, prior to approval of the application.



(Prior Code, § 99.04)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.05  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE EVENT SPONSOR.



   (A)   The event sponsor is responsible for all costs related to the
event, including established fees, facility rental charges, required
insurance, permits, and the cost of all services provided by the city. The
event sponsor should be aware that noise generated by the event could have an
impact on the neighborhoods near the event site. The event sponsor must be
considerate of the neighborhood and be aware of the city’s Noise Ordinance,
§§ 94.045 through 94.047. (See § 99.18 below for use of sound amplifying
equipment.)



   (B)   Events involving the use of tents and fireworks require the
event sponsor to obtain special permits from the City Clerk’s office. An
application and fee is required for each tent in excess of 120 square feet.
Fireworks displays also require the approval of City Council. The City Fire
Marshal will perform a fire and life safety inspection on the day of the
event for tents and fireworks. If vendors are utilized at the event, the
event sponsor must obtain a special event vendor’s license in accordance
with § 99.12.



(Prior Code, § 99.05)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.06  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In order to comply with the city’s insurance liability
carrier, city officials will review the special event application and
determine if insurance is required and the appropriate type and amount of
insurance. When insurance is required, the event sponsor shall provide a
valid certificate of insurance naming the City of Saginaw as an additional
insured and general liability coverage must extend to the event. The carrier
must be approved and admitted within the state or listed on the non-admitted
approved carrier list. The certificate of insurance must be submitted to the
Department of Public Services in advance of the event and within the time
frame established by the Department of Public Services.



   (B)   Events sponsored by city boards, such as the Saginaw Community
Enrichment Commission, are covered under the city’s insurance policy. The
event is subject to the self-insured retention (deductible) on the city’s
insurance policy at the time of the event.



   (C)   The city may require participants to sign hold harmless
waivers.



   (D)   Minimum insurance requirements include, but are not limited
to, full commercial general liability covering personal injury, bodily
injury, and property damage in the amount of $500,000 per occurrence/$500,000
per aggregate. All other events will be required to provide insurance based
on past experience and assessment of the city’s potential liability risk
factors based on the following risk categories:



      (1)   Class I - Low Hazard involves no physical activity by
participants and no severe exposure to spectators other than normal activity
and exposure in a city park or public location. Examples of events in this
category include, but are not limited to, meetings, seminars, social
gatherings, theatrical performances, and auctions. It shall be the policy of
the city to not routinely require insurance coverage for events classified as
Class I - Low Hazard. This waiver of the insurance requirement is meant to
cover small gatherings or ceremonies that do not involve more than 75 people,
are limited to passive participation by the public, and require no city
services.



      (2)   Class II - Moderate Hazard involves limited physical
activity by participants and no severe exposure to spectators. Events in this
category include, but are not limited to, amateur team sports, dances, animal
shows, political rallies, flea markets, picnics, and parades with no floats.



      (3)   Class III - High Hazard involves major participation by
participants and/or moderate exposure to spectators. Events in this category
include, but are not limited to, parades with floats, marathons or races,
circus/carnivals, and semi-pro team sporting events.



      (4)   Class IV - Severe Hazard involves severe exposure to
spectator and/or participants. Examples of events in this category include,
but are not limited to, rock concerts, alcoholic beverage sales, vehicle
races, fireworks, ice skating events, professional or collegiate sporting
events.



(Prior Code, § 99.06)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.07  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND/OR RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The Department of Public Services may place additional
requirements on any event. These requirements may include specific staffing
levels for police, fire, paramedic, municipal services, or other personnel.
The city also reserves the right to require that certain facilities and/or
services be provided in support of event activities, including trash
dumpsters, portable toilets, fencing, security personnel, traffic barricades,
and trash barrels. The cost for providing these services is the
responsibility of the event sponsor. The city reserves the right to assess
damage and litter deposits for events. These deposits are non-refundable if
city property is damaged or litter is not collected and removed. Expenses for
these requirements will be billed to the event sponsor as provided in §
99.09 of this chapter.



   (B)   The Department of Public Services has the authority to cancel
or stop an event if the special conditions required for approval of the event
are not being met. In addition, the Department of Public Services and city
public safety officials have the authority to cancel or stop an event, or
place additional restrictions on the event, if it is deemed that the public
health, safety, or welfare would be better served with additional
restrictions.



(Prior Code, § 99.07)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.08  BILLINGS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   Special event billings shall be itemized and provided to an event
sponsor in advance of the event. Rates are subject to change. (See rate
sheet.)



(Prior Code, § 99.08)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.09  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   All payment of fees must be submitted to the Finance Director’s
office in advance of the event and within the time period set forth by the
Department of Public Services. If payment in full is not received prior to
the event as required, the city reserves the right to withhold all public
services relating to the event and deny the application. Fees shall be
charged for city services provided to special events as indicated on the rate
sheet, but specifically as follows.



   (A)   Hourly rate shall be the hourly cost for any employee working
on a special event as established by the City Administration. The hourly rate
shall include expenses related to the employee including fringe benefits and
overhead.



   (B)   Overtime shall be the hourly cost for an employee working on a
special event during a time period that would be considered overtime for city
payroll records, including the actual cost for fringe benefits.



   (C)   Equipment rental charges shall be the current equipment rental
rates charged by the city.



(Prior Code, § 99.09)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.10  USE OF CITY-OWNED REGIONAL PARKS, COMMUNITY PARKS AND NEIGHBORHOOD
PARKS.



   (A)   Requests for use of certain city-owned regional parks,
community parks, and neighborhood parks shall be made in the same manner as
all other special events. In regard to use of neighborhood parks, every
effort will be made to inform and seek approval of the request by the
affected neighborhood association. Listed below are the parks affected by
this chapter.



 

Regional Parks
 
Community Parks
 
Neighborhood Parks




Hoyt Park
 
Crayola Park
 
Germaine Park


Webber Park
 
Garber Tennis Courts
 
Dr. Archer Claytor Park


Wickes Park
 
Bliss Park
 
Weadock Park


Ojibway Island
 
Fordney Park
 
Otto Roeser Park


Morley Plaza
 
Deindorfer Woods
 
Schroeder Park


Celebration Park
 
Linton Park
 
St. Vincent’s Park


Jeffers Park
 
Unity Park
 
Park Palace Park


Merrill Park
 
Veterans Memorial Park
 




 



   (B)   Upon the recommendation of the Department of Public Services,
the Special Events Committee may waive special event fees to duly
incorporated, nonprofit neighborhood associations for use of its own
neighborhood parks in exchange for a contribution of volunteer hours and/or
cash or in-kind contributions in support of the park.



(Prior Code, § 99.10)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.11  TRAFFIC CONTROL AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The special event sponsor shall be responsible for complying
with all traffic control and safety procedures required by the city during
the event. Additional requirements may be made by the city during the event
as may be necessary for the safety of the public.



   (B)   It should be noted that the city does not allow solicitations
of any kind in the street unless all of the following circumstances are
met:   



      (1)   The contributions are being solicited on behalf of a
charitable or civic organization;



      (2)   The charitable or civic organization complies with all
city and state regulations and safety requirements, including obtaining a
special event permit as provided herein;



      (3)   The charitable or civic organization maintains at least
$500,000 in liability insurance;



      (4)   Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of the
charitable or civic organization is 18 years of age or older;



      (5)   Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of the
charitable or civic organization is wearing high-visibility safety apparel
that meets current standards promulgated by the International Safety
Equipment Association; and



      (6)   The portion of the roadway upon which the solicitation
occurs is not a work zone and is within an intersection where traffic control
devices are present.



   (C)   The city is not liable for any claim for damages arising out
of a charitable or civic organization seeking solicitations in the
streets.   



   (D)   The city has no authority to grant a permit for solicitations
on any county or state highway.



   (E)   As used herein, charitable or civic organization means a
nonprofit organization that is qualified under section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4)
of the Internal Revenue Code, or a veteran’s organization that has
tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code.



(Prior Code, § 99.11)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013;
Ord. O-200, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 99.12  SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR LICENSE.



   Individual vendors for special events, at the invitation of the event
sponsor, shall not be required to obtain individual licenses for selling food
or merchandise at the event. However, the event sponsor will be required to
meet the following conditions.



   (A)   The event sponsor shall apply for and receive a special event
vendor’s license from the City Clerk.



   (B)   Such application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Date, name, and location of special event;



      (2)   Name of corporation and/or organization sponsoring the
event;



      (3)   Name, mailing address, email address, and phone number
of event coordinator; and



      (4)   A list of the all vendors with the following information:



         (a)   Name, address, and phone number for each vendor;



         (b)   The type of vendor (i.e., food or merchandise);



         (c)   A description of the vehicle used by vendor, with
license number or other means of identification, if applicable; and



         (d)   Whether or not the vendor will use a tent. Vendors
using tents which exceed 120 square feet shall be required to obtain a
separate tent license and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of
that license as required under § 92.10 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   All food vendors must be approved by the County Health
Department and post a valid temporary food license as authorized by the
County Health Department. Such food vendors are responsible for any and all
fees related to obtaining a food license and are required to comply with all
County Health Department rules and regulations for temporary food licensed
facilities.



   (D)   The event sponsor must sign the special event vendor license
application confirming the information provided is true and accurate to the
best of his, her, or its knowledge and belief, and furnish a copy of his or
her valid driver’s license. Such statement shall also give authorization to
the city to perform a criminal background check on the applicant and for the
applicant to waive all rights, claims, causes of actions, or damages against
the city in obtaining or utilizing such records and information.



   (E)   Any and all special event vendors must comply with all
federal, state, and local laws pertaining to vending.



(Prior Code, § 99.12)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.13  TWO OR MORE APPLICATIONS FOR THE SAME EVENT DATE.



   (A)   In the event two or more special event applications are
received simultaneously to reserve the same date, time, and location, City
Administration shall attempt to resolve the conflict with the event sponsors
of each application. In resolving the conflict, the city shall consider each
applicant’s history with regard to payment of fees, cancellations, or other
public health, safety, or welfare issues.



   (B)   In the event an application is received for which a date and
site has been reserved and it is determined the subsequent application will
have a greater economic impact on the city, the Department of Public Services
reserves the right to request the initial applicant change the date and/or
site of its event. Consideration will be given as to the hardship and expense
it may cause the applicant to make the requested change.



(Prior Code, § 99.13)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.14  RESERVATION OF ANNUAL EVENT DATES.



   If an event is intended to be an annual event on regularly scheduled
dates, the current year’s application may include the following year’s
requested dates. Approval of the current year’s application will include
reservation of the next year’s proposed dates. However, it will not
constitute approval of next year’s event, which must have its own timely
application submitted for city approval. In general, the city will not
approve special event dates more than one year in advance.



(Prior Code, § 99.14)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.15  CANCELLATION OF EVENTS.



   (A)   The city reserves the right to deny services for special
events if the event sponsor fails to pay the required fees and submit the
required certificate of insurance within the time specified by the Department
of Public Services.



   (B)   In the event the event sponsor cancels the event at any time
after the application is received and the non-refundable application fee is
paid, the city will bill the event sponsor for any city services utilized
prior to cancellation of the event. In addition the city shall assess a
percentage of the facility and/or use fees in accordance with the rates
established on the special events rate sheet.



(Prior Code, § 99.15)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.16  DENIAL OF FUTURE EVENTS.



   Event sponsors that do not pay the required fees, submit the required
insurance, have a history of cancellations, or violate this chapter in any
manner will be denied future applications.



(Prior Code, § 99.16)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.17  SALE AND/OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   If an event sponsor intends to serve and/or sell alcoholic beverages,
the event sponsor is required to comply with all regulations set forth by the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission, all local ordinances and requires
approval from City Council. If alcohol is going to be served and/or sold, the
event sponsor must apply for and receive a special liquor license through the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission, and supply the city with a copy of the
liquor license prior to the event.



(Prior Code, § 99.17)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.18  USE OF SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.



   Council approval is needed for any event utilizing sound amplifying
equipment.



(Prior Code, § 99.18)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.19  CITY SPONSORSHIP/WAIVER OF FEES AND INSURANCE.



   In accordance with Public Act 110 of 1905, being M.C.L. § 123.851, the
city may appropriate money for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the
proper observance of Armistice, Independence, and Memorial or Decoration Day
or for the proper observance of a diamond jubilee or centennial. In this
regard, the city may waive fees for in-kind services provided and licenses in
celebration of these events only. The city shall not waive the insurance
requirements set forth in accordance with § 99.06.



(Prior Code, § 99.19)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infractions. A person who violates any
provision of this chapter is responsible for a Class C municipal civil
infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in Ch. 37 of this
code of ordinances, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37.



   (B)   Authorized city official. The City Manager and/or his or her
designee is hereby designated as the authorized city officials, as defined by
Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances, to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction violations notices as provided by Ch.
37.



(Prior Code, § 99.20)  (Ord. O-146, passed 5-20-2013, effective 5-30-2013)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   AMUSEMENTS



      113.   ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE, AND TELEGRAPH



      114.   HAZARDOUS BUSINESSES



      115.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISING



      116.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      117.   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Licensing



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License required



   110.03   License year



   110.04   Approval of licenses



   110.05   Fees and bond



   110.06   Suspension, revocation, denial of renewal of license



   110.07   Renewal



   110.08   Exhibition of license



   110.09   Transferability; misuse



   110.10   Sales regulations



Businesses



   110.25   Building wreckers



   110.26   House movers and house raisers



   110.27   Scrap material dealers



   110.28   Pawnbrokers



   110.29   Peddlers and hawkers



   110.30   Secondhand merchants



   110.31   Stationary boiler operators and stationary engineers



   110.32   Transient merchants



   110.33   Food vendors



   110.34   Entertainment venues



   110.35   Dance schools



   110.36   Theaters



   110.37   General business license



   110.38   Precious items dealers



 



   110.98   Violations



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



   Tents; licensing, see § 92.10



LICENSING



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, trades, privileges, establishments, and all other kinds of
activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and
appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for non-profit,
private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in
this city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.



   CITY. The City of Saginaw.



   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Saginaw.



   LICENSE and LICENSEE. Include, respectively, the words PERMIT or
PERMITTEE, or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this subchapter or other law
or ordinance.



   PERSON. Includes individual natural persons, partnerships,
joint-venturers, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or
corporations, or any other individual sharing in the profits of the business;
or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or
herself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or
pursuant to law.



   PREMISES. Includes all lands, structures, places, and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in
connection with any such business conducted on such premises.



(Prior Code, § 110.01)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage, advertise, represent himself or
herself as engaged, or be engaged in the operation, conduct, or carrying on
of any trade, profession, business, or privilege for which any license is
required by any provision of this code without first obtaining a license from
the city in the manner provided for in this chapter.



   (B)   The granting of a license or permit to any person operating,
conducting, or carrying on any trade, profession, business, or trades,
professions, businesses, or privileges, which are required by this code to be
licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is
granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for
each such trade, profession, business, or privilege.



   (C)   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any
person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of
any trade, profession, business, or privilege shall not exempt such person
from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such
license or permit is required by this code.



   (D)   Unless otherwise provided in this code, every person required
to obtain a license or permit from the city to engage in the operation,
conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege
shall make application for said license or permit to the City Clerk upon
forms provided by the City Clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation
such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such
license or permit.



   (E)   The applicant or licensee shall have a duty to notify the
office of the City Clerk of any changes in the information contained in an
application which is pending or which was the basis for the issuance of a
license.



(Prior Code, § 110.02)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  LICENSE YEAR.



   (A)   The license year shall begin June 1 of each year and shall
terminate at midnight on May 30 of the following year, except as herein
otherwise provided.



   (B)   Wherever the city’s code of ordinances provides for fees for
periods of less than one year, the licenses shall be issued for the full time
for which the fee is paid.



(Prior Code, § 110.03)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.04  APPROVAL OF LICENSES.



   (A)   No license or permit required by this code shall be issued to
any person who is required by a provision of this code to also have a license
or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence of such
state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have
been paid.



   (B)   No license or permit shall be granted to any applicant
therefor until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this
code applicable to the trade, profession, business, or privilege for which
application for license or permit is made. Neither shall any license or
permit be granted where the certification of any officer of the city or other
official is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification
is made.



   (C)   In all cases where the certification of the Health Officer is
required prior to the issuance of any license or permit by the City Clerk,
such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and finding that
the person making application and the premises in which the person proposes
to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business, or privilege
comply with all the sanitary requirements of the state, county, and city.



   (D)   In all cases where the certification of the Fire Chief or the
Chief’s designee is required prior to issuance of any license or permit by
the City Clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection
and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for
such license or permit proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade,
profession, business, or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of
the state and of the city.



   (E)   (1)   In all cases where the certification of the Police
Chief or the Chief’s designee is required prior to issuance of any license
or permit by the City Clerk, except as is otherwise provided in this chapter,
such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making
application for such license or permit is of good moral character and that
the person will not pose a threat to the public safety, peace, good order,
and decency. In making such determination, the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee shall consider:



         (a)   Penal history. All convictions, if any, reasons
therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her
conviction and/or release. The city police shall be allowed to run a complete
criminal history of the applicant;



         (b)   License history. The license history of the
applicant, if any; whether such person in previously operating in this or
another state under a license has had such license revoked or suspended, the
reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action;



         (c)   General personal history. Such other facts
relevant to the general personal history of the applicant as shall be found
necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant; and



         (d)   No obligation to the city. Whether the applicant
is in default under the provisions of this chapter or indebted or obligated
in any manner to the city except for current taxes.



      (2)   Where the fingerprints of an applicant are required to
be filed, any state fees for the processing of said fingerprints shall be
charged to the applicant in addition to required license fees.



   (F)   In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession,
business, or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license
or permit therefor shall not be issued until the Inspections Division shall
certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by the zoning and building
regulations.



   (G)   No license or permit required by this code shall be issued to
any person without the verification of a valid current driver’s license or
identification card issued by a federal or state government that contains the
persons photograph and signature.



(Prior Code, § 110.04)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.05  FEES AND BOND.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Where the provisions of this code require that the
applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be
furnished in an amount set by City Council, in the amount so required; the
form of such bond shall be acceptable to the designated city official. In
lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more
policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection
as called for in any such bond; any such policies of insurance shall be
approved by the designated city official issuing said license.



      (2)   If the application for any license or permit is approved
by the proper officers of the city, said license or permit shall be granted
upon proper payment for same at the office of the issuing authority.



      (3)   No license fee shall be required from any person exempt
from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all
other provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Whenever any person fails to comply with provisions of
this chapter and has been served a notice of violation of this code and has
failed to achieve compliance as ordered in the time specified, a reinspection
fee set by City Council necessitated by such noncompliance shall be assessed
and paid to the Finance Director within the time period indicated. Each
subsequent additional failure to comply, after additional notices citing the
same violations have been served, shall be subject to an additional
reinspection fee.



   (B)   Schedule established. The fee required to be paid and the
amount of any bond required to be posted to obtain any license to engage in
the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or
privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this code
shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. No license shall be issued
to any applicant unless they first pay to the Finance Director the fee and
posts a bond in the amount required for the type of license desired.



   (C)   Late payment penalty. An additional late charge of 50% of the
base fee shall be incurred as a result of the following:



      (1)   Failure to obtain a business license within 15 days from
the effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter or any applicable
amendment;



      (2)   Failure to obtain a business license within 15 days of
commencement of a business; or



      (3)   Failure to renew a business license by the license
expiration.



(Prior Code, § 110.05)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.06  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, DENIAL OF RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Generally. The City Manager or his or her designee may
suspend, revoke, or deny renewal of a license for cause of any license or
permit issued by the city in the manner herein provided. Divisions (A)
through (D) below shall not apply to denial of new licenses.



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CAUSE. As used in this section shall include:



         (a)   The doing or omitting of any act or permitting any
condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business, or
privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of
this code, or any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which
act, omission, or condition is contrary to the health, morals, safety, or
welfare of the public; is unlawful or fraudulent; is unauthorized or beyond
the scope of the license or permit granted; or is forbidden by the provisions
of this code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city
applicable to the trade, profession, business, or privilege for which the
license or permit has been granted;   



         (b)   The arrest and conviction of the licensee or
permittee for any crime involving moral turpitude;



         (c)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement
made in the application of the license;



         (d)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement
made in the operation of a business;



         (e)   Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and
satisfy the requirements and provisions of this code; and



         (f)   Violation of any state or federal statute or duly
adopted federal, state, or local rule and regulation as relates to the
operation or business pertaining to the license or registration.



   (C)   Notice. Whenever the City Manager or his or her designee shall
have evidence to warrant the suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of
a license or permit, the City Manager or his or her designee shall send a
notice to the licensee or permittee by certified mail to his or her last
known address, which notice shall contain a statement of the charge against
the licensee or permittee and a definite time and place for a hearing of the
charge, and shall order the licensee or permittee to show why the license or
permit should not be suspended, revoked, or denied renewal, and that failure
by the licensee or permittee to appear at the hearing may result in
suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of the license or permit. Unless
the licensee or permittee requests a longer time, the hearing shall be
conducted within five days from the order of suspension, revocation, or
denial of renewal of a license or permit.



   (D)   Hearing.



      (1)   The City Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer to
conduct a public hearing at which the licensee or permittee shall be granted
an opportunity to show cause why the license or permit should not be
suspended, revoked, or denied renewal.



      (2)   In any proceedings under this section, the Hearing
Officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify
official acts. The Hearing Officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to
conclude any matter before them. Due regard shall be shown for the
convenience and necessity of the parties and their representatives.



      (3)   The Hearing Officer shall cause a record of the entire
proceeding to be made by tape recording or by other means of permanent
recording determined appropriate by the Hearing Officer. A transcript of the
proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon
payment of a fee prescribed by the court reporter.



      (4)   The hearing need not be conducted according to the
technical rules of evidence adopted for the courts of record in the state.



      (5)   The Hearing Officer shall take testimony from the
licensee or permittee and any person having knowledge relevant to the
suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a license or permit. Oral
evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation of the party offering
the testimony.



      (6)   Hearsay evidence may be used under the following
guidelines:



         (a)   Hearsay evidence may be used to explain other
direct evidence;



         (b)   Hearsay evidence may be used to support other
direct evidence; and



         (c)   Hearsay evidence shall not be used in itself to
support a finding, unless it would be admissible in civil actions in courts
of competent jurisdiction.



      (7)   Any relevant evidence not otherwise excluded herein
shall be admitted. RELEVANT EVIDENCE shall be defined, for the purpose of
this section, as the type of evidence upon which responsible persons are
accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Such relevant evidence
shall be admitted regardless of whether or not it may be admissible in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction.   



      (8)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded. Each party shall have these rights:



         (a)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (b)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



         (c)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the witness to testify;



         (d)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party
first called the witness to testify;



         (e)   To refute the evidence;



         (f)   To represent himself or herself or to be
represented by anyone of his or her choice who is lawfully permitted to do
so; and



         (g)   To make a closing statement at the conclusion of
the evidentiary portion of the hearing.



      (9)   Failure of the licensee or permittee or his or her
representative to appear at the hearing may be deemed to be an admission by
the licensee or permittee of the facts set forth in the City Manager or his
or her designee’s notice and order.



      (10)   The Hearing Officer shall make written findings of fact
based upon the competent evidence and testimony admitted during the hearing.



      (11)   The Hearing Officer shall make a finding whether or not
the license or permit shall be denied, revoked, or suspended.



   (E)   Appeal upon denial, suspension, or revocation of a license.



      (1)   Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the City
Manager or other Hearing Officer shall have a right to appeal the decision.
The appeal shall be in writing and shall contain a complete statement of the
grounds for the appeal. It must be filed with the City Clerk, together with
an appeal fee, within 14 days after notice of such denial, suspension, or
revocation is mailed to the person’s last known address. This appeal upon
denial includes the denial of a new license.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt of the appeal by the City
Clerk, the Clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing. Unless waived by the
parties, the Clerk shall mail by first-class mail a written notice of the
time and location of the appeal hearing at least five days prior to the
hearing. The appeal hearing shall be an informal hearing held before a panel
consisting of the City Manager or their designee, the affected department
head or their designee, and the City Clerk or his or her designee.



      (3)   The factual record made in the hearing, or license or
permit application record in case of denial, shall constitute the basic
record for the appeal. The appeal panel may, but need not, allow the
presentation of additional evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to
relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The decision of the
appeal panel shall be reached by majority vote and mailed to the parties
within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the
appeal panel shall be final and conclusive.   



      (4)   A party aggrieved by the order or decision of the appeal
panel may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by state statutes and court rules.



   (F)   Immediate suspension. Where the City Manager or his or her
designee shall determine that in the interest of the public health, morals,
safety, or welfare an immediate suspension is necessary, he or she shall
order the same. In such case, the City Manager shall forthwith send a notice
to the licensee or permittee by certified mail to his or her last known
address, which notice shall contain a statement of the charge against the
licensee or permittee and a definite time and place for a hearing of the
charge and shall order the licensee or permittee to show why his or her
license or permit should not be suspended for an additional period of time or
revoked. Unless the licensee or permittee requests a longer time, the City
Manager or his or her designee shall conduct said hearing within five days
from the order of suspension, at which time and place the licensee or
permittee shall have an opportunity to present a defense to the charge and
cross-examine any witnesses and examine all evidence produced against them.
The decision may be appealed pursuant to division (E) above.



   (G)   Fee refund. No fee for any license or permit which has been
suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
refunded.



(Prior Code, § 110.06)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014;
Ord. O-191, passed 7-24-2017, effective 8-3-2017)



§ 110.07  RENEWAL.



   Unless otherwise provided in this code, an application for renewal of a
license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application.



(Prior Code, § 110.07)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.08  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No licensee shall fail to carry any license or permit issued
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon his or her person at
all times when engaged in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any
trade, profession, business, or privilege for which the license was granted;
except that where such trade, profession, business, or privilege is operated,
conducted, or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, said license or
permit shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in said
place of business and shall be produced for examination when applying for a
renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by
any person representing the issuing authority.



   (B)   No licensee shall fail to display a license that is required
by this code.



   (C)   No person shall display any expired license or permit or any
license or permit for which a duplicate has been issued.



(Prior Code, § 110.08)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.09  TRANSFERABILITY; MISUSE.



   (A)   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this code
shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of
this code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by
the provisions of this code, transfer or attempt to transfer their license or
permit to another, nor shall they make any improper use of the same.



   (B)   A change in ownership of a business licensed under this code
shall be immediately reported in writing to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 110.09)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.10  SALES REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No licensee or permittee shall sell or offer for sale any
article or commodity purporting to be in quantities of standard weight or
measure, unless the same shall be actually of the weight or measure purported.



   (B)   No licensee or permittee shall sell or offer for sale any
defective, faulty, incomplete, or deteriorated articles of merchandise unless
the goods are so represented to prospective customers.



(Prior Code, § 110.10)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



BUSINESSES



§ 110.25  BUILDING WRECKERS.



   No person shall engage in the business of wrecking buildings without
first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except
upon certification of the Chief Inspector or their designee that said
applicant is properly qualified and equipped to engage in said business.



(Prior Code, § 110.20)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.26  HOUSE MOVERS AND HOUSE RAISERS.



   (A)   No person shall move any house or other building more than 12
feet in width, or more than 20 feet in length, or more than 13 feet in height
when loaded, onto or through any street, alley, or public place without first
obtaining a house mover’s license.



   (B)   No person shall engage in the business of raising houses or
buildings without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (C)   No license required by this section shall be granted except
upon the certification by the Chief Inspector or his or her designee, and
that said applicant is properly qualified and equipped to raise houses or to
move houses and other objects.



   (D)   Before any house or building more than eight feet in width is
moved through any street, alley, or public places, a permit shall first be
obtained from the Traffic Engineer which shall specify the route which must
be used. No person shall use other than the permitted route.



   (E)   Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefor
shall furnish a license and permit bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with a
surety who is listed on the Department of the Treasury’s listing of
certified companies, which bond shall be conditioned for the due observance
during the time of the license of all laws of the state and all ordinances of
the city. Any person aggrieved by the action of any such licensee shall have
a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both.
Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days after
the expiration or cancellation of any such license or after the termination
of any action upon such bond.



   (F)   The applicant will also furnish the city with a certificate of
insurance evidencing worker’s compensation and general liability insurance.
The limits of liability required will be $1,000,000 per occurrence,
$2,000,000 general aggregate, and a $2,000,000 products and completed
operations aggregate with the city named as an additional insured. This
insurance shall stay in effect for the entire length of the license.



(Prior Code, § 110.21)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.27  SCRAP MATERIAL DEALERS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall engage in the business of dealer of
scrap metal without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this section.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         SCRAP METAL. Ferrous or nonferrous metal, or items that
contain ferrous or nonferrous metal, that are sold or offered for sale for
the value of the ferrous or nonferrous metal they contain rather than for
their original intended use; ferrous or nonferrous metal removed from or
obtained by cutting, demolishing, or disassembling a building, structure, or
manufactured item; or other metal that cannot be used for its original
intended purpose but can be processed for reuse in a mill, foundry, die
caster, or other manufacturing facility.



         SCRAP METAL DEALER. A person that buys scrap metal and is
not a first purchaser. The term includes, but is not limited to, a person
that operates a business as a scrap metal recycler, scrap processor, or other
person that purchases any amount of scrap metal on a regular, sporadic, or
one time basis.



         SCRAP METAL RECYCLER. A person that purchases ferrous or
nonferrous metal that is intended for recycling or reuse.



         SCRAP PROCESSOR. A person utilizing machinery and equipment
and operating from a fixed location, whose principal business is the
processing and manufacturing of iron, steel, nonferrous metals, paper,
plastic, or glass, into prepared grades of products suitable for consumption
by recycling mills, foundries, and other scrap processors.



   (B)   No license shall be issued under this section:



      (1)   Except upon the certification of the Police, Fire, and
Inspection Departments. The certification of the Chief Inspector or his or
her designee shall be given if the premises upon which the licensed business
and the use complies with the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) below
and with the applicable provisions of city zoning regulations;



      (2)   Unless the applicant therefor files with the original
application for the conduct of the business the written consent of 60% of the
owners of the exclusively residential property within 500 feet of the
property where such business is to be conducted; and



      (3)   For conducting such business on a vacant lot or in a
partially enclosed structure, unless all street frontage and all other
property lines affording access by persons or vehicles to such property are
enclosed with a properly maintained and opaque fence at least seven feet
above grade, said fence to be structurally sufficient to withstand any wind,
snow, or other load to which it may reasonably be subjected or unless an
alternate installation accomplishing comparable results as determined
pursuant to division (H) below is maintained. For purposes of this division
(B)(3), any fence shall be deemed to be “opaque” if the open area in each
square foot thereof does not exceed a total of 24 square inches.



   (C)   Each such license granted shall designate the particular place
where said business is to be conducted, and no scrap metal dealer shall
engage in said business at any place other than that so designated.



   (D)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or receive any scrap
metal:



      (1)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



      (2)   On any Sunday;



      (3)   From any person the scrap metal dealer suspects as
having stolen the article or is known to the dealer to be a thief or an
associate of thieves;



      (4)   From any person under the age of 18 years;



      (5)   From any person who is intoxicated; or



      (6)   From any person who has not presented a valid form of
identification.



   (E)   A scrap metal dealer shall not pay any seller in cash. A scrap
metal dealer shall only pay a seller using one of the following methods of
payment in a purchase transaction:



      (1)   A check or money order;



      (2)   An electronic payment card or encrypted receipt that may
only be converted to cash in an automated teller machine that comports with
state law;



      (3)   By bank wire transfer or other electronic delivery, such
as direct deposit; or



      (4)   Barter, trade, or exchange of scrap metal or other
property.



   (F)   No scrap metal dealer shall fail to keep record of all persons
with whom he or she does business and all property coming into his or her
possession. Such records shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:



      (1)   A description of the predominant type(s) of scrap metal
purchased, including a photograph thereof;



      (2)   The weight, quantity, or volume of the scrap metal
purchased, the name of the scale operator, and the name of the employee who
conducted the purchase (if other than the scale operator);



      (3)   The name, address, photograph of, and thumbprint of the
person from whom the article was received;



      (4)   A copy of the operator’s or chauffeur’s license,
military identification card, state identification number, passport, or other
government-issued identification containing a photograph;



      (5)   A signed statement that certifies that the seller is the
owner of or is authorized to sell the scrap metal, is at least 18 years old,
and has not been convicted of a crime involving theft, conversion, or the
sale of scrap metal;



      (6)   If the scrap metal is delivered by a licensed vehicle,
the vehicle plate number of the vehicle;



      (7)   The date and time the article was received; and



      (8)   The method and amount of payment.



   (G)   No licensee shall fail to keep a daily record of all purchases
and sales made by them nor to report same weekly to the Police Chief or the
Chief’s designee, on forms prescribed by said Police Chief. The Police
Chief or the Chief’s designee shall at all times have access to such daily
record.



   (H)   In order that the suitability of alternate methods of
screening and containing the contents of scrap material yards may be
established and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this section, a
Special Board consisting of the then-members of the Board of Appeals on
Zoning shall upon application hear and determine any written appeal made to
it by any person considering himself or herself aggrieved by any action or
decision of the City Clerk or any other official acting under the provisions
of this section. Service of said appeal shall be made on the Secretary of the
Board of Appeals on Zoning within ten days after said action or decision.
Among other factors which may be considered by the Special Board are
remoteness of the location, the use of adjoining property, litter, or other
nuisances, larceny, trespass, and any other criminal offenses related to the
property. The Special Board shall render its decisions and findings in
writing to the City Clerk with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The Special
Board may recommend to the City Council such amendment of this section as it
may determine to be appropriate to protect the public.



(Prior Code, § 110.22)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014;
Ord. O-165, passed 7-20-2015, effective 7-30-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.28  PAWNBROKERS.



   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly operate, conduct, or
engage in the business of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license
therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the
Police Chief and Fire Chief or their designees. For purposes of this section,
a PAWNBROKER shall mean a person who loans money on deposit, or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed
evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property
or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a
stipulated price.



   (B)   No such license shall be granted to any person unless a
complete set of fingerprints of such person is on file in the noncriminal
identification file of the Police Department.



   (C)   Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefor
shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with a
surety who is listed on the Department of the Treasury’s listing of
certified companies to be approved by the City Clerk, which bond shall be
conditioned for the due observance during the time of the license of all laws
of the state and all ordinances of the city. Any person aggrieved by the
action of any such licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for the
recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force
and effect for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of
any such license or after the termination of any action upon such bond.



   (D)   No pawnbroker shall purchase or receive any article:



      (1)   From any person under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   From any person the pawnbroker suspects as having stolen
the article or is known to the pawnbroker to be a thief or an associate of
thieves;



      (3)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



      (4)   On a Sunday;



      (5)   From any person who is intoxicated;



      (6)   When the serial number or other identifying insignia on
the article has been defaced, scratched, melted, or otherwise damaged; or



      (7)   From any person who has not presented a valid form of
identification.



   (E)   No pawnbroker shall accept, offer, or display a pistol for
resale. For purposes of this section, the term PISTOL means any firearm that
is 26 inches or less in length, or is any firearm that by its construction
and appearance conceals it as a firearm. For purposes of this section, a
flaregun is a pistol.



   (F)   (1)   No pawnbroker shall fail to keep record of all
persons with whom he or she does business and all property coming into their
possession. Such records shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:



         (a)   A description of the article;



         (b)   A photograph of the article;



         (c)   A sequential transaction number;



         (d)   Any amount of money loaned on the article;



         (e)   The name, address, general description,
operator’s or chauffeur’s license or state identification number, and
fingerprint of the person from whom the article was received;



         (f)   A copy of the operator’s or chauffeur’s
license or state identification card;



         (g)   The date and time the article was received;



         (h)   The method and amount of payment, if any; and



         (i)   The customer’s signature.



      (2)   The records, the place where the business is carried on,
and all articles of property in that place of business are subject to
examination at any time by the City Attorney, City Police Department, County
Prosecuting Attorney, or Department of State Police.



      (3)   All records must be electronically transmitted to the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. Every pawnbroker must, within 48
hours, transmit to the Chief of Police or his or her designee by means of
electronic transmission through a modem or similar device in such a format
that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the Police
Department’s computerized system all transactions in which the pawnbroker
received articles the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment,
in a format approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. A
transaction reported by electronic transmission under this division (F)(3)
shall not be reported on paper forms unless the Chief of Police or his or her
designee so requests.



      (4)   A pawnbroker need not report electronically transactions
taking place at a business location where the number of transactions in each
90-day period does not exceed ten. A pawnbroker reasonably believing a
location at which he or she conducts a business qualified under this division
(F)(4) for exemption from computerized reporting and wishing to be exempt
from the requirements of this section shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a
declaration to that effect in a form developed by the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee, and once the declaration is signed, so long as the volume
of transactions does not exceed ten in each 90 day period, transactions
taking place at that pawnbroker need not be reported electronically, but
shall be reported on paper forms.



      (5)   All pawnbrokers must have the equipment installed in
their place of business no later than July 31, 2006. The Saginaw Police
Department will require all pawnbrokers to electronically submit data
beginning August 1, 2006.



   (G)   Every pawnbroker must make daily, a sworn statement of all
transactions, describing the items received, and setting forth the name,
address, and description of the person from whom the articles were received.



   (H)   A fee of $2 will be assessed per transaction. The fee
breakdown is as follows: the electronic information data manager and
pawnbroker will each receive $0.50 per transaction and the city will receive
$1 per transaction. The electronic information data manager will assess a
property registration fee of $0.50 for each transaction the pawnbroker
reports, either through batch file upload, directly using the electronic
information data manager’s business interface, or on the electronic
information data manager’s Automated Reporting Service.



   (I)   (1)   A TRANSACTION is defined as a single buy or pawn,
which may involve one or more articles and does not include contract
extensions or claims. This is a per transaction registration fee, not a per
item fee included in the transaction. It is in the pawnbroker’s discretion
to recover the fees from its customers for registering the transaction.
Further, the pawnbroker may choose to incorporate the fee within other fees
associated with the transaction.



      (2)   The pawnbroker will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The
electronic information data manager’s Automated Reporting Service will
generate a list of the billable transactions, which are used for deriving the
invoiced amounts. The above fees are assessed for the use of the standard
electronic information data manager’s Automated Reporting Service.



      (3)   Any custom programming completed for the pawnbroker will
be negotiated on a contract basis and may result in unique licensing
arrangements between the electronic information data manager and the
pawnbroker.



   (J)   Every pawnbroker must comply with requirements and procedures
established by state law, including, but not limited to those governing
memorandums of pawn, interest on loans, storage fees, and title and
possession of pawned articles.



(Prior Code, § 110.23)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014;
Ord. O-162, passed 6-22-2015, effective 7-2-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.29  PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      HAWKER. A peddler who carries their wares, goods, or merchandise
or exhibits them publicly.



      PEDDLER. A person who travels from place to place and who sells
or offers to sell small non-edible wares, goods, or merchandise which
accompany the peddler in traveling about from place to place.



   (B)   A peddler and a hawker must carry a valid license issued by
the city in his or her possession to lawfully conduct business within the
city limits.



   (C)   No licensee shall hawk, peddle, solicit, or sell any goods or
merchandise on or in any public sidewalk, public street, public park, public
parking ramp, public parking lot, or any public building without approval of
the Director of Public Services or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 110.24)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.30  SECONDHAND MERCHANTS.



   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly operate, conduct, or
engage in the business or occupation of dealing in secondhand goods or junk
without first obtaining a license therefor. For the purpose of this section,
DEALING IN SECONDHAND GOODS OR JUNK shall include purchasing, selling,
exchanging, receiving, or storing to facilitate or promote the sale of
secondhand goods or junk of any kind or description; provided, that this
section shall not apply to persons who deal exclusively in used personal
property commonly known as “antiques,” nor shall this section apply to
persons involved in scrap processing, automotive recycling, or a junkyard
that deals principally in industrial scrap and is licensed by the city for
same.



   (B)   No such license shall be granted except upon certification of
the Police Chief or his or her designee and unless a complete set of the
fingerprints of the applicant therefor is on file in the noncriminal
identification file of the Police Department.



   (C)   No licensee shall purchase or receive any article:



      (1)   From any person under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   From any person the licensee suspects as having stolen
the article or is known to the secondhand merchant to be a thief or an
associate of thieves;



      (3)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



      (4)   From any person who is intoxicated; or



      (5)   From any person who has not presented a valid form of
identification.



   (D)   No secondhand merchant shall accept, offer, or display a
pistol for resale. For purposes of this section, the term PISTOL means any
firearm that is 26 inches or less in length, or is any firearm that by its
construction and appearance conceals it as a firearm. For purposes of this
section, a flaregun is a pistol.



   (E)   (1)   A secondhand merchant shall post in a conspicuous
place in or upon its place of business a sign having its name and occupation.



      (2)   No secondhand merchant shall fail to keep record of all
persons with whom he or she does business and all property coming into his or
her possession. Such records shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:



         (a)   The name, description, and photograph of the
property, and the fingerprint, operator’s or chauffeur’s license or state
identification number, registration plate number, and address of the person
from whom the article was purchased and received;



         (b)   A copy of the operator’s or chauffeur’s
license or state identification card;



         (c)   The date and time the purchase or exchange was
made;



         (d)   The method and amount of payment; and



         (e)   The customer’s signature.



      (3)   The records, the place where the business is carried on,
and all secondhand goods or junk in that place of business are subject to
examination at any time by the City Attorney, City Police Department, County
Prosecuting Attorney, or Department of State Police.



      (4)   All records must be electronically transmitted to the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. Every secondhand merchant, within 48
hours, must transmit to the Chief of Police or his or her designee by means
of electronic transmission through a modem or similar device in such a format
that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the City Police
Department’s computerized system approved by the Chief of Police for
identifying secondhand goods or junk, all transactions in which the
secondhand merchant received secondhand goods or junk the preceding day by
trade, purchase, or consignment. A transaction reported by electronic
transmission under this division (E)(4) shall not be reported on paper forms
unless the Chief of Police or his or her designee so requests.



      (5)   A secondhand merchant need not report electronically
transactions taking place at a business location where the number of
transactions in each 90-day period does not exceed ten. A secondhand merchant
reasonably believing a location at which he or she conducts a business is
qualified under this division (E)(5) for exemption from computerized
reporting and wishing to be exempt from the requirements of this section
shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a declaration to that effect in a form
developed by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, and once the
declaration is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed
ten in each 90-day period, transactions taking place at that business need
not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms.



      (6)   All secondhand merchants must have the equipment
installed in their place of business no later than July 31, 2006. The Police
Department will require all secondhand merchants to electronically submit
data beginning August 1, 2006.



   (F)   (1)   A fee of $2 will be assessed per transaction. The fee
breakdown is as follows: the electronic information data manager and
secondhand merchant will each receive $0.50 per transaction and the city will
receive $1 per transaction. The electronic information data manager will
assess the property registration fee of $0.50 for each transaction the
secondhand merchant reports, either through batch file upload, directly using
the electronic information data manager’s business interface, or on the
electronic information data manager’s automated reporting service.



      (2)   A TRANSACTION is defined as a single buy or may involve
one or more secondhand goods or junk and does not include contract extensions
or claims. This is a per transaction registration fee, not a per item fee
included in the transaction. It is in the secondhand merchant’s discretion
to recover the fees from its customers for registering the transaction.
Further, the secondhand merchant may choose to incorporate the fee within
other fees associated with the transaction.



      (3)   The secondhand merchant will be invoiced on a monthly
basis. The electronic information data manager’s automated reporting
service will generate a list of the billable transactions, which are used for
deriving the invoiced amounts. The above fees are assessed for the use of the
standard electronic information data manager’s automated reporting service.
Any custom programming completed for the secondhand merchant will be
negotiated on a contract basis and may result in unique licensing
arrangements between the electronic information data manager and the
secondhand merchant.



   (G)   The articles purchased or received shall be retained by the
secondhand merchant for at least 15 days before disposing of them.



   (H)   Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefore
shall furnish a license and permit bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with
surety who is listed on the Department of Treasury’s listing of certified
companies to be approved by the City Clerk, which bond shall be conditioned
for the due observance during the time of the license of all laws of the
state and all ordinances of the city. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery
of money, damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect
for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any such
license or after the termination of any action upon such bond.



   (I)   Secondhand merchants must comply with requirements and
procedures established by state law.



(Prior Code, § 110.25)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014;
Ord. O-163, passed 6-22-2015, effective 7-2-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.31  STATIONARY BOILER OPERATORS AND STATIONARY ENGINEERS.



   (A)   Definitions:



      (1)   Fuel (energy) systems include:



         (a)   Coal;



         (b)   Fuel oil;



         (c)   Gas - natural/ liquefied petroleum;



         (d)   Electricity;



         (e)   Bio-mass; and



         (f)   Volatile waste fluids.



      (2)   BTU (British Thermal Unit).



      (3)   Types of licenses:



         (a)   Fourth Class license 6,000,000 BTU input (180 HP);



         (b)   Third Class license 12,000,000 BTU input (360 HP);



         (c)   Second Class license 20,000,000 BTU input (600
HP); and



         (d)   First Class license 250,000,000 BTU input (750 HP).



   (B)   No person shall engage in the occupation of operating steam
boilers or steam actuated machinery without first obtaining a license issued
by the city. Such license shall be granted by the Board of Examiners for
Stationary Boiler Operators and Stationary Engineers after it has been
determined by examination that such person is qualified to operate said
boilers or machinery as outlined in the license skill index.



   (C)   Candidates for stationary boiler operator’s license and
stationary engineering license also must have knowledge of the following
types of equipment:



      (1)   Commercial hot water boiler (generator) system and its
heat source;



      (2)   Commercial incinerator systems including recovery
boilers, heat recovery elements of fired or engine driven electrical
generating equipment;



      (3)   Direct fired absorption chillers for air conditioning;
and



      (4)   Direct fired elements for liquid phase or vapor phase
systems employing synthetic organic fluids instead of water as a heat
transfer medium.



   (D)   Candidates must also have knowledge of the following:



      (1)   Safe handling of fuels as promulgated by the National
Fire Protection Agency (NFPA);



      (2)   Guidelines published by the following:



         (a)   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME);



         (b)   American Boiler Manufacturers Association (ABMA);
and



         (c)   American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and
Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRE).



      (3)   Candidates must also have knowledge of up-to-date
requirements for clean air and water by the Environmental Quality Division of
the State Department of Natural Resources. Candidate practical experience
required.



   (E)   The Board of Examiners for stationary boiler operators and
stationary engineers issues four types of licenses based upon the BTU input
of specific pieces of equipment. The licenses are: Fourth, Third, Second, and
First Classes.



   (F)   Applicants for the stationary engineers license must have
passed all four levels of the stationary boiler operators examinations.



   (G)   Candidates for Fourth Class boiler operators license shall
have had on the job training plus orientation from selected textbooks. Third
Class candidates shall have had on the job training and also be encouraged to
enroll in an industrial powerhouse operator training program offered at some
local colleges. To write the Second and First Class boiler operators
examinations, the candidate must have at least one year of boiler room
experience.



      (1)   Stationary engineers license candidates must have at
least two years powerhouse experience. If a candidate fails the examination,
six months must elapse before rewriting the examination.



      (2)   Persons possessing a boiler operator’s license from
another location, but planning on being employed in the city, have one year
to pass the examinations relative to the class of license required for the
equipment under their control.



   (H)   License fees are not graduated, but constant for all skill
levels. The skill levels are: Fourth Class through First Class.



   (I)   License holder need only renew highest level license and not
those of lower levels previously awarded.



   (J)   Licenses are renewable on May 30 of each year regardless of
the date of issuance, i.e., no proration. Any existing license or renewal
thereof may be renewed by mail without reexamination, provided the city
receives the renewal fee within 60 days of notice.



   (K)   The provisions of this section do not apply to steam boilers
and other steam-generating apparatus installed and used in private dwellings,
marine service, railroads, or agriculture (mint processing).



(Prior Code, § 110.26)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.32  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS.



   (A)   No person shall engage temporarily in the business of selling
at retail any goods, wares, or merchandise from any lot, building, room, or
structure of any kind on public or private property within the city without
first obtaining a license/registration therefor.



   (B)   The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not include any persons
selling goods, wares, or merchandise of any description raised, produced, or
manufactured by the individual offering the same for sale nor to persons
handling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products at any established
city market nor to any stands located at the Saginaw Farmers Market. However,
a person conducting business at any established city market shall register
with the City Clerk by completing the application form described in division
(D) below, provided that no fee shall be charged for any such registration.



   (C)   Transaction of business as described in division (A) by any
person for a period of less than six months consecutively shall be prima
facie evidence that such person was a transient merchant within the intent
and meaning of this section.



   (D)   Any person applying for a transient merchant
license/registration shall complete an application form provided by the City
Clerk and pay the required license fee which shall not be refunded if no
license is issued. The application form shall be submitted to the City Clerk
at least 15 days prior to conducting any business requiring a
license/registration hereunder. The application form shall include, but not
be limited to:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   A listing of the precise locations within the city at
which the applicant proposes to conduct business; and



      (3)   The signatures of the owners of the private property
from which the business is to be conducted signifying the approval thereof.



   (E)   (1)   Any honorably discharged member of the Coast Guard,
Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps of the United States, who is a
resident of the state and a veteran of any war in which the United States of
America has been or shall be a participant, shall have the right to hawk,
vend, or peddle their own goods, wares, and merchandise within the city by
procuring a license therefor as herein prescribed. Application for such
license shall be made in the form and manner prescribed in this section, and
upon presentation of a certificate of honorable discharge from the Coast
Guard, Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps of the United States, which
certificate shall show that the applicant is a veteran of any war in which
the United States has been or shall be a participant, a veteran’s license
shall be issued to the applicant without cost.



      (2)   Any person exempt by law from the payment of license
fees as prescribed herein shall comply with all other provisions of this
chapter, and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the city of such
exemption, a license shall be issued to such applicant without requiring the
payment of any fee, and the city shall indicate upon the face of the license
that same was issued pursuant to such exemption without any fee being paid
therefor.



   (F)   No license/registration shall be issued hereunder without the
certification of the Fire Marshal if the applicant proposes to use any
building or structure in conjunction with the business.



   (G)   Before any such license is issued to any person selling furs
such as coats, scarfs, neck pieces, muffs, and the like, or rugs (oriental,
domestic, handwoven, novelty), the applicant therefor shall furnish a license
and permit bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with a surety who is listed on
the Department of the Treasury’s listing of certified companies to be
approved by the City Clerk, which bond shall be conditioned for the due
observance during the time of the license/registration of all laws of the
state and all ordinances of the city. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery
of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect
for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any such
license/registration or after the termination of any action upon such bond.



   (H)   As a condition to obtaining a license to operate as a
transient merchant, the licensee is required to acknowledge in writing
receipt of a summary of materials regarding certain state statutes which
regulate the licensing operation of such a business.



(Prior Code, § 110.27)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.33  FOOD VENDORS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FOOD. Any good or substance, solid or liquid, which is
customarily edible; FOOD includes prepackaged food and non-prepackaged food.



      FOOD VENDOR. A person who travels about from place to place and
who sells or offers to sell food which accompanies the person. FOOD VENDOR
includes each individual assistant to or supplier for another food vendor.
FOOD VENDOR also includes a food vendor who operates from, in, or through a
temporary food service establishment or a mobile restaurant.



      MOBILE RESTAURANT. Any vehicle which is used to transport food
for human consumption from a licensed establishment, commissary, catering
kitchen, food processor, or other similar licensed food service to be served
directly from said vehicle at locations such as factories, construction
projects, or similar prearranged stations on private property.



      NON-PREPACKAGED FOOD. Food which is not wrapped, packaged, or
bottled pursuant to the laws of the state or the United States.
NON-PREPACKAGED FOOD includes, but is not limited to, fruit and vegetables,
hot dogs prepared on location, ice cream served on location in cups or cones,
ices, soft drinks in cups, popcorn, and cotton candy and other confections.



      PREPACKAGED FOOD. Food which is wrapped, packaged, or bottled
pursuant to the laws of the state or the United States.



      SUPPLIER. A person who knowingly provides or supplies a food
vendor by oral or written contract or agreement or other understanding. A
SUPPLIER does not include a person who has no knowledge or agreement that the
food supplied to the food vendor is to be sold or offered for sale by the
food vendor.



      TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment, mobile
or fixed, where food is served or provided for the public on the premises or
elsewhere which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time,
not to exceed two weeks, in connection with a carnival, circus, public
exhibition, sidewalk sale, parade, art show, race, sporting event, festival,
rodeo, horse or dog show, auction, or other similar events.



   (B)   A food vendor shall not be allowed to operate within the city
limits of the city, unless the food vendor is in possession of and carries
with them a valid license issued by the city. The provisions of § 110.29
shall not apply to such licenses.



   (C)   A license shall not be issued by the City Clerk unless the
food vendor supplies the City Clerk with a copy of one and all valid licenses
or certificates required by the county or the state or the United States
pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation.



   (D)   A food vendor shall not be licensed unless they are at least
14 years of age. Applicants under 16 years of age shall submit the written
consent of a parent or guardian. An applicant for such license shall submit
with the applications satisfactory proof that all suppliers furnishing the
food vendor with a vehicle or equipment or goods for the food vendor shall
also have a license under this division (D).



   (E)   No food vendor shall have an exclusive right to any location
in the public streets except as provided in division (G) below; no food
vendor shall be permitted to make a sale within 50 feet of a street
intersection, park on a public roadway except as provided in division (G)
below, park on school property or private property without the consent of the
owner or person in possession thereof or person responsible for permitting
such parking; no food vendor shall enter a public park or public playground
except as provided by division (G) below. A food vendor shall not be
permitted to operate in any congested area where their operations might
impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this division (E), the
judgment of a police officer exercising good faith shall be deemed conclusive
as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.



   (F)   A food vendor may sell or offer for sale any prepackaged foods
as defined in division (A) above if the food vendor also is in compliance
with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.



   (G)   A temporary food establishment or a mobile restaurant may not
park or locate on any public street, public roadway, public park, or any
public property except with the permission of the Director of Public Services
or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 110.29)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.34  ENTERTAINMENT VENUES.



   (A)   Generally. Entertainment venues are defined as special dance
halls and public dance halls. The following operating rules and regulations
shall apply to all entertainment venues in the city:



      (1)   The regulations and licensing requirements applicable to
all businesses in the city shall apply to entertainment venues.



      (2)   No entertainment venues shall be open after 2:00 a.m. on
any day.



      (3)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an
adequate number of qualified security personnel during all operating hours to
maintain peace and order and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws.



      (4)   The licensee shall no assist, aid, abet, permit or
encourage any underage person to violate the curfews set forth in §130.50.



      (5)   The licensee shall ensure that public rest room
facilities are kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (6)   The licensee shall ensure that all doors and windows
which may direct sounds to adjacent properties shall remain closed during
hours of operation.



      (7)   No outdoor music or amplification is permitted.



      (8)   Dancing is only permitted in a well-marked area free of
tables, chairs or other obstacles.



      (9)   No overcrowding on dance floors is permitted.



      (10)   Smoking or drinking on dance floors is prohibited.



      (11)   Intoxicated persons are not permitted on the venue
premises, and the illegal possession or use of any alcoholic liquors or
controlled substances on the venue premises is prohibited.



      (12)   The entertainment venue shall be operated in a manner
that does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or create or
maintain any unlawful conduct, either on the venue premises or on or about
the adjacent businesses, public right-of-way, parking facilities and other
areas open to the public.



      (13)   The licensee shall secure and maintain in force, at its
own expense, comprehensive general liability insurance. This insurance shall
be written in comprehensive occurrence form and shall protect the licensee
against all claims for personal and bodily injuries to members of the public,
damage to public premises and equipment, property of others, and completed
operations arising from any act or omission of licensee, its officers,
employees, agents, representatives and invitees. The liability limits shall
not be less than: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 general aggregate; and
$2,000,000 aggregate for completed operations.



   (B)   Special dance halls.



      (1)   No person shall permit dancing in or on the licensed
premises without first obtaining a special dance hall license as provided in
this code, which license shall also permit the licensee to charge a fee for
entry into the establishment. No such license shall be granted except upon
certification of the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and Chief Inspector or their
designees.



      (2)   No special dance hall license shall be issued until the
application therefor has been approved by the Council when a dance
entertainment permit is being applied for in conjunction with a State of
Michigan Liquor License.



   (C)   Public dance halls; public dances.



      (1)   The term PUBLIC DANCE shall include any dance to which
admission may be gained by the general public but shall not include any dance
to which admission is restricted to invited guests.



      (2)   No person, except a special dance hall licensee, shall
conduct, operate, or maintain any place in or on which public dances are held
without first obtaining a dance hall license in the manner provided in this
code. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the Fire
Chief, Police Chief, and Chief Inspector or their designees.



(Prior Code, § 110.31)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.35  DANCE SCHOOLS.



   No person shall teach dancing without first obtaining a dance school
license in the manner provided for in this code, said license shall designate
the premises in which the school is to be conducted. No such license shall be
granted except upon certification of the Police Chief and Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 110.32)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.36  THEATERS.



   (A)   The word THEATER as used in this code shall include any
structure used primarily for entertainment on the stage or screen.



   (B)   No person shall conduct, maintain, or operate any theater
without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner provided for in this
code. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the Fire
Department.



   (C)   Except for non-profit community theaters and theaters already
established, no license shall be issued unless the City Zoning Division shall
first approve of the parking facilities available to the patrons of said
theater. The minimum requirement of parking space shall be one space to each
four seats contained in the theater, exclusive of parking facilities
available on public streets or alleys.



   (D)   The scale of prices for admission to any theater shall be
framed and hung at some conspicuous place at the entrance of said theater.



   (E)   (1)   The words OUTDOOR THEATER as used in this code shall
include any permitted outdoor entertainment not otherwise specifically
licensed under this code including the exhibition of outdoor motion pictures.



      (2)   (a)   No person shall establish or maintain any
outdoor theater without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk for
each day said outdoor theater is to be conducted.



         (b)   No license shall be granted except upon
certification of the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and the Building Inspector or
their designees, who shall certify as to compliance with the zoning and
building regulations.



(Prior Code, § 110.33)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective
2-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.37  GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to generate
General Fund revenue to offset the cost of enforcing existing city ordinances
and regulate business activity as it relates to zoning, permits, income tax,
property tax, and the like.



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   Generally. All persons who conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on, or manage a business for which a license is not otherwise
required under any other provisions of this code shall be required to obtain
a general business license for said business. A separate license shall be
required for each separate place of business. A business shall include, but
not be limited to, for profit businesses and not for profit businesses.



      (2)   Exceptions.



         (a)   Churches;



         (b)   Public libraries;



         (c)   Schools (public, parochial and charter, K-12); and



         (d)   Government offices or operations.



   (C)   Application. An application for a license required by this
code shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the City Clerk. Each
application shall contain any information as may be required to determine
whether a license should be issued.



   (D)   Issuance of license. The City Clerk shall issue the license
pursuant to the application if:



      (1)   The appropriate fees have been paid according to the fee
schedule as set by City Council and available in the City Clerk’s Office;



      (2)   The Planning and Development Divisions have approved the
use of said parcel for the requested use;



      (3)   There are no outstanding building code violations;



      (4)   There are no outstanding fire code violations; and



      (5)   All current and past due fees and/or fines associated
with the property or applicant have been paid or arrangements have been made
to pay, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Permit fees;



         (b)   Zoning fees;



         (c)   Water or sewer services;



         (d)   Engineering fees;



         (e)   False alarm fees;



         (f)   Property tax (real and personal); and



         (g)   Income tax.



      (6)   Exception. An applicant shall not be denied a license if
neither the applicant, nor any business in which the applicant has an
interest, is responsible for the above-referenced fees and/or fines. As used
in this division (D)(6), the term business shall include sole proprietorships
acting under an assumed name, partnerships, corporations, and limited
liability companies.



   (E)   Term of license, renewal. All licenses provided in this
section shall expire on May 30 following the date of issuance.



   (F)   License fees.



      (1)   Fees; generally. Fees shall be established by City
Council and listed in the Office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   Late payment penalty. An additional late charge of 50%
of the base fee shall be incurred as a result of the following:



         (a)   Failure to obtain a business license within 15
days from the effective date of the ordinance or any applicable amendment;



         (b)   Failure to obtain a business license within 15
days of commencement of a business; or



         (c)   Failure to renew a business license by the license
expiration.



   (G)   Regulations.



      (1)   No license shall be assigned, sold, or transferred, nor
shall any license authorize any person other than the applicant to conduct
business under such license.



      (2)   The applicant or licensee shall have a duty to notify
the City Clerk of any changes in the information contained in an application
which is pending or which was the basis for the issuance of a license.



      (3)   All licenses shall be prominently displayed on the
business premises at all times.



      (4)   No person shall add to, alter, deface, forge, or
counterfeit any license which is required under this section.



      (5)   All licensees shall comply with all applicable city,
state, and federal laws.



   (H)   Suspension and revocation. In addition to any other penalty
provided for in this code or other city ordinances, the City Clerk may
suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this section for:



      (1)   Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter
and any applicable ordinances; and



      (2)   Failure to allow required inspection. The City Clerk
shall notify the licensee that his or her license has been suspended or
revoked and the reason for said suspension or revocation. Notification may be
made by first-class mail and shall state that the licensee has the right to
appeal the suspension or revocation provided the appeal is made in writing to
the City Clerk within ten days of notification. Upon receipt of the written
appeal the City Clerk shall proceed with scheduling an appeal hearing as
provided for in divisions (I) and (J) below.



   (I)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the above described hearing shall
be served on the licensee by first-class mail and posting at the location of
the licensed business not less than five days before the date of said hearing.



   (J)   Hearings. The hearing shall be conducted by the Chief
Inspector or his or her designee affording the licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend the charges. The Chief Inspector shall make a final
decision in writing, including the reasons for such decision and shall serve
said decision on the licensee within ten days after conclusion of the hearing.



   (K)   Summary suspension. Where the Chief Inspector presents to the
City Manager sufficient evidence demonstrating probable cause to believe that
the licensee has violated the provisions of this code or the laws of the
United States or the state, and that said violation will immediately threaten
the public health, safety, or welfare, the City Manager may, upon the
issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without prior notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed and the
license summarily suspended pending a public hearing and determination on
suspension or revocation. Said hearing shall be commenced not more than 17
days following entry of such an order, unless the licensee shall agree to a
longer period of time. Upon entry of an order of summary suspension, the
licensee shall be served with a copy of the order and notice of violation and
hearing in the manner provided in this section.



   (L)   Penalties and remedies. In addition to any other penalty or
remedy provided for in this code, or other city ordinances, the City Clerk
shall have the authority to take the following actions against any business
which fails to obtain or renew a business license:



      (1)   Cause to be issued a Class C civil infraction citation.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation
occurs; and



      (2)   Use whatever means necessary to cause said business to
cease operations at its location reasonable and proportional to the manner,
length, and circumstances surrounding the business’ failure to renew or
obtain a license, with reasonable costs of same charged to the business
owner. Upon restoration or renewal of the business’ license and the
satisfaction of any outstanding fees, fines, or costs incurred by the city
for actions taken as provided herein, the business owner shall notify the
city, in writing, of the date they again commence operations.



   (M)   Severability. The provisions of this section shall be
interpreted so as not to be in conflict with the laws of the state or any
other limitations imposed by law. In the event, however, that any section,
provision, sentence, or clause of this section is declared unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, that determination will not affect the
other remaining provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 110.34)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014;
Ord. O-205, passed 1-7-2019, effective 1-17-2019)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.38  PRECIOUS ITEMS DEALERS.



   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly operate, conduct, or
engage in the business or occupation of dealing in precious items without
first obtaining a license therefor. For the purpose of this section, a person
is a DEALER OF PRECIOUS ITEMS if that person, in whole or in part, engages in
the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying and
receiving precious items from the public.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a PRECIOUS ITEM means jewelry, a
precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious item
does not include the following:



      (1)   Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or on
behalf of, a government or private mint;



      (2)   Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and
commodity exchanges;



      (3)   Industrial machinery or equipment;



      (4)   An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer
where the item was purchased and that is accompanied by a valid sales receipt;



      (5)   An item which is received for alterations, redesign, or
repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and is returned
directly to the customer;



      (6)   An item which does not have a jeweler’s identifying
mark or serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5; and



      (7)   Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold,
silver, or platinum that are recoverable as by-product.



   (C)   No such license shall be granted except upon certification of
the Police Chief or his or her designee and unless the names, addresses, and
thumbprint of the dealer and all agents or employees of the dealer are on
file in the noncriminal identification file of the Police Department. Such
certifications shall be posted in a conspicuous place at dealer’s place of
business.



   (D)   Any person who is convicted of buying, receiving, possessing,
concealing, or aiding in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted
money, goods, or property shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer for a
period of one year after conviction of a misdemeanor offense or five years
after conviction of a felony offense.



   (E)   No licensee shall purchase or receive any article:



      (1)   From any person under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   From any person the licensee suspects as having stolen
the article or is known to the dealer to be a thief or an associate of
thieves;



      (3)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



      (4)   From any person who is intoxicated; or



      (5)   From any person who has not presented a valid form of
identification.



   (F)   (1)   A dealer shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon
its place of business a sign having its name and occupation.



      (2)   No precious item dealer shall fail to keep record of all
persons with whom he or she does business and all property coming into his or
her possession. Such records shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:



         (a)   The name, description (including the name of the
maker, type of metal or gem, and all letters and marks inscribed) and
photograph of the property, and the thumbprint, operator’s or chauffeur’s
license or state identification number, registration plate number, and
address of the person from whom the article was purchased and received;



         (b)   A copy of the operator’s or chauffeur’s
license or state identification card;



         (c)   The date or time the purchase or exchange was made;



         (d)   The method and amount of payment; and



         (e)   The customer’s signature.



      (3)   All reports must be electronically transmitted to the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. Every dealer, within 48 hours, must
transmit to the Chief of Police or his or her designee by means of electronic
transmission through a modem or similar device in such a format that the data
is capable of direct electronic entry into the City Police Department’s
computerized system, all transactions in which the dealer received precious
items the preceding day. A transaction reported by electronic transmission
under this division (F)(3) shall not be reported on paper forms unless the
Chief of Police or his or her designee so requests.



   (G)   (1)   A fee of $2 will be assessed per transaction. The fee
breakdown is as follows: the electronic information data manager and dealer
will each receive $0.50 per transaction and the city will receive $1 per
transaction. The electronic information data manager will assess the property
registration fee of $0.50 for each transaction the dealer reports, either
through batch file upload, directly using the electronic information data
manager’s business interface, or on the electronic information data
manager’s Automated Reporting Service.



      (2)   A transaction is defined as a single buy, which may
involve one or more precious items. This is a per transaction registration
fee, not a per item fee included in the transaction. It is in the dealer’s
discretion to recover the fees from its customers for registering the
transaction. Further, the dealer may choose to incorporate the fee within
other fees associated with the transaction.



      (3)   The dealer will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The
electronic information data manager’s automated reporting service will
generate a list of the billable transactions, which are used for deriving the
invoiced amounts. The above fees are assessed for the use of the standard
electronic information data manager’s automated reporting service. Any
custom programming completed for the dealer will be negotiated on a contract
basis and may result in unique licensing arrangements between the electronic
information data manager and the dealer.



   (H)   The articles purchased or received shall be retained by the
dealer for at least nine days before disposing of them.



   (I)   Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefore
shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with surety
who is listed on the Department of Treasury’s listing of certified
companies to be approved by the City Clerk, which bond shall be conditioned
for the due observance during the time of the license of all laws of the
state and all ordinances of the city. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery
of money, damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect
for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any such
license or after the termination of any action upon such bond.



   (J)   Every precious items dealer must comply with requirements and
procedures established by state law.



(Prior Code, § 110.35)  (Ord. O-164, passed 6-22-2015, effective
7-2-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person in violation of this chapter may be subject to one or more
of the following criminal or civil remedies:



   (A)   Penalty. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in § 110.99.



   (B)   Revocation or suspension of license. The license or permit is
subject to revocation or suspension as set forth in greater specificity
within this chapter.



   (C)   Nuisance; injunction. The city may be entitled to injunctive
relief if the activity constitutes a public nuisance or nuisance per se.



(Prior Code, § 110.98)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a Class C municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as
set forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased
fines as provided by Ch. 37. Each violation and each day of failure to comply
with any provision of the chapter shall constitute a separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 110.99)  (Ord. O-156, passed 2-17-2014, effective 2-27-2014)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



Licenses



   111.15   License required



   111.16   Application for license



   111.17   Appeal upon denial of an alcoholic liquor establishment
license



   111.18   License revocation or denial of renewal



   111.19   License fees



Regulations



   111.30   Premises and conduct thereon



   111.31   Outdoor lighting



   111.32   Dispensing of alcoholic beverages



   111.33   Suspension of sale in



Administration and Enforcement



   111.45   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The meaning of “alcoholic liquor”, “beer”, “wine”,
“spirits”, “club”, “license”, “person”, “vendor”, and
“hotel”, when used in this chapter, shall be defined in the Michigan
Liquor Control Code, Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L. §§ 436.1101 et
seq., hereinafter referred to as the “Liquor Law”.



(Prior Code, § 111.01)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995)



LICENSES



§ 111.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, unless first properly licensed by the state (when license is
required), by himself or herself or another, shall sell, furnish, give, or
deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person.



(Prior Code, § 111.10)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995)



§ 111.16  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   To obtain a license for an alcoholic liquor establishment the
applicant must:



      (1)   Have the qualifications required by a vendor under the
liquor law; and



      (2)   Supply to the City Council in writing such information
as it may require relating to the fitness of the applicant to engage in the
liquor business.



   (B)   The City Manager will submit the application to the
appropriate city departments for reports on the information set forth
therein, and for such additional information as the City Council may require,
including a report from the Police Department as to the penal history of the
applicant, if any. The applicant must meet all of the requirements of §
110.04.



   (C)   The City Manager will review the application and departmental
reports and submit them to the City Council with a recommendation as to
approval/disapproval of the license.



   (D)   The City Council will act upon the recommendations of the City
Manager if the applicant is qualified and is of good moral character pursuant
to § 110.04(E).



   (E)   Exception: local approval (City Manager and City Council) is
not required for an SDD and SDM license application, transfer, or renewal.
These licenses are strictly regulated and approved by the State Liquor
Control Commission in conjunction with the City Police Department, County
Department of Health, or State Department of Agriculture. The local governing
body, or its designee, may however, notify the Liquor Control Commission
within 15 days of receipt of notification from the state of the pending
application, if the applicant’s location will not be in compliance with all
appropriate state and local building, plumbing, zoning, fire, sanitation and
health laws and ordinances, or if the applicant is considered ineligible due
to other factors. All conditions of noncompliance must be outlined in detail,
indicating the laws and ordinances applicable to the case, with a copy of the
law and ordinance submitted with the notification. In addition to the
foregoing, the City Council reserves the right to recommend revocation or
denial of renewal of an application for SSD or SDM licenses as set forth in
§ 111.18.



(Prior Code, § 111.11)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995;
Ord. O-72, passed 8-25-2008, effective 9-4-2008)



§ 111.17  APPEAL UPON DENIAL OF AN ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved with the decision of the City Council
shall have the right to appeal the decision. The appeal shall be in writing
and shall contain a complete statement of the grounds for the appeal. It must
be filed with the City Clerk, together with an appeal fee, within 14 days
after notice of such denial has been mailed to the applicant’s last known
address.



   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt of the appeal by the City
Clerk, the Clerk shall schedule the appeal for the next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting. The City Council may allow the applicant to address the
Council, but is not compelled to do so. The City Clerk will advise the
applicant by registered mail when the appeal will be considered by the City
Council. The City Clerk will advise the applicant of the decision of City
Council by registered mail.



   (C)   An applicant aggrieved by any decision of the City Council may
appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by state
statutes and court rules after notification of the decision of the City
Council by a notice from the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 111.12)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995;
Ord. D-1780, passed 11-4-1996, effective 11-14-1996)



§ 111.18  LICENSE REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF RENEWAL.



   (A)   Criteria for revocation or denial or renewal of alcoholic
liquor establishment licenses. The City Council may recommend revocation or
denial of renewal of a license or related permit to the State Liquor Control
Commission upon a determination by it that based upon a preponderance of the
evidence presented at a public hearing conducted in accordance with the
procedure set forth in division (B) below, if any of the following exists:



      (1)   A licensee has engaged in any of the prohibited
activities specified in § 111.30;



      (2)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any if the following:



         (a)   Existing violations of the building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire, or other applicable regulatory
provisions;



         (b)   A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of
the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the
peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood;



         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of
the licensed premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties; and/or



         (d)   Entertainment on the licensed premises without a
permit and/or entertainment which disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility
in the neighborhood of the licensed premises.



      (3)   Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the
licensed premises by the city’s agents or employees in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter; and



      (4)   Violation of city ordinances and rules, State Liquor
Control Commission rules and regulations, or state law.



   (B)   Procedure for recommendation of denial of renewal and
revocation of licenses and related permits.



      (1)   If the Chief of Police determines that any licensee has
committed a violation of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall prepare a
report in writing specifying the specific factual details of such violations;
the particular chapter sections violated; and any other information or
recommendation relevant to a proper determination by the City Council as to
the nature of such violations and the appropriate action to be taken by
Council.



      (2)   The Chief of Police shall file the original report
prepared under division (B)(1) above with the City Council, and serve a copy
of such report upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee
personally or by registered mail.



      (3)   Within 20 days from the date such report has been filed
with the City Council, the City Clerk shall set a date for a hearing before
Council on the alleged violations and for a determination by Council as to
whether or not Council shall request and recommend to the State Liquor
Control Commission that the Commission revoke or deny the renewal of any
license or permit held in conjunction with such license. Notice of this
hearing shall be served by the City Clerk upon the licensee or its authorized
agent or employee personally or by registered mail not less than seven days
before the scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the licensee
of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before City
Council.



      (4)   At all such hearings, the licensee shall have the legal
right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any
adverse witnesses by being allowed to present live witnesses in its own
behalf, by being allowed to present other evidence in its own behalf, and by
being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel, in
its own behalf.



      (5)   The City Council shall prepare a written statement of
its findings, which may be formal or informal in nature, within a reasonable
time, not to exceed 60 days, after the conclusion of all such hearings. Such
statement of findings may be embodied in a resolution as described in
division (B)(6) below, if Council determines that objection to renewal or
request for revocation of a license or related permit is appropriate.



      (6)   If the City Council determines after due notice and
proper hearing upon a preponderance of the evidence presented that a
violation of this chapter has been committed by a licensee, or that, even if
no violation has been demonstrated, nevertheless the interests of public
health, safety, or welfare warrant that Council object to renewal or request
revocation of any existing license or related permit issued to such licensee,
the Council may adopt a resolution recommending to the State Liquor Control
Commission that it deny renewal or revoke any such license or related permit
to such licensee.



      (7)   Within ten days of the Council’s final approval of any
such resolution, the City Clerk shall forward a copy thereof to the State
Liquor Control Commission, as Council’s official notice of objection to
renewal or request for revocation of any existing license or related permit.



      (8)   An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the City
Council may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by state statutes and court rules after notification of the decision
of the City Council by a notice from the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 111.13)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995;
Ord. D-1780, passed 11-4-1996, effective 11-14-1996)



§ 111.19  LICENSE FEES.



   No application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor, no
application for the transfer of any license to sell alcoholic liquor, and no
application for transfer of location of any licensed business shall be
considered by the Council unless accompanied by a fee established by Council
and posted in the Office of the City Clerk to cover the city’s cost of the
necessary investigation to enable the Council to act on such application
request.



(Prior Code, § 111.14)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995)



REGULATIONS



§ 111.30  PREMISES AND CONDUCT THEREON.



   No licensee shall permit on the premises:



   (A)   Spirits to be consumed if licensed to sell only beer or wine,
or both;



   (B)   Dancing open to the public with or without an admission
charge, unless holding a special dance hall license;



   (C)   Any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and
good order of the neighborhood;



   (D)   Conduct which is criminal under state laws or city ordinances;



   (E)   Any gambling, or the placing or using of any gambling
apparatus or paraphernalia thereon;



   (F)   Any lewd, obscene, or immoral exhibition or entertainment, or
other conduct likely to corrupt the public morals;



   (G)   Any employee to fraternize or drink alcoholic liquor with any
of the patrons;



   (H)   The obstruction of the public view by the use of drawn shades
or blinds or screens, either permanent or movable; and/or



   (I)   Lighting which does not provide sufficient light so that all
patrons can be clearly seen.



(Prior Code, § 111.25)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective
5-1-1995)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 111.31  OUTDOOR LIGHTING.



   Every holder of a license for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
liquor on the premises shall provide and maintain outdoor lighting which
provides a minimum of three-tenths footcandles per square foot measured at
the ground level surface throughout all customer parking areas, including
access and egress driveways, utilized by the licensee in the operation of the
licensed business; all yard areas existing in connection with the licensed
premises but not to exceed the minimum yard areas as defined in the zoning
regulations; and the space between the lot line or lines and the abutting
curb line or curb lines. Such illumination shall direct the light away from
adjacent buildings or portions of buildings used in any part for residential
purposes. Every reasonable precaution shall be taken to confine the lighting
to the required area.



(Prior Code, § 111.26)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995)



§ 111.32  DISPENSING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No licensee, by himself or herself or another, shall sell, furnish,
give, or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person:



   (A)   Who is so intoxicated as not to be in control of all his or
her faculties;



   (B)   Who has not attained the age prescribed by the Liquor Law or
by the Liquor Control Commission;



   (C)   On any day during the hours not permitted by the Liquor Law or
by the Liquor Control Commission; and/or



   (D)   For consumption on the premises on any Sunday, from the Sunday
morning closing hour of the preceding Saturday set by the Liquor Law or by
the Liquor Control Commission until 12:00 noon of said Sunday.



(Prior Code, § 111.27)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective
5-1-1995)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 111.33  SUSPENSION OF SALE IN.



   The Council shall have the right at any time by resolution to suspend
the sale, furnishing, gift, or delivery of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises throughout the entire city or any part thereof whenever the
Council deems such action necessary by reason of any public emergency.



(Prior Code, § 111.28)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 111.45  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   General prohibition. No person, as defined in the Liquor Law,
shall violate any law of the state, any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Liquor Control Commission, or any ordinance or regulation of the city.



   (B)   Revocation or non-renewal. In addition to the penalties
provided for in § 30.99, if a person who is the licensed owner or operator
of an alcoholic liquor establishment violates, or allows another person to
violate, any ordinance or regulation of the city, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the Liquor Control Commission, or any law of the state on or
involving the premises licensed by said Commission, the City Council may
recommend to said Commission the revocation or non-renewal of the license
pursuant to § 111.18.



   (C)   License denial. In addition to the penalties provided in §
30.99, if a person who has applied for the issuance of a new license or the
transfer of an existing license by the Liquor Control Commission violates, or
allows another person to violate, any ordinance or regulation of the city,
any rule or regulation promulgated by the Liquor Control Commission, or any
law of the state on or involving the premises for which the new license is
sought, or on or involving the premises from which or to which the transfer
of an existing license is sought, the City Council may recommend to said
Commission that the application be denied pursuant to §§ 111.16 and 111.17
for new licenses and § 111.18 for existing licenses.



(Prior Code, § 111.40)  (Ord. D-1739, passed 4-3-1995, effective 5-1-1995)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Prohibited conduct



   112.02   Regulation of certain amusements



Outdoor Amusements



   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   Licenses



   112.17   Security personnel



   112.18   Access and traffic control



   112.19   Parking



   112.20   Overnight accommodations



   112.21   Illumination



   112.22   Insurance



   112.23   Bonding



   112.24   Fire protection



   112.25   Sound-proofing equipment



   112.26   Fencing



   112.27   Communications



   112.28   Other conditions



   112.29   Violations



 



   112.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   No person shall permit any illegal occupation or business, or any lewd,
indecent, or obscene conduct, in or about any premises owned or occupied by
him or her and used for any business or amusement to which the provisions of
this chapter are applicable.



(Prior Code, § 112.01)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  REGULATION OF CERTAIN AMUSEMENTS.



   (A)   It is hereby declared that amusements commonly known as the
following may constitute public nuisances contrary to the safety, health,
morals, and welfare of the public and no person shall conduct, participate
in, attend, or sell or purchase tickets for any such affair in the city
without prior approval of the City Council:



      (1)   Carnivals, including medicine shows;



      (2)   Street fairs or street shows;



      (3)   Shooting galleries;



      (4)   Endurance contests or marathons; and



      (5)   Freak shows, where artificial or natural curiosities are
exhibited.



   (B)   (1)   In deciding whether to approve or disapprove of any
of the amusements set forth in division (A) above, the City Council shall
consider the following criteria:



         (a)   The size, location, normal use, and purpose of the
area proposed for the amusement and surrounding areas in determining its
suitability for the intended amusement;



         (b)   The availability of the proposed location on the
day and time requested;



         (c)   Whether the proposed activity will entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense for police operations or the extension of
other city services; and



         (d)   Whether the proposed activity and use of the area
would unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public
welfare in the vicinity by creating disruptive noise, overcrowding the area,
or unreasonably interfering with normal activities in the area.



      (2)   In no event shall approval be given where a proposed
activity would violate any state law or city ordinance or regulation.



      (3)   In no event shall the sex, race, color, creed, or
national origin of an applicant for approval be considered.



   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to
prohibit concessions operating under the auspices of the County Agricultural
Society on the fairgrounds during the time the county fair is in exhibition
or at such other time as shall be approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 112.02)  (Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective
5-19-1977)  Penalty, see § 112.99



OUTDOOR AMUSEMENTS



§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTENDANT. Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by
the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment
of money for admission.



   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this
subchapter.



   OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY or ASSEMBLY. Any event, attended by more than 5,000
attendants, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public
show, display, entertainment, amusement, or other exhibition, including, but
not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals, or
similar gatherings, but does not mean:



      (1)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by a
governmental unit or agency on publicly-owned land or property;



      (2)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity
qualifying for tax exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in
the Income Tax Act, Public Act 281 of 1967, being M.C.L. § 206.201; or



      (3)   An event held entirely within the confines of a
permanently enclosed and covered structure.



   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
organization.



   SPONSOR. Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to be
conducted an outdoor assembly.



(Prior Code, § 112.15)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.16  LICENSES.



   (A)   License required. A person shall not sponsor, operate,
maintain, conduct, or promote an outdoor assembly in the city unless he or
she shall have first made application for and obtained, as hereinafter
prescribed, a license for each such assembly.



   (B)   Application for license. Application for a license to conduct
an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner
as prescribed by the City Clerk and shall be made at least 60 days prior to
the date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable fee established by Council and posted in the Office of the
City Clerk and shall include at least the following:



      (1)   The name, age, residence, and mailing address of the
person making the application. (Where the person making the application is a
partnership, corporation, or other association, this information shall be
provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the
person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be
filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders
having financial interest greater than $500.);



      (2)   A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed
assembly;



      (3)   The address, legal description, and proof of ownership
of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where
ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he or she shall submit
an affidavit from the owner indicating his or her consent to the use of the
site for the proposed assembly;



      (4)   The date or dates and hours during which the proposed
assembly is to be conducted; and



      (5)   An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected
at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of
the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering
or other method which will be used for accounting purposes.



   (C)   Requirements.



      (1)   Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed
explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the
prospective licensee’s plans to provide for the following:



         (a)   Police and fire protection;



         (b)   Food and water supply and facilities;



         (c)   Health and sanitation facilities;



         (d)   Medical facilities and services, including
emergency vehicles and equipment;



         (e)   Vehicle access and parking facilities;



         (f)   Illumination facilities;



         (g)   Communication facilities;



         (h)   Noise control and abatement;



         (i)   Facilities for clean up and waste disposal; and



         (j)   Insurance and bonding arrangements.



      (2)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a
map or maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly.



   (D)   Departmental review. On receipt by the Clerk, copies of the
application shall be forwarded to the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health
Officer, and City Engineer. Such officers and officials shall review and
investigate matters relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt
thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the Council.



   (E)   Issuance of license. Within 30 days of the filing of the
application, the Council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the
issuance of, or deny a license. The Council shall require that adequate
security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where
conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license or where
a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice thereof must be
mailed to the applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the
reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice.



   (F)   Denial of license. A license may be denied if:



      (1)   The applicant fails to comply with any or all
requirements of this subchapter, or with any conditions imposed pursuant
hereto, or with any other applicable provisions of state or local law; or



      (2)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document.



   (G)   License contents; posting. A license shall specify the name
and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the
maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license, and
any other conditions imposed pursuant to this subchapter. It shall be posted
in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly, and shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.



   (H)   Suspension. The City Manager is hereby empowered to order the
immediate suspension of a license for an assembly issued hereunder whenever
he or she shall determine that the health, morals, safety, or welfare of the
public is endangered by said assembly or whenever the licensee, or his or her
employees or agents, fail, neglect, or refuse to fully comply with any and
all provisions and requirements set forth in this subchapter, or with any and
all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other laws incorporated
herein by reference. In such case the City Manager shall forthwith send such
notice of suspension to the licensee either by registered mail at his or her
last known address or shall have such notice served personally on the
licensee.



   (I)   Revocation. The City Council may revoke a license whenever the
licensee, or his or her employees or agents, fail, neglect, or refuse to
fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements of this subchapter
or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other
laws incorporated herein by reference.



(Prior Code, § 112.16)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.17  SECURITY PERSONNEL.



   The licensee shall employ at his or her own expense such security
personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate
security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly
and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around
the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the Police Chief
is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be
provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly.



(Prior Code, § 112.17)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.18  ACCESS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   The licensee shall provide for adequate ingress to and egress from the
premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the
premises. Access to the premises shall be limited to a public highway which
is part of the state trunk line system and other city streets that compose
the system of major streets. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided,
designated, and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment,
helicopter, and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license,
the City Engineer must approve the licensee’s plan for access and traffic
control.



(Prior Code, § 112.18)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.19  PARKING.



   The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all
motor vehicles, but in no case shall he or she provide less than one
automobile space for every four attendants.



(Prior Code, § 112.19)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.20  OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS.



   A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall make provisions for overnight
accommodations which do not violate any state or local law.



(Prior Code, § 112.20)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.21  ILLUMINATION.



   The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied
areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The
licensee’s lighting plan shall be approved by the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 112.21)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.22  INSURANCE.



   Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public
liability and property damage insurance in amounts deemed sufficient by the
City Manager, from a company or companies approved by the Commissioner of
Insurance of the State of Michigan, which insurance shall insure liability
for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from
the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance
shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the
duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an
endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the City
Clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of
said insurance. Such policy of insurance shall be approved as to substance
and form by the City Attorney prior to the issuance of any license specified
in this subchapter and shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 112.22)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.23  BONDING.



   Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall obtain from a
corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state a corporate
surety bond in the amount of $50,000 in a form to be approved by the City
Attorney, conditioned upon the licensee’s faithful compliance with all of
the terms and provisions of this subchapter and all applicable provisions of
state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers,
and employees, and the City Council against any and all loss, injury, or
damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly and
which shall indemnify the owners or property adjoining the assembly site for
any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other
waste resultant from the assembly.



(Prior Code, § 112.23)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.24  FIRE PROTECTION.



   The licensee shall, at his or her own expense, take adequate steps as
determined by the Fire Chief to ensure fire protection.



(Prior Code, § 112.24)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.25  SOUND-PROOFING EQUIPMENT.



   Sound producing equipment, including, but not limited to, public
address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments, and other
recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises in a manner which
violates the provisions of §§ 94.045 through 94.047.



(Prior Code, § 112.25)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970;
Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)



§ 112.26  FENCING.



   The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site of
sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the
maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have
sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and
egress.



(Prior Code, § 112.26)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.27  COMMUNICATIONS.



   The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use
on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000 attendants.



(Prior Code, § 112.27)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.28  OTHER CONDITIONS.



   Prior to the issuance of a license, the Council may impose any other
conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare, and
property of attendants or of the citizens of the city.



(Prior Code, § 112.28)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.29  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee, or his or her employee or agent,
to knowingly:



   (A)   Advertise, promote, or sell tickets to, conduct, or operate an
assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided;



   (B)   Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a
public or private nuisance;



   (C)   Conduct or permit within the assembly any obscene display,
exhibition, show, play, entertainment, or amusement;



   (D)   Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a
disturbance in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct;



   (E)   Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell, or possess
intoxicating liquor while on the premises; or



   (F)   Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell, or possess any
controlled substances or narcotic drugs as defined in the Public Health Code,
Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. §§ 333.7101 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 112.29)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any of the enumerated violations in § 112.29 is a
separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately enjoinable in the circuit
courts, and, is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.



      (2)   Any of the violations listed in § 112.29 is a
sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate
enjoining in the Circuit Court of the assembly.



(Prior Code, § 112.29)  (Ord. D-948, passed 9-14-1970, effective 9-24-1970)



CHAPTER 113:  ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE, AND TELEGRAPH



Section



   113.01   Conduit districts



   113.02   Poles and wires in conduit districts



   113.03   Emergencies, temporary permits in case of



   113.04   Records of installation



   113.05   Use of telephone and telegraph conduits by the city



§ 113.01  CONDUIT DISTRICTS.



   The following streets or territory shall be within the electric power,
telephone, and telegraph conduit districts of the city:



   (A)   District Number One. The territory bounded by the following
streets inclusive:



      (1)   Southerly - Janes Avenue;



      (2)   Easterly - Second Avenue;



      (3)   Northerly - Johnson Street; and



      (4)   Westerly - Washington Avenue.



   (B)   District Number Two. Michigan Avenue from Genesee Avenue to
Union Avenue and from Ames Street to Adams Street; Hamilton Street from Ames
Street to Adams Street; Court Street, from the west end of Court Street
Bridge to Fayette Street; Genesee Avenue from the west end of the Genesee
Avenue Bridge to the east line of Schaefer Street.



(Prior Code, § 113.01)  (Ord. D-539, passed 10-3-1960, effective 10-13-1960)



§ 113.02  POLES AND WIRES IN CONDUIT DISTRICTS.



   No person shall set any electric power, telephone, or telegraph pole
within the conduit districts established by this chapter nor place any cable
or wire on any such pole already erected in such districts except that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to:



   (A)   Wires placed on distributing poles;



   (B)   Wires strung across any street in the conduit districts from
poles situated upon cross streets and outside of the streets situated within
the conduit districts;



   (C)   Traffic light installations at intersections; or



   (D)   Public street lighting poles and public street lighting cables
normally carrying not over 260 volts.



(Prior Code, § 113.02)  (Ord. D-539, passed 10-3-1960, effective
10-13-1960)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 113.03  EMERGENCIES, TEMPORARY PERMITS IN CASE OF.



   (A)   In case of an emergency or unusual situation which would make
it impossible for an electric, telephone, or telecommunications utility to
continue service or unreasonably expensive for it to provide temporary
service, the Director of Public Services may issue a temporary permit for the
erection of poles and wires in a conduit district as he or she may find to be
reasonably necessary to the continuance of such service in said emergency or
to the providing of such temporary service.



   (B)   Each such temporary permit shall expire upon the termination
date therein stated, at which time such emergency or temporary service shall
be discontinued and the poles and wires erected thereunder removed. If no
expiration date is stated in any such permit, it may be terminated by the
Director of Public Services at any time upon finding that the conditions
which justified its granting no longer exist, whereupon all poles and wires
placed thereunder shall, within such reasonable time as may be fixed by the
Director of Public Services, be removed.



(Prior Code, § 113.03)  (Ord. D-539, passed 10-3-1960, effective 10-13-1960)



§ 113.04  RECORDS OF INSTALLATION.



   No person shall fail to file with the Director of Public Services a
record of all underground wiring laid in such conduit districts. Records
shall be in a pre-approved form acceptable to the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 113.04)  (Ord. D-539, passed 10-3-1960, effective 10-13-1960)



§ 113.05  USE OF TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CONDUITS BY THE CITY.



   No person empowered to install wires and cables in telephone and
telegraph conduits shall fail to provide free of cost to the city one duct in
each conduit excavation for the use of the city.



(Prior Code, § 113.05)  (Ord. D-539, passed 10-3-1960, effective 10-13-1960)



CHAPTER 114:  HAZARDOUS BUSINESSES



Section



General Regulations



   114.01   Dry cleaning and dry dyeing



   114.02   Garage and repair shops



Gasoline Service Stations



   114.15   State laws, rules, and regulations



   114.16   Definitions



   114.17   License required



   114.18   Location and placement restrictions



   114.19   Equipment



   114.20   Underground storage tanks



   114.21   Safety provisions



Cross-reference:



   Fire protection and public safety, see Ch. 92



   Hazardous chemicals, see § 92.11



   Inflammable dust, see § 92.10



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 114.01  DRY CLEANING AND DRY DYEING.



   (A)   No person shall violate any law of the state nor any rule or
regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state pertaining to
dry cleaning and dry dyeing.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall carry on any business of dry cleaning
or dry dyeing without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner
provided for in Ch. 110 of this code.



      (2)   No such license shall be granted except upon
certification by the Fire Chief that the premises comply with all the
requirements of the state and of the city pertaining thereto.



(Prior Code, § 114.01)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 114.02  GARAGE AND REPAIR SHOPS.



   (A)   All gasoline, exclusive of that in the tanks of vehicles,
shall be stored in tanks approved by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and
the reservoirs of motor vehicles shall be filled directly through hose from
pumps attached to such tanks. No transfer of gasoline in any garage shall be
made in any open or breakable container.



   (B)   Smoking shall be prohibited in any public garage, except in
office areas separated from the repair or storage areas by sufficient
protective walls. “No Smoking” signs shall be maintained in conspicuous
places therein.



   (C)   No gasoline, oil, grease, or inflammable liquid shall be
allowed to run upon the floor or flow into or be placed in the drainage
system. Self-closing metal cans shall be used for all oily waste or waste
oils.



   (D)   All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase
drainings, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until
removed from the premises.



   (E)   Public garages shall be equipped with foam-type fire
extinguishers and pails of sand as required by the Fire Chief.



   (F)   All public garages shall be kept clean.



(Prior Code, § 114.02)  Penalty, see § 30.99



GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS



§ 114.15  STATE LAWS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.



   No person shall violate any law of the state nor any rule or regulation
adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state pertaining to gasoline
service stations.



(Prior Code, § 114.15)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 114.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GASOLINE OR VOLATILE LIQUIDS. Any inflammable liquid that will flash or
emit an inflammable vapor below the temperature of 110°F. The Fire Chief
shall determine the flash point by some standard or approved method.



   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any premises, including all buildings and
structures thereon, devoted to selling or dispensing at retail or wholesale
gasoline or volatile liquids as fuel for any motor-propelled vehicle,
watercraft, or aircraft.



(Prior Code, § 114.16)



§ 114.17  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, operate, or manage a gasoline service
station without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner provided for
in Ch. 110 of this code.



   (B)   No license required by this subchapter shall be granted except
upon certification by the Fire Chief that said gasoline service station
complies with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 114.17)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 114.18  LOCATION AND PLACEMENT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   General provision. No gasoline service station, doing business
at retail or wholesale, shall hereafter be constructed or opened for business
within a radius of 100 feet of any school building, public park or
playground, church, theater, or any other public place where the public
frequently gathers in large numbers; provided, that this division (A) shall
not extend to any gasoline station operating or in the process of being
constructed at the time of the adoption of this code.



   (B)   Location of gasoline pumps.



      (1)   No gasoline service station shall be permitted to
operate within the boundaries of any street, alley, or public place.



      (2)   All apparatus for the servicing of motor vehicles shall
be so placed that any and all motor vehicles can be serviced while standing
upon the property of the service station with no part of the vehicle
projecting over the sidewalk area. The provisions of this division (B) shall
not apply to stations constructed or in process of construction at the time
this subchapter becomes effective except to such stations as habitually and
seriously interfere with pedestrian right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 114.18)  Penalty, see § 30.99



Cross-reference:



   Automobile service stations and public garages: zoning regulations, see
§ 153.071



§ 114.19  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The storing or keeping of gasoline, or the installation,
erection, alteration, or replacement of any gasoline pump, gasoline tank,
pipe, appliance, or device used in connection with the storage or handling of
gasoline at a gasoline service station shall not be undertaken until a
written permit has been issued therefor by the Fire Chief. Said permit shall
not be refused except for failure to comply with applicable provisions of
this subchapter. This division (A) shall not apply to general maintenance
activities of wholesale stations nor to emergency repairs, except that such
work must be done in accordance with other provisions of this code.



   (B)   Not more than one “portable filling tank” of a type
approved by the Underwriters Laboratories Inc. containing not more than 60
gallons of gasoline may be stored or kept above ground in or at any retail
gasoline service station.



(Prior Code, § 114.19)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 114.20  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.



   (A)   All underground gasoline tanks hereafter installed shall be
placed outside of buildings in a location approved by the Fire Chief. The top
of such tanks shall be at least 24 inches below the surface of the ground
with the space between the top of the tanks and the ground properly filled,
or shall be covered with one foot of earth and six inches of concrete.



   (B)   All pipes used in connection with underground storage tanks
other than vent and filling pipes shall be at least 12 inches underground,
shall have a fall toward the tank, shall be free of sags or pockets, and
shall be standard, full weight, galvanized steel or iron, or copper.



   (C)   Tanks and pipes shall not be covered until inspected and
tested by the Fire Chief and permission



to do so has been granted by him or her. The Fire Chief shall be notified
when the installation is complete and ready for inspection.



(Prior Code, § 114.20)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 114.21  SAFETY PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Miscellaneous safety provisions.



      (1)   Smoking is hereby prohibited on the premises of a
gasoline service station and the motor of an automobile shall not be in
operation while the fuel tank is being filled with gasoline. Notice to that
effect shall be conspicuously posted as required by the Fire Chief.



      (2)   No pump, hose, nozzle, container, or other device shall
be used in the handling of gasoline or volatile liquids at any retail
gasoline service station, unless the same shall have been approved by the
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or by the Fire Chief. Any such device which
becomes defective or hazardous may be condemned for further use by the Fire
Chief.



      (3)   No gasoline or inflammable liquid shall be kept or
conveyed in open receptacles or in glass bottles or other breakable
containers on the premises of a gasoline service station, except in glass
bottles of not more than eight ounces capacity used for sample purposes, and
shall not be used for cleaning purposes on such premises. No glass container
gasoline pump shall be installed in any building.



      (4)   All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase
drainings, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until
removed from the premises.



      (5)   No gasoline, oil, grease, or inflammable liquid shall be
allowed to flow into or be placed in the drainage system. Oil and grease
shall not be allowed to accumulate on the floor. Sawdust shall not be kept in
any gasoline service station or place of storage, and sawdust or other
combustible material shall not be used to absorb oil, grease, or gasoline.



      (6)   All gasoline service station proprietors and attendants,
upon being notified by the Fire Chief of the presence of gasoline or volatile
liquids in sewers, shall cooperate in ascertaining the reason therefor. Any
expense to the city in tracing gasoline leaks shall be paid by the owner of
the station or the equipment to which such gasoline leak is traceable.



      (7)   The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to
approval by the Council, to make reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter,
respecting the use, operation, maintenance, and construction of any
appliance, device, apparatus, equipment, or oil burner used in connection
with gasoline or volatile liquids, including fuel oil.



      (8)   There shall be constantly maintained in good working
order at least one two and one-half gallon, fully charged, portable,
foam-type fire extinguisher at each gasoline service station.



      (9)   When a gasoline service station is discontinued or
dismantled, the owner thereof shall forthwith remove all underground tanks
that were used in connection therewith.



   (B)   Filling of storage tanks.



      (1)   The driver, operator, or attendant of any tank truck
shall be in direct and constant attendance upon said tank truck and attached
delivery hose at all times while gasoline is being transferred therefrom to
the storage tanks of any gasoline service station.



      (2)   The person in charge of the filling of any gasoline
storage tanks of a gasoline service station shall not permit gasoline to
overflow therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 114.21)  (Ord. D-9, passed 1-2-1940, effective 1-15-1940;
Ord. D-170, passed 3-7-1949, effective 3-7-1949; Ord. D-193, passed 9-6-1949,
effective 9-16-1949)  Penalty, see § 30.99



CHAPTER 115:  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISING



Section



General Provisions



   115.001   Intent



   115.002   Short title



   115.003   Definitions



   115.004   Compliance with state and federal laws



   115.005   Separability non-material provisions



   115.006   Separability-material provisions



   115.007   Notices



   115.008   Captions



   115.009   No recourse against the grantor



   115.010   Nonenforcement by the grantor



   115.011   Franchise violations



Grant of Franchise



   115.025   Grant



   115.026   Franchise territory



   115.027   Use of public streets and ways



   115.028   Duration



   115.029   Franchise nonexclusive



   115.030   Transfer of ownership or control



   115.031   Franchise renewal



   115.032   Police powers



   115.033   Franchise fee



   115.034   Forfeiture or revocation



   115.035   Procedures in the event of termination or expiration



   115.036   Receivership and foreclosure



   115.037   Franchise required



   115.038   Establishment of franchise requirements



   115.039   Franchise applications



Regulation of Franchise



   115.050   Regulatory authority



   115.051   Regulatory responsibility



   115.052   Public usage of the system



   115.053   Reservation by grantor



   115.054   Rate regulation



   115.055   Annual review of performance



   115.056   System and services review



   115.057   Access channel management



General Financial and Insurance Provisions



   115.070   Construction bond



   115.071   Performance bond



   115.072   Security fund



   115.073   Indemnification



   115.074   Insurance



Design and Construction Provisions



   115.085   System design



   115.086   Geographical coverage



   115.087   Cablecasting facilities



   115.088   System construction schedule



   115.089   Remedies for delay in construction



   115.090   Provision of service



   115.091   Undergrounding of cable



   115.092   New development undergrounding



   115.093   Underground at multiple-dwelling units



   115.094   Street occupancy



   115.095   Construction and technical standards



   115.096   Areawide interconnection



Services



   115.110   Service provisions



Operation and Maintenance



   115.125   Open books and records



   115.126   Records required



   115.127   Maintenance and complaints



   115.128   Rights of individuals



   115.129   Continuity of service mandatory



   115.130   Grantee rules and regulations



Basic Cable Television Rate Regulation and Procedures



   115.145   Title



   115.146   Definitions



   115.147   Purpose; interpretation



   115.148   Adoption of rate regulations promulgated by FCC



   115.149   Filing; additional information; burden of proof



   115.150   Proprietary information



   115.151   Public notice; initial review of rates



   115.152   Tolling order



   115.153   Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates
following tolling of 30-day deadline



   115.154   Staff or consultant report; written response



   115.155   Rate decisions and orders



   115.156   Refunds; notice



   115.157   Written decision; public notice



   115.158   Rules and regulations



   115.159   Failure to give notice



   115.160   Additional hearings



   115.161   Additional powers



   115.162   Failure to comply; remedies



   115.163   Conflicting provisions



Rights Reserved to the Grantor and Grantee



   115.175   Right to purchase the system



   115.176   Right to maintain records



   115.177   Right of inspection of construction



   115.178   Right of intervention



   115.179   Right to require removal of property



   115.180   Right reserved to the grantee



Reports



   115.195   Annual reports



   115.196   Cable plant report



   115.197   Copies of federal and state reports



   115.198   Public reports



   115.199   Complaint file and reports



   115.200   Miscellaneous reports



   115.201   Public inspection



   115.202   Failure to report



   115.203   False statements



   115.204   Cost of reports



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.001  INTENT.



   The city finds that the development of cable television and
communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact
upon the people of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the
public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such
persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and
subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best
possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any
franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this
finding as an integral part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 115.001)  (Ord. D-1485, § 1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.002  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Saginaw
Cable Television Franchise Provisions”.



(Prior Code, § 115.002)  (Ord. D-1485, § 2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. Any service not included in basic
television service, basic radio service, or institutional service, including,
but not limited to, pay-cable.



   AGENCY SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a government
or public agency, school, or non-profit corporation.



   BASIC RADIO SERVICE. The provision to all subscribers of such audio
programs as the retransmission of broadcast FM radio signals, the
retransmission of stereo signals for video services, and the transmission of
cablecast audio signals, all provided to subscribers at a monthly rate.



   BASIC TELEVISION SERVICE or BASIC CABLE SERVICE. The transmission to
all subscribers of any service tier that includes local broadcast television
channel signals.



   BROADCAST SIGNAL. A television or radio signal that is transmitted over
the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable television
system off the air or by microwave.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CABLE SYSTEM (CATV SYSTEM). A system of
antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios,
and other conductors, converters, equipment, or facilities, designed and
constructed for the primary purpose of distributing video programming to home
subscribers, and the secondary purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying,
storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital, or other forms of
electronic or electrical signals.



   CABLECAST SIGNAL. A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.



   CHANNEL. A six megahertz (MHZ) frequency band, which is capable of
carrying either one standard television or video signal, a number of audio,
digital, or other non-video signals, or some combination of such signals.



   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a place
of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business,
trade, or profession.



   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one
form to another.



   COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Saginaw.



   EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL or EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where
educational institutions are the primary designated programmers.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.



   FRANCHISE. The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to
construct and operate a cable television system along the public way within
all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as
required by other ordinances and laws of this city.



   GOVERNMENT CHANNEL or GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where
local government agencies are the primary designated programmers.



   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and
under the granting franchise ordinance, and its lawful successor, transferee,
or assignee.



   GRANTOR or CITY. The City of Saginaw as represented by the City Council
or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.



   INITIAL SERVICE AREA. The area of the city which will receive service
initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement.



   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers’ terminals, and the provision of service.



   LEASED CHANNEL or LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel or portion of a
channel available for lease and programming by persons or entities other than
the grantee.



   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL. Any channel where the grantee is the primary
designated programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.



   NONBROADCAST SIGNAL. A signal that is transmitted by a cable system and
that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path.



   OPEN CHANNEL. Any channel that can be received by all subscribers,
without the necessity for special equipment.



   PAY-CABLE or PAY-TELEVISION. The delivery to subscribers, over the
cable system, or television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over
and above the charge for basic subscriber service, on a per program, per
channel, or other subscription basis.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation, or any lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of the
individual, partnership, association, organization, or corporation.



   PRIVATE CHANNEL or CLOSED-CIRCUIT CHANNEL. Any channel which is
available only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or
terminal equipment to receive signals on that channel.



   PROGRAMMER. A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise
provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio,
digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other
storage media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where any member of the general
public or any noncommercial organization may be a programmer, without charge,
on a first-come, first-served, non-discriminatory basis, in accordance with
the terms of the franchise agreement.



   REASONABLE NOTICE. Written notice addressed to the grantee at its
principal office or such other office as the grantee has designated to the
grantor as the address to which notice should be transmitted to it, which
notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than four days prior to
that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action
which requires the giving of notice. In computing the four days, Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays recognized by the grantor shall be excluded.



   RESIDENT. Any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by
applicable law.



   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in
connection with a business, trade, or profession.



   SECTION. Any section, division, or provision of this franchise chapter.



   SERVICE AREA. The entire geographic area within the franchise territory.



   STATE. The State of Michigan.



   STREET. Includes each of the following which have been dedicated to the
public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public
authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets; roadways;
highways; avenues; lanes; alleys; sidewalks; easements; rights-of-way; and
similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be
included within the definition of street from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 115.003)  (Ord. D-1485, § 3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.004  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary,
the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof.
Provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall
require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to
perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any
service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation
of the grantor, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the
grantee shall notify the grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist
between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the grantor or
the franchise.



(Prior Code, § 115.004)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.005  SEPARABILITY NON-MATERIAL PROVISIONS.



   If any provision of this chapter or any related agreements is held by
any court or by any federal, state, or local agency of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid as conflicting with any federal, state, or local law, rule, or
regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to
be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such
law, rule, or regulation, and if the provision is considered nonmaterial by
the grantor, the provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and
independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that
such law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended,
or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or thereof which has been
held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules, and
regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full
force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto,
provided that the grantor shall give the grantee 30 days written notice of
such change before requiring compliance with the provision.



(Prior Code, § 115.005)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.006  SEPARABILITY-MATERIAL PROVISIONS.



   If any material section of this chapter, as determined by the grantor,
is held to be invalid or preempted by federal, state, or county regulations
or laws, the grantor shall negotiate with grantee appropriate modifications
to the franchise to provide reasonable relief from such invalidity or
preemption, including the payment of liquidated damages. If the parties are
unable to reach agreement on such modifications, then the dispute shall be
submitted to a mutually agreeable arbitrator, in accordance with state law,
who shall determine what modifications and/or liquidated damages are
appropriate. The arbitrator’s decision shall be binding on the parties,
provided, that no decision of the arbitrator shall require the grantor or
grantee to be in violation of any federal or state law or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 115.006)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.007  NOTICES.



   The grantee shall maintain, within the franchise area throughout the
term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee
shall also maintain within the franchise area a local office and telephone
number for the conduct of matters related to this franchise during normal
business hours.



(Prior Code, § 115.007)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.008  CAPTIONS.



   The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning
or interpretation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 115.008)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.009  NO RECOURSE AGAINST THE GRANTOR.



   The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or
its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs,
expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the
franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise.



(Prior Code, § 115.009)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.010  NONENFORCEMENT BY THE GRANTOR.



   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the grantor to
enforce prompt compliance.



(Prior Code, § 115.010)  (Ord. D-1485, § 14.7, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.011  FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Remedies for franchise violations.



      (1)   If the grantee fails to perform any obligation under the
franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the grantor may at its
option, and in its sole discretion:



         (a)   Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to
the limits established in the franchise agreement for material franchise
violations, which the grantee hereby agrees to pay, the assessment to be
levied against the security fund, hereinabove provided, and collected by
grantor immediately upon the assessment. Grantor and grantee agree that the
amount of such assessment shall be deemed, without proof, to represent
liquidation of damages actually sustained by grantor by reason of grantee’s
failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the
grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under
applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from
grantee such additional damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including
actual attorney fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by
reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for
assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart
from grantor’s right to enforce the provisions of the construction and
performance bonds provided for in §§ 115.070 through 115.074, and is
intended to provide compensation to grantor for actual damages;



         (b)   For violations considered by grantor to have
materially degraded the quality of service, order and direct grantee to issue
rebates or reduce its rates and/or charges to subscribers, in an amount
solely determined by grantor to provide monetary relief substantially equal
to the reduced quality of service resulting from grantee’s failure to
perform;



         (c)   Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes
stated in §§ 115.025 through 115.039; and



         (d)   No remedy shall be imposed by grantor against
grantee for any violation of this franchise without grantee being afforded
due process of law, as provided for in division (B) below.



      (2)   The grantor may, in its sole judgment and discretion,
impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which
shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has
under this franchise or under any applicable law.



   (B)   Procedure for remedying franchise violations. In the event
that the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any material
provision of the franchise, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
hereto or any applicable federal, state, or local law, the grantor may make a
written demand on the grantee that it remedy such violation. If the
violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect is not remedied to the
satisfaction of the grantor following such demand within the time period
specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor shall determine whether or
not such violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was
excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following procedure:



      (1)   A public hearing shall be held and the grantee shall be
provided with an opportunity to be heard upon written notice to the grantee
of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations of
franchise violations;



      (2)   If, after notice is given and, at the grantee’s
option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such
violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was excusable
as provided in division (C) below, the grantor shall direct the grantee to
correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner and
upon such terms and conditions as the grantor may direct; and



      (3)   If, after notice is given and, at the grantee’s
option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such
violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect was inexcusable, then the
grantor may assess a penalty or remedy in accordance with division (A) above.



   (C)   Force majeure; grantee’s inability to perform. In the event
grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or
requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause
beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability
to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall
be imposed as a result thereof, provided grantee has notified grantor in
writing within 30 days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event.
Such causes beyond grantee’s reasonable control or not reasonably
foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God, and
civil emergencies.



(Prior Code, § 115.011)  (Ord. D-1485, § 12, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



GRANT OF FRANCHISE



§ 115.025  GRANT.



   (A)   In the event that grantor shall grant to the grantee a
nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and
reconstruct a cable television system within the franchise area, the
franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the
services of a cable television system as required by the provisions of this
chapter and the franchise agreement.



   (B)   Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained
herein shall be consistent with general law and/or statutory requirements,
which are incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein. In the
event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the
terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a franchise, the general
law and/or statutory requirements, shall, without exception, control.



(Prior Code, § 115.020)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.026  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.



   The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the
city. The service area shall be the entire territory defined in the franchise
agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise
territory scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the franchise
agreement.



(Prior Code, § 115.021)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.027  USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND WAYS.



   For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the franchise area, and subject to the provisions of § 115.094,
the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and
retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets and
ways within the franchise territory such wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments,
and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the
operation of the cable television system. Prior to construction or
alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the
appropriate grantor agencies and local utility companies, and receive written
approval before proceeding.



(Prior Code, § 115.022)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.028  DURATION.



   The term of any franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations, and
restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as stated in the franchise
agreement. The effective date of the franchise shall be the date of adoption
of the resolution by the grantor approving the franchise agreement, subject
to prior acceptance by the grantee.



(Prior Code, § 115.023)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.029  FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.



   Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a
cable television system as it deems appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 115.024)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.030  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



   (A)   Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall
be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. The franchise cannot
in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of,
including but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership, or other means without the prior consent of the
grantor, and then only under such conditions as the grantor may establish.
Such consent as required by the grantor shall, however, not be unreasonably
withheld.



   (B)   Ownership or control. The grantee shall promptly notify the
grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any
other party of, ownership or control of the grantee. The word “control”
as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer, or
acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to
cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented thereto, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control,
the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective
controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such
inquiry. In seeking the grantor’s consent to any change in ownership or
control, the grantee shall have the responsibility:



      (1)   To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the “proposed transferee”),
which in the case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors,
employees and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in 5% or more
of its voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee’s principals:



         (a)   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts
involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to, any violation of
federal, state, or local law or regulations, or is presently under an
indictment, investigation, or complaint charging such acts;



         (b)   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud,
deceit, or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any
court of competent jurisdiction; or



         (c)   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit, or
administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system.



      (2)   To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the
financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting relevant current
financial data for the proposed transferee, and such other data as the
grantor may request. Financial statements shall be audited, certified, and
qualified by an independent certified public accountant; and



      (3)   To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the
financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as
shall enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining
term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms.



   (C)   Notification. The grantor agrees that any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise
shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee
satisfactory to the grantor will take control and operate the cable
television system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial
obligations. Further, the financial institution shall also submit a plan for
such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all
franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the
grantor in its discretion and during the period of time it shall have the
right to petition the grantor to transfer franchise to another grantee. If
the grantor finds that such transfer after considering the legal, financial,
character, technical, and other public interest qualities of the applicant
are satisfactory, the grantor will transfer and assign the rights and
obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the
grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (D)   Consent. The consent or approval of the grantor to any
transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the
rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its
terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of any franchise.



   (E)   Transfer or assignment. In the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, the grantor will not approve any transfer or assignment of the
franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of the proposed
system.



   (F)   Successor in interest. In no event shall a transfer of
ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a
signatory to the franchise agreement.



(Prior Code, § 115.025)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.031  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   Franchise renewal shall be in accordance with applicable law.



(Prior Code, § 115.026)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.7, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.032  POLICE POWERS.



   (A)   In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its
rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the grantor to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public;
and its agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the grantor pursuant to such power.



   (B)   Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any
other present or future lawful exercise of the grantor’s police powers
shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that
is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to
any grantee or cable television systems which contains provisions
inconsistent with this franchise shall prevail only if upon such exercise,
the grantor finds any emergency exists constituting a danger to health,
safety, property or general welfare, or such exercise in mandated by law.



(Prior Code, § 115.027)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.8, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.033  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   Annual franchise payment. A grantee of a franchise hereunder
shall pay to the grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the
franchise agreement, in consideration of the use of public rights-of-way.
Such payment shall be in addition to any other and commence as of the
effective date of the franchise. In the event of a dispute, the grantor, if
it so requests, shall be furnished a statement by a certified public
accountant, reflecting the total amounts of annual gross revenues and all
payments, deductions, and computations for the period covered by the payment.



   (B)   Acceptance by grantor. No acceptance of any payment by the
grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of
any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a
franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other
obligation of the grantee.



   (C)   Failure to make required payment. In the event that any
franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates
specified herein, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation:



      (1)   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at the
annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the
due date; and



      (2)   A sum of money equal to 5% of the amount due in order to
defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason
of delinquent payment.



(Prior Code, § 115.028)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.9, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.034  FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Grounds for revocation. The grantor reserves the right to
revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges
associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which
shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise
grant:



      (1)   If the grantee should default in the performance of any
of its material obligations under this chapter or under such documents,
agreements, and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the
grantor and the grantee;



      (2)   If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in
full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the
security fund or bonds as required herein;



      (3)   If the grantee should willfully violate any orders or
rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative
to this franchise unless such orders or rulings are being contested by the
grantee in a court of competent jurisdiction;



      (4)   If the grantee ceases to provide services for any reason
within the control of the grantee over the cable system. The grantee shall
not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of
this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is
prevented for reasons beyond the grantee’s control. A fault shall not
deemed to be beyond the grantee’s control if committed by a corporation or
other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest,
whether held directly or indirectly;



      (5)   If the grantee attempts to evade any of the material
provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud
or deceit upon the grantor;



      (6)   If the grantee’s construction or system rebuild
schedule is delayed for more than 18 months later than the schedule contained
in the franchise agreement and grantor finds that the delay was not
excusable; and



      (7)   If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to
pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.



   (B)   Procedure prior to revocation.



      (1)   The grantor may make written demand that the grantee do
so comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule, or
regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure,
refusal, or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days
following such written demand, the grantor may place its request for
termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The
grantor shall cause notice to be served upon such grantee, at least ten days
prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request
such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which
shall be published at least once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper
of general circulation within the franchise area.



      (2)   The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein,
and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal,
or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.



      (3)   If such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was
with just cause, the grantor shall direct the grantee to comply within such
time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.



      (4)   If the grantor shall determine such failure, refusal, or
neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the grantor may, by
resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated
and security fund and bonds forfeited unless there be compliance by the
grantee within such period as the grantor may fix.



(Prior Code, § 115.029)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.10, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.035  PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires,
is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the
system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time
as determined by the grantor or require the original grantee to maintain and
operate its network until a subsequent grantee is selected and a subsequent
or modified cable system becomes operational.



   (B)   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures,
and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s removal of its
equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable
wires, or attachments. The grantor shall inspect and approve the condition of
the public ways and public places, and cables, wires, attachments, and poles
after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund
and bonds provided therein shall continue in full force and effect during the
period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and
conditions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Restoration by grantor, reimbursement of costs. In the event
of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by divisions (A) or
(B) above, or any other work required by grantor by law or ordinance within
the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the
grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the
grantor the cost thereof within 30 days



after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the grantor may recover
such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by grantee. The
grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation
of a franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate
the cable communications system for a defined period of time not to exceed 24
months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall, as
trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable
communications system under the terms and conditions of this subchapter and
the franchise agreement and to provide the regular subscriber service and any
and all of the services that may be provided at that time. The grantor shall
be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (E)   Grantor’s right not affected. The termination and forfeiture
of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor
under the franchise or any provision of law.



(Prior Code, § 115.030)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.11, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.036  RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE.



   (A)   Any franchise herein granted shall, at the option of the
grantor, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the
grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of the 120 days, or unless:



      (1)   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days
after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the
receivers or trustees within the 120 days shall have remedied all defaults
under the franchise; and



      (2)   Such receivers or trustees shall, within the 120 days,
execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by
each and every term, provision, and limitation of the franchise agreement.



   (B)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
plant, property, and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, the
grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful
bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after
service of such notice, unless:



      (1)   The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the
franchise, as and in the manner in this chapter provided; and



      (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed
with the grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement.



(Prior Code, § 115.031)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.12, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.037  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No cable television system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets in the franchise territory or be allowed to operate without a
franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 115.032)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.13, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.038  ESTABLISHMENT OF FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.



   The grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises
or franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to
reflect changing conditions and state of art in the cable television
industry. Such requirements shall not be retroactive to franchises then in
effect.



(Prior Code, § 115.033)  (Ord. D-1485, § 4.14, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.039  FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   New franchise applications. Applicants for a new franchise
shall submit to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized
format provided by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the
grantor for accepting applications, and including the designated application
fee.



   (B)   Franchise processing costs. For either a new franchise award
or a franchise renewal, costs to be borne by grantee shall include, but shall
not be limited to, all costs of publications of notices prior to any public
meeting provided for pursuant to a franchise, development and publication of
relevant ordinances and franchise agreement, fees, and any cost not covered
by the applications fees, incurred by the grantor in its study, preparation
of proposal solicitation documents, evaluation of all applications,
including, but not limited to, consultant and attorney fees and grantor staff
time.



(Prior Code, § 115.034)  (Ord. D-1485, § 15, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



REGULATION OF FRANCHISE



§ 115.050  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The grantor shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area served
by the cable system, also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities,
grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency,
with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications.



(Prior Code, § 115.040)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.051  REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.



   The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other grantors, may
exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility:



   (A)   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable system
franchise(s);



   (B)   Coordination of the operation of government and educational
channels;



   (C)   Providing technical, programming, and operational support to
public agency users, such as government departments, schools, and health care
institutions;



   (D)   Establishing procedures and standards for use of channels
dedicated to public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in
any franchise agreement;



   (E)   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services;



   (F)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications
with other local, state, or national telecommunications networks; and



   (G)   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications
policy.



(Prior Code, § 115.041)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.052  PUBLIC USAGE OF THE SYSTEM.



   (A)   To the extent specified in the franchise agreement, the
grantor may utilize a portion of the cable system capacity, and associated
facilities and resources, to develop and provide cable services that will be
in the public interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the grantor may
establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive and
allocate facilities, support funds, and other considerations provided by the
grantee and/or others.



   (B)   Such an entity, if established, may be delegated the following
responsibilities:



      (1)   Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization,
channel capacity, facilities, funding, and other support provided
specifically for public usage of the cable system;



      (2)   Review the status and progress of each service developed
for public benefit;



      (3)   Reallocate resources on a periodic basis to conform with
changing priorities and public needs; and



      (4)   Report to the grantor annually on the utilization of
resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for
the city and its residents.



(Prior Code, § 115.042)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.053  RESERVATION BY GRANTOR.



   The grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time,
to determine if the entity described in § 115.052 is performing its purposes
in a manner satisfactory to the grantor, and if it is not, the grantor may
receive and reallocate all or a portion of the channel capacity, operations
appropriation, and capital appropriation, including any facilities and
equipment purchased previously with such appropriation, to another entity. A
new entity shall be required to comply in all respects with the legal
responsibilities described in § 115.052.



(Prior Code, § 115.043)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.054  RATE REGULATION.



   The grantor may, at its sole option, exercise rate regulation to the
extent permitted by applicable law.



(Prior Code, § 115.044)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.055  ANNUAL REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE.



   (A)   At the grantor’s sole option, within 90 days of the first
anniversary of the effective date of each franchise, and each year thereafter
throughout the term of the franchise, the grantor and grantee shall meet
publicly to review the performance and quality of service of the cable
system. The reports required in §§ 115.195 through 115.204 regarding
subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests, and the opinion
survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any
subscriber may submit complaints during the review meetings, either orally or
in writing, and these shall be considered.



   (B)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the system performance
review meetings, the grantor shall issue findings with respect to the
adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are
found, grantor may direct grantee to correct the inadequacies within a
reasonable period of time.



(Prior Code, § 115.045)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.056  SYSTEM AND SERVICES REVIEW.



   (A)   To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes
in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal
procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system,
and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the grantor and the
grantee shall comply with the following system and services review provisions.



   (B)   At grantor’s sole option, the grantor and grantee shall hold
a system and services review session periodically at the times specified in
the franchise agreement.



   (C)   Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review
session, the grantee shall submit a report to grantor indicating the
following:



      (1)   All cable system services that are being provided on an
operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to cities in the
United States with populations above 10,000, that are not provided to the
grantor; and



      (2)   A plan for provision of such services, or a
justification indicating why such services are not feasible for the franchise
area.



   (D)   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services
review sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, services
provided, application of new technologies, system performance, subscriber
complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise,
undergrounding processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints.



   (E)   Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics
for discussion at any review session.



   (F)   Not later than 60 days after the conclusion of each system and
services review session, the grantor shall issue findings, including
specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the
grantor that are considered technically and economically feasible. The
grantor may request the grantee to provide such services within a reasonable
time, under reasonable rates and conditions.



(Prior Code, § 115.046)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.7, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.057  ACCESS CHANNEL MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Specification of management. The management of access
channels, facilities, and resources shall be as specified in the franchise
agreement.



   (B)   Access rules. The grantee, or, if so designated, the separate
access management entity shall complete a set of rules for the use of the
access and community channels which shall be promptly forwarded to the
grantor. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:



      (1)   Access on a first-come, first-served, non-discriminatory
basis for all residents of the franchise area;



      (2)   Prohibition of advertising for commercial or political
purposes, as defined by the FCC;



      (3)   Prohibition of any presentation of lottery information,
or obscene or indecent material;



      (4)   Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall
be retained by the grantee for a period of two years;



      (5)   Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate
any rule may be prevented from further access to the channel; and



      (6)   Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time,
cablecasting facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the
franchise agreement.



   (C)   Access management reports. The grantee or, if so designated,
the separate access management entity shall provide a report to the grantor,
at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based programming and
services.



(Prior Code, § 115.047)  (Ord. D-1485, § 5.8, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS



§ 115.070  CONSTRUCTION BOND.



   (A)   If required by the franchise agreement, within 30 days after
the granting of a franchise or renewal, and prior to the commencement of any
construction or system rebuild work by the grantee, the grantee shall file
with the grantor a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise
agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may claim damages
as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such bond.



   (B)   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved
by the grantor and shall, among other matters, cover the cost of removal of
any properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall
default in the performance of its franchise obligation.



   (C)   In no event shall the amount of the bond be construed to limit
the liability of the grantee for damages.



   (D)   Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or
permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond or
security fund specified, respectively in §§ 115.071 and 115.072.



(Prior Code, § 115.060)  (Ord. D-1485, § 6.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.071  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   If required by the franchise agreement, in addition to the
construction bond set forth above, the grantee shall, at least 30 days prior
to the commencement of operation, file with the grantor a performance bond in
the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and
any other person who may be entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence
in the operation or termination of the cable system operated under the
franchise agreement, and including the payments required to be made to the
grantor hereunder.



   (B)   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved
by the grantor and shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the grantee in the event the grantee shall default in
the performance of its franchise obligation.



   (C)   In no event shall the amount of the bond be construed to limit
the liability of the grantee for damages.



(Prior Code, § 115.061)  (Ord. D-1485, § 6.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.072  SECURITY FUND.



   (A)   (1)   If required by the franchise agreement, within 30
days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit
into a bank account, established by the grantor and maintain on deposit
through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in the franchise
agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the
provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under this ordinance, and the payment by the grantee of any claims,
liens, and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction,
operation, or maintenance of the system.



      (2)   The security fund may be assessed by the grantor for
purposes including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Failure of grantee to pay grantor sums due under
the terms of the franchise;



         (b)   Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to
correct franchise violations not corrected by the grantee, after due notice;
and



         (c)   Monetary remedies or damages assessed against
grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements.



   (B)   At the grantor’s sole option, all or some portion of the
security fund may be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter
of credit, in lieu of a cash deposit.



   (C)   Within 30 days after notice to it that any amount has been
withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to division (A)
above, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money or increase the letter of
credit in an amount sufficient to restore such security fund to the original
amount.



   (D)   The security fund or letter of credit provided pursuant to
this subchapter shall become the property of the grantor in the event that
the franchise is revoked for cause by reason of the default of the grantee in
accordance with the procedures of § 115.034. The grantee, however, shall be
entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains
on deposit no later than 90 days after the expiration of the term of the
franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of
the grantee.



   (E)   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor whether
reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other
right the grantor may have.



(Prior Code, § 115.062)  (Ord. D-1485, § 6.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.073  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall by acceptance of the franchise
granted herein indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the grantor, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from any and all claims,
suits, judgments for damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged
to arise out of or through:



         (a)   The act of the grantor in granting the franchise;
and



         (b)   The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants,
employees, or agents.



      (2)   Both such indemnifications shall cover such claims
arising in tort, contracts, violations of statutes, ordinances or
regulations, or otherwise.



   (B)   In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantor shall
tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Provided, however, that the
grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims
at its expense.



(Prior Code, § 115.063)  (Ord. D-1485, § 6.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.074  INSURANCE.



   (A)   The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the
franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows:



      (1)   Worker’s compensation insurance. In such coverage as
may be required by the worker’s compensation insurance and safety laws of
the state and amendments thereto;



      (2)   Comprehensive general liability. Comprehensive general
liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily
injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the
franchise agreement; and



      (3)   Comprehensive automobile liability. Comprehensive
automobile liability including, but not limited to, non-ownership and hired
car coverage as well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and
property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the franchise
agreement.



   (B)   The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such
insurance policies and certificates of insurance.



   (C)   Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the
grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as
additional insureds and shall contain the following endorsement:



It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
cancelled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until 30 days after receipt by the city by registered mail written notice of
such intention to cancel or not renew.



   (D)   The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for
such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee
to the grantor under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such
insurance.



(Prior Code, § 115.064)  (Ord. D-1485, § 6.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS



§ 115.085  SYSTEM DESIGN.



   The cable television system shall be constructed in accordance with the
design requirements contained in the franchise agreement.



(Prior Code, § 115.070)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.086  GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.



   The grantee shall design and construct the cable system in such a
manner as to have the eventual capability to pass by every single-family
dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, school, and public agency
within the area of the franchise. Service shall be provided to subscribers in
accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the
franchise agreement. Cable system construction and provision of service shall
be non-discriminatory, and grantee shall not delay or defer service to any
section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.



(Prior Code, § 115.071)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.087  CABLECASTING FACILITIES.



   The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with
the requirements of the franchise agreement.



(Prior Code, § 115.072)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.088  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.



   (B)   The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan
indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and
projected dates for offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update
this information on a monthly basis, showing specifically whether schedules
are being met and the reasons for any delay.



(Prior Code, § 115.073)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.089  REMEDIES FOR DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The grantor may at its sole option, apply any or all of the
following remedies in connection with delays in system construction:



      (1)   Forfeiture of construction bonds and/or assessment of
monetary damages against the security fund up to a maximum limit specified in
the franchise agreement, levied against the security fund for delays
exceeding three months;



      (2)   Termination of the franchise within one year after award
of the franchise if the grantee has failed to initiate system construction or
rebuild, as required by the franchise agreement; and



      (3)   Termination of the franchise for construction or service
delays exceeding 18 months.



   (B)   Any remedies applied shall be in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 115.011.



(Prior Code, § 115.074)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.090  PROVISION OF SERVICE.



   After service has been established by activating trunk cables for any
area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within
that area within 30 days from the date of request.



(Prior Code, § 115.075)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.091  UNDERGROUNDING OF CABLE.



   The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall
be installed underground at grantee’s cost where existing utilities are
already underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded
and relocated in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities,
when such other utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction.



(Prior Code, § 115.076)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.7, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.092  NEW DEVELOPMENT UNDERGROUNDING.



   (A)   In cases of new construction or property development where
utilities are to be placed underground, upon request by the grantee, the
developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable notice of the
particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee’s
installation of conduit, pedestals, and/or vaults, and laterals to be
provided at grantee’s expense. The grantee shall also provide
specifications as needed for trenching.



   (B)   Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to
the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except
that if grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals, and/or vaults, and
laterals within five working days of the date the trenches are available, as
designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then
should the trenches be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new
trenching is to be borne by grantee.



(Prior Code, § 115.077)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.8, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.093  UNDERGROUND AT MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNITS.



   In cases of multiple-dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities,
grantee shall make every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial
drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables
between the pole and the dwelling unit. The burden of proof shall be upon the
grantee to demonstrate why undergrounding of drop cables is technically or
economically unfeasible.



(Prior Code, § 115.078)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.9, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.094  STREET OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other
facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new,
different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on
public property or on privately-owned property until the written approval of
the grantor is obtained. However, no location of any pole or wire holding
structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the grantor determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby.



   (B)   The grantee shall notify the grantor at least ten days prior
to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets.
The grantor shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits
required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee
shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed
construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the
ordinances of the grantor.



   (C)   All transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be so
installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times, shall be kept and
maintained in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition, and in good order
and repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall
install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries,
or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or
other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably
required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other
fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.



   (D)   The grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner
approved by the grantor, restore to grantor standards and specifications any
damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations
or construction on its behalf.



   (E)   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes
necessary in the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee’s
facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for
restoration and repair.



   (F)   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public
property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and
facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor. Trimming
of trees on private property shall require written consent of the property
owner.



   (G)   The grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of grantee when, in the opinion
of the grantor the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vacation, freeway or street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities,
tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements by governmental
agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any
other structure or public improvement, including, but not limited to,
movement of buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the
grantor shall undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath
the surface of the ground. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the
property of the grantee and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by
reason of anything hereunder.



   (H)   Upon failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any
street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor,
the grantor may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the grantee
shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by
the grantor to grantee within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report.



   (I)   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless
absolutely necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the
grantor.



   (J)   The grantor reserves the right to require conduit for
underground cabling if deemed to be necessary.



(Prior Code, § 115.079)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.10, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.095  CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Construction standards.



      (1)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices
shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto, being principally
29 U.S.C. §§ 651 et seq., as well as all state and local regulations where
applicable.



      (2)   Compliance with electrical codes. All installation of
electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in
accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code as adopted by the State
of Michigan, and all applicable state and local regulations.



      (3)   Antennas and towers. Antenna supporting structures
(towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as specified in
ANSI/TIA-222 standards.



      (4)   Compliance with aviation requirements. Antennas
supporting structures (tower) shall be painted, lighted, erected, and
maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable state or local
regulations.



      (5)   Construction standards and requirements. All of the
grantee’s plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna
site, head-end and distribution system towers, house connections, structures,
poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures, and appurtenances shall be
installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed,
repaired, maintained, and operated in accordance with good engineering
practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so
as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the grantor may deem proper
to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner,
or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (6)   Safety, nuisance, requirements. The grantee shall at all
times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are
likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public.



   (B)   Technical standards. The cable communications system shall
meet all technical and performance standards contained in the franchise
agreement.



   (C)   Test and compliance procedure. The grantee shall submit,
within 60 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a
detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable
system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the
franchise agreement. The tests shall be performed at intervals no greater
than every 12 months, on a minimum of 20 subscriber television receivers,
located throughout the service area. At least eight of these locations shall
be at the far end of the distribution trunk cables. The tests shall be
witnessed by representatives of the grantor, and written test reports shall
be submitted to the grantor. If more than 10% of the locations tested fail to
meet the performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate
what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be
repeated for at least 20 different locations. A second failure of more than
10% may result, at the grantor’s option, in appropriate remedies.



   (D)   Special tests. At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific
subscriber’s terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on
the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved
controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to
the particular matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so
arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or
inconvenience to grantee or to the subscriber.



(Prior Code, § 115.080)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.11, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.096  AREAWIDE INTERCONNECTION.



   (A)   Interconnection required. The grantee shall begin good faith
negotiations to interconnect public usage channels of the cable system with
any or all other cable systems in adjacent areas, upon the directive of the
grantor. Interconnection of systems shall permit interactive transmission and
reception of program material, and may be done by direct cable connection,
microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.



   (B)   Interconnection procedure.



      (1)   Upon receiving the directive of the grantor to
interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems. The cost shall be borne by both grantees,
in the proportion of number of channels received to total number of channels
transmitted and received, under the assumption that benefits accrue primarily
through receipt of additional channels.



      (2)   In the case of regional or state-wide interconnection,
the same principle shall apply.



   (C)   Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of
time to interconnect or the grantor may rescind its order to interconnect
upon petition by the grantee to the grantor. The grantor may grant the
request if it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has
failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed
interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an
unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.



   (D)   Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city,
county, state, and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter
established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing
for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the
franchise territory.



   (E)   Initial technical requirements to assure future
interconnection capability.



      (1)   All cable systems receiving franchises to operate within
the franchise territory shall use the same frequency allocations for commonly
provided television signals so far as is technically and economically
feasible.



      (2)   The grantee shall provide local origination and access
equipment that is compatible throughout the area so that videocassettes or
videotapes can be shared by various systems.



(Prior Code, § 115.081)  (Ord. D-1485, § 7.12, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



SERVICES



§ 115.110  SERVICE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Services to be provided. The grantee shall provide, as a
minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement. Services shall not
be reduced without 60 days prior notification to grantor.



   (B)   Local programming. The grantee shall operate the cablecasting
studios of a high-quality, professional basis for the purpose of providing
cablecast programming responsive to local needs and interests. The emphasis
shall be on providing programming that is unavailable to viewers on broadcast
television channels.



   (C)   Government access channel(s). The grantee shall provide the
number of channels specified in the franchise agreement, including all
necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, for the use of
the grantor at no charge to the grantor. The grantee shall make every effort
to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of these
channels.



   (D)   Educational access channel(s). The grantee shall provide the
number of channels specified in the franchise agreement including all
necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, for the use of
the local educational institutions at no charge. The grantee shall make every
effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of
these channels.



   (E)   Public access channel(s). The grantee shall provide the number
of channels specified in the franchise agreement including all necessary
interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, to be available to the
public at no charge. The public access channel(s) shall be managed as
described in the franchise agreement. The grantee shall make available for
programmers of the public access channel the facilities and support listed in
the franchise agreement.



   (F)   Public access(s) (closed-circuit). If the cable communications
system includes a closed-circuit institutional network, the grantee shall
make at least two two-way channels available for local government,
educational, and public use at no charge.



   (G)   Universal connection. The grantor may require that all
dwelling units within the franchise area shall be connected physically to the
cable system by the grantee by means of drop cables terminating at each
dwelling unit, whether or not the dwelling unit’s occupants desire to
subscribe to cable service. The cost and charges shall be determined by the
grantor at the time such connection is required. The grantee shall be
entitled to recover the incremental cost of providing a universal connection.



(Prior Code, § 115.090)  (Ord. D-1485, § 8, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE



§ 115.125  OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   The grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a
policy of totally open books and records. The grantor shall have the right to
inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps,
plans, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test
results, and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the
operation of the franchise and are maintained at the office within the
franchise territory.



(Prior Code, § 115.100)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.126  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   In any event. the grantee shall at all times maintain:



   (A)   A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding three years; and



   (B)   A full and complete set of plans, records and “as-built”
maps showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment
installed or in use in the franchise territory, exclusive of subscriber
service drops.



(Prior Code, § 115.101)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.127  MAINTENANCE AND COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   The grantee shall maintain an office in the franchise
territory which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a
publicly listed toll-free telephone, and be so operated to receive subscriber
complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24 hour a day basis.
A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints and their
disposition.



   (B)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during period of minimum use of the system. A written
log shall be maintained for all service interruptions.



   (C)   The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians
capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within
24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No charge shall be made
to the subscriber for this service.



   (D)   The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service
is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints,
including the name, address, and local telephone number of the employee or
employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed,
and furnish information concerning the grantor office responsible for
administration of the franchise with the address and telephone number of the
office.



(Prior Code, § 115.102)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.128  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. The grantee
shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
non-discrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this
chapter by reference.



   (B)   The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of the FCC, state, and local regulations, and as
amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 115.103)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.129  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue
receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the
grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild,
rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to
terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to
ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service
regardless of the circumstances.



      (2)   In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event
a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the
grantor, new franchisee, or operator in maintaining continuity of service to
all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the
revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be
entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the
system.



   (B)   In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven
consecutive days without prior approval of the grantor or without just cause,
the grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator
until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to
the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor is required
to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the
grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the
system received by the grantor that are the result of the grantee’s failure
to perform.



(Prior Code, § 115.104)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.130  GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights
and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however,
that such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict
with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations. Such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall be
submitted to the grantor for its review and grantor approval is required
prior to their becoming effective.



(Prior Code, § 115.105)  (Ord. D-1485, § 9.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



BASIC CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATION AND PROCEDURES



§ 115.145  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as “Basic Cable Television Rate
Regulation and Procedures” and may be cited as such.



(Prior Code, § 115.110)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.146  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT. The Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et
seq., as amended.



      ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. All equipment and services subject to
regulation pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.923.



      BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Basic service as defined in the FCC rules,
and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by
the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



      FCC RULES. All rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time
pursuant to the Act.



      INCREASE. As applies to rates, shall mean an increase in rates or
a decrease in programming or customer services.



   (B)   All other words and phrases used in this subchapter shall have
the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules.



(Prior Code, § 115.111)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.147  PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:



      (1)   Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC
Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and



      (2)   Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity
for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic
cable service rate regulation by the city.



   (B)   This subchapter shall be implemented and interpreted
consistent with the Act and FCC Rules.



(Prior Code, § 115.112)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.148  ADOPTION OF RATE REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY FCC.



   The city adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications
Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76
(Multichannel Video and Cable Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of
the Code of Federal Regulations (47 C.F.R. Part 76) regarding the regulation
of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as
amended.



(Prior Code, § 115.113)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.149  FILING; ADDITIONAL INFORMATION; BURDEN OF PROOF.



   (A)   A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such
rates in accordance with the Act and FCC Rules. The cable operator shall
include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show
that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with
the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the
schedule or proposed increase with the City Clerk. For purposes of this
subchapter, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been
made when at least ten copies have been received by the City Clerk. The City
Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations
prescribing the information, data, and calculations which must be included as
part of the cable operator’s filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed
increase.



   (B)   In addition to information and data required by rules and
regulations of the city pursuant to division (A) above, a cable operator
shall provide all information requested by the City Manager in connection
with the city’s review and regulation of existing rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates.
The City Manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested
information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines.



   (C)   A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule
of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed
increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including,
without limitation, 47 U.S.C. § 543 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and 76.923.



(Prior Code, § 115.114)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.150  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.



   (A)   If this subchapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the
city to § 115.149(A), or any request for information pursuant to §
115.149(B) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable
operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly
proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that
specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and
withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the
information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those
reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city
determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure
is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C.
§ 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision
that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests
confidentiality and the request is denied:



      (1)   Where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase,
it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary
information will be returned to it; or



      (2)   The cable operator may seek review within five working
days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will
be stayed pending review.



   (B)   Any interested party may file a request to inspect material
withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy
considerations favoring non-disclosure against the reasons cited for
permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will
then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that
submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant,
deny, or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may
seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum.
Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal.



   (C)   The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as
analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for
confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 C.F.R. § 0.459.



(Prior Code, § 115.115)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.151  PUBLIC NOTICE; INITIAL REVIEW OF RATES.



   (A)   Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the
proposed increase in rates pursuant to § 115.149(A), the City Clerk shall
publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
which shall state that:



      (1)   The filing has been received by the City Clerk and
(except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for
public inspection and copying; and



      (2)   Interested parties are encouraged to submit written
comments on the filing to the City Clerk not later than seven days after the
public notice is published.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the
date, time, and place of the meeting at which the City Council shall first
consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be
mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the meeting.



   (C)   In addition, if a written staff or consultant’s report on
the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration
of the City Council, then the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the report by
first-class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting
at which the City Council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the
proposed increase.



(Prior Code, § 115.116)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.152  TOLLING ORDER.



   After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a
proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain
in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30
days from the date of filing under § 115.149(A) unless the City Council (or
other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline
pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by
resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The City
Council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not
involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases
involving cost-of-service showings.



(Prior Code, § 115.117)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.153  PUBLIC NOTICE; HEARING ON BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES FOLLOWING
TOLLING OF 30-DAY DEADLINE.



   (A)   If a written order has been issued pursuant to § 115.152 and
47 C.F.R. § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these
rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information
required or requested pursuant to § 115.149. In addition, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties
within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall publish a public notice of the public
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall
state:



      (1)   The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be
held;



      (2)   Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by
letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing
rates or the proposed increase in rates; and



      (3)   Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase
in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as
proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the
Clerk.



   (C)   The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days
before the hearing.



   (D)   In addition, the City Clerk shall mail by first-class mail a
copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before
the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 115.118)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.154  STAFF OR CONSULTANT REPORT; WRITTEN RESPONSE.



   Following the public hearing, the City Manager shall cause a report to
be prepared for the City Council which shall (based on the filing of the
cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information
requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant’s
review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the
decision of the City Council pursuant to § 115.155. The City Clerk shall
mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less
than 20 days before the City Council acts under § 115.155. The cable
operator may file a written response to the report with the City Clerk. If at
least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the
City Clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator,
the City Clerk shall forward it to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 115.119)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.155  RATE DECISIONS AND ORDERS.



   The City Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or
otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic
cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates,
denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction,
prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase
to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in
accordance with the FCC Rules. If the City Council issues an order allowing
the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to
refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting
pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be
issued within 90 days of the tolling order under § 115.152 in all cases not
involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150
days after the tolling order under § 115.152 in all cases involving a
cost-of-service showing.



(Prior Code, § 115.120)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.156  REFUNDS; NOTICE.



   The City Council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47
C.F.R. § 76.942. Before the City Council orders any refund to subscribers,
the City Clerk shall give at least seven days’ written notice to the cable
operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the City
Council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an
opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear
in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting
comments to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 115.121)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.157  WRITTEN DECISION; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   Any order of the City Council pursuant to §§ 115.155 or
115.156 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the City
Council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption.



   (B)   The Clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written
order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall:



      (1)   Summarize the written decision; and



      (2)   State that copies of the text of the written decision
are available for inspection or copying from the office of the Clerk.



   (C)   In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the written
decision to the cable operator by first-class mail.



(Prior Code, § 115.122)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.158  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to § 115.149, the City
Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for
basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without
limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC
Rules.



(Prior Code, § 115.123)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.159  FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE.



   The failure of the City Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of
reports as required by this subchapter shall not invalidate the decision or
proceedings of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 115.124)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.160  ADDITIONAL HEARINGS.



   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, the City Council
may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the City
Council, in its discretion, shall prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 115.125)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.161  ADDITIONAL POWERS.



   The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules,
the cable operator’s franchise, and all other applicable laws. The powers
exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this subchapter shall be in
addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any
action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public
interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation.



(Prior Code, § 115.126)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.162  FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDIES.



   The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against
the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided
under a cable operator’s franchise with the city) for failure to comply
with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city
pursuant to this subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter, or any
rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law,
failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations
of the city pursuant to this subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter
or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient
grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator’s franchise.



(Prior Code, § 115.127)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



§ 115.163  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   The various parts of any conflict between this subchapter and the
provisions of any prior ordinance or a franchise, permit, consent agreement,
or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this
subchapter shall control.



(Prior Code, § 115.128)  (Ord. D-1702, passed 10-18-1993, effective
10-28-1993)



RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR AND GRANTEE



§ 115.175  RIGHT TO PURCHASE THE SYSTEM.



   The grantor may in any lawful manner and upon the payment of a fair
valuation lawfully ascertain, purchase, condemn, acquire, take over, and hold
the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part.



(Prior Code, § 115.135)  (Ord. D-1485, § 10.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.176  RIGHT TO MAINTAIN RECORDS.



   (A)   There shall be kept in the grantor’s office a separate
record for the franchise, which record shall show the things hereafter set
forth. The grantee shall provide such information in such form as may be
required by the grantor for the records, including:



      (1)   The true and entire cost of construction equipment, of
maintenance and of the administration and operation thereof, and all amounts
and sources of income;



      (2)   The amount collected annually from the grantor treasury,
if any, and the character and extent of the service rendered therefor to the
grantor; and



      (3)   The amount collected annually from other users of
service and the character and extent of the service rendered therefor to them.



   (B)   The books and records kept by the grantor shall be open to
public examination at any time during the business hours of the grantor’s
office. The information, in addition to any further data which may be
required by the grantor, shall be furnished by the grantee to the grantor
upon request, and at the grantee’s own cost and expense.



(Prior Code, § 115.136)  (Ord. D-1485, § 10.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.177  RIGHT OF INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to
make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms of this franchise and other pertinent provisions of law.



(Prior Code, § 115.137)  (Ord. D-1485, § 10.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.178  RIGHT OF INTERVENTION.



   The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or
proceeding to which the grantee is party, and the grantee shall not oppose
such intervention by the grantor.



(Prior Code, § 115.138)  (Ord. D-1485, § 10.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.179  RIGHT TO REQUIRE REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.



   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or
upon its revocation or expiration, as provided for herein, the grantor shall
have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the
franchise area.



(Prior Code, § 115.139)  (Ord. D-1485, § 10.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.180  RIGHT RESERVED TO THE GRANTEE.



   In any material dispute, the grantee may pursue such other remedies as
are available, including the bringing of action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 115.140)  (Ord. D-1485, § 11, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



REPORTS



§ 115.195  ANNUAL REPORTS.



   At grantor’s sole option, within 60 days after the close of the
grantee’s fiscal year, the grantee shall submit a written annual report, in
a form approved by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the following
information:



   (A)   A summary of the previous year’s (or, in the case of the
initial report year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the
cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued
during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of
service;



   (B)   A financial statement, audited by an independent certified
public accountant, or certified by



an officer of the grantee, including a statement of income, revenues,
operating expenses, value of plant, annual capital expenditures, depreciation
with an attached depreciation schedule, interest paid, taxes paid, balance
sheets, and a statement of sources and application of funds;



   (C)   A current statement of costs of construction by major
component categories;



   (D)   A statement of projected construction for the next two years;



   (E)   A list of grantee’s officers, members of its board of
directors, and other principals of grantee; and



   (F)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or
more of the voting interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary, and
affiliated corporations and other entities, if any.



(Prior Code, § 115.150)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.1, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.196  CABLE PLANT REPORT.



   At grantor’s sole option, grantee shall submit to the grantor an
annual cable plant report. The report shall include, but not be limited to, a
description and “as-built” maps of the portions of the franchise area
that have been cabled and have all services available, and an appropriate
engineering evaluation including the required system performance test
results. The report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the grantor to
ascertain that the service requirements and technical standards of the FCC
and/or the franchise are achieved and maintained. At the grantor’s request,
but no more often than once per three years, the grantee and the grantor
shall agree upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to
evaluate and verify the technical performance of the cable system. The cost
of such evaluation shall be borne equally by the grantee and the grantor.



(Prior Code, § 115.151)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.2, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.197  COPIES OF FEDERAL AND STATE REPORTS.



   The grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings,
applications, reports, communications, and documents of any kind, submitted
by the grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and
actions by any federal, state, and local courts, regulatory agencies, and
other government bodies relating to its cable television operations within
the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor
simultaneously with its submission to such courts, agencies, and bodies; and
within five days after their receipt from such courts, agencies, and bodies.
The grantee hereby waives any right to claim confidential, privileged, or
proprietary rights to such documents unless such confidential rights are
conferred by law or by the practices of federal or state agencies. However,
proprietary data exempt from public disclosure shall be retained in
confidence by the grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made
available for public inspection.



(Prior Code, § 115.152)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.3, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.198  PUBLIC REPORTS.



   A copy of each of grantee’s annual and other periodic public reports
and those of its parent, subsidiary, and affiliated corporations and other
entities, as the grantor requests and is reasonably appropriate, shall be
submitted to the grantor within five days of its issuance.



(Prior Code, § 115.153)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.4, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.199  COMPLAINT FILE AND REPORTS.



   (A)   An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the
grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure
shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the cable
system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the
grantor. Complete records of the grantee’s actions in response to all
complaints shall be kept.



   (B)   These files and records shall remain open to the public during
normal business hours:



      (1)   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and
nature of complaints and their disposition, in a form approved by the
grantor, shall be completed for each month and submitted to the grantor by
the tenth day of the succeeding month; and



      (2)   The results of an annual opinion survey report which
identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable
communications services offered by the grantee shall be submitted to the
grantor no later than two months after the end of the grantee’s fiscal
year. The surveys required to make the report shall be in a format approved
by the grantor and may be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers
with one or more bills for service.



(Prior Code, § 115.154)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.5, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.200  MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS.



   The grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or
reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may reasonably request
or require.



(Prior Code, § 115.155)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.6, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.201  PUBLIC INSPECTION.



   All reports subject to public disclosure shall be available for public
inspection at a designated grantor office during normal business hours.



(Prior Code, § 115.156)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.7, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.202  FAILURE TO REPORT.



   The refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any of the
reports required, or such other reports as the grantor reasonably may
request, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall
subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available
to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 115.157)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.8, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.203  FALSE STATEMENTS.



   Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made
knowingly by the grantee in any report required under the franchise shall be
deemed a material breach of the franchise and shall subject the grantee to
all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under
the franchise or otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 115.158)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.9, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



§ 115.204  COST OF REPORTS.



   All reports and records required under this or any other subchapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee.



(Prior Code, § 115.159)  (Ord. D-1485, § 13.10, passed 6-3-1985, effective
6-13-1985)



CHAPTER 116:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Conflict



   116.03   Definitions



   116.04   Permit required



   116.05   Issuance of permit



   116.06   Construction/engineering permit



   116.07   Conduit or utility poles



   116.08   Route maps



   116.09   Repair of damage



   116.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee



   116.11   Modification of existing fees



   116.12   Savings provision



   116.13   Use of funds



   116.14   Annual report



   116.15   Cable television operators



   116.16   Existing rights



   116.17   Compliance



   116.18   Reservation of police powers



   116.19   Authorized city officials



 



   116.99   Municipal civil infraction



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act, Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L. §§ 484.3101 et seq.
(“Act”) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies
for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers
and complying with the Act.



(Prior Code, § 116.01)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.02  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Act or other applicable law.



(Prior Code, § 116.02)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act, Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L. §§ 484.3101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.



      CITY. City of Saginaw.



      CITY COUNCIL. City Council of the City of Saginaw or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.



      CITY MANAGER. City Manager or his or her designee.



      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and
this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the city for its telecommunications facilities.



   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation
the following.



      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act, being
M.C.L. § 484.3101.



      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term
COMMISSION in the Act.



      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement, or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunications services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title
III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R.
Part 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES. Those terms as defined in § 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications
Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
PROVIDER does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when
providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in
§ 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat.
1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service
in 47 C.F.R. Part 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a
PROVIDER also includes all of the following:



         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service;



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person
who owns telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way;
and



         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport
access service.



(Prior Code, § 116.03)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1)
of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and one copy
with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make two copies of
the application and distribute a copy to the Director of Public Services and
the City Engineer. Applications shall be complete and include all information
required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the
location of the provider’s existing and proposed facilities in accordance
with § 6(5) of the Act.



   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information,
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976,
being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each
map.



   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
established by Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (E)   Additional information. The City Manager may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the City Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such
requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant
cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the
city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2)
of the Act.



   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L. §
484.2251, and authorizations or permits issued by the city to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180
days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way
in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization
or a permit under § 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act
179 of 1991, being M.C.L. § 484.2251, shall submit to the city an
application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an
application under this division (G) is not required to pay the application
fee required under division (D) above. A provider under this division (G)
shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application
if allowed by the authority, as provided in § 5(4) of the Act.



(Prior Code, § 116.04)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an
application for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to
§ 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application
for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files
an application for a permit under § 116.04(B) for access to a public
right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the City
Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a
permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was
filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager
shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.



   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the
City Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1),
6(2) and 15 of the Act.



   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager
may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on division (C) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be
posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after
the telecommunications provider’s access and use.



(Prior Code, § 116.05)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.06  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required by this code, as
amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be
charged for such a construction or engineering permit.



(Prior Code, § 116.06)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.07  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Prior Code, § 116.07)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.08  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
city. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC
determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.



(Prior Code, § 116.08)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.09  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to §15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over,
below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(Prior Code, § 116.09)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.10  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set
forth in § 116.04(D) a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city’s public rights-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.



(Prior Code, § 116.10)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.11  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of
§ 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees
of providers with telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way
within the city’s boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under § 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter,
in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any
fees are charged to telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts
permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act,
such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and
intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.



(Prior Code, § 116.11)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.12  SAVINGS PROVISION.



   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, if § 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 116.11 shall
be void from the date the modification was made.



(Prior Code, § 116.12)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.13  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from
the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951.



(Prior Code, § 116.13)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.14  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual
report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the authority.



(Prior Code, § 116.14)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.15  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Prior Code, § 116.15)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.16  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by
the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 116.16)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.17  COMPLIANCE.



   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including, but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information
Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided
in § 116.04(C);



   (B)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the
permit requirements hereof, in accordance with § 116.04(F);



   (C)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit
an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the application
fee, in accordance with § 116.04(G);



   (D)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45
days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a
permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in
accordance with § 116.05(A);



   (E)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with § 116.05(A);



   (F)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with § 116.05(A);



   (G)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, as provided
in § 116.05(B), with or without additional or different permit terms;



   (H)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to
the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with § 116.05(C);



   (I)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications
provider’s access and use, in accordance with § 116.05(D);



   (J)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 116.06;



   (K)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
city’s right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
116.11;



   (L)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance
with § 116.14; and



   (M)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a
failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 116.15.



(Prior Code, § 116.17)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.18  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
city’s right to review and approve a telecommunications provider’s access
to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority
to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 116.18)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.19  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as
provided by this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 116.19)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as
set forth in Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances, plus costs and other
sanctions, and shall be subject to a Class E municipal civil infraction.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to
the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.



(Prior Code, § 116.20)  (Ord. D-1938, passed 11-18-2002, effective
11-28-2002)



CHAPTER 117:  BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   117.01   Purpose



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   Lighting



   117.04   Video surveillance system required



   117.05   Access to media



   117.06   Minimum technological standards



   117.07   Site assessment and signage



   117.08   Inspections



   117.09   Enforcement



   117.10   Appeal process



   117.11   Exemptions



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council recognizes that certain businesses have
characteristics which may tend to increase the potential risk of criminal
activity on their premises.  This chapter is enacted to reduce the
likelihood that employees and patrons of those businesses will be exposed to
potential death and/or injuries because of crime occurring on the premises. 
It is also intended to assist law enforcement with the criminal investigation
of crimes on the premises of the businesses which are the subject of this
chapter.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT.  Establishments listed and
defined as follows:



      (1)    BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  An establishment whose
primary function is related to the custody, loan, exchange, issuance of
money, extension of credit, or transmission of funds, and includes banks,
credit unions, or savings and loans.



      (2)    CHECK CASHING BUSINESS.  A business offering payday
loans, cash advances, or check advance loans, and which is regulated under
the State of Michigan Deferred Presentment Services Transaction, Public Act
244 of 2005, as amended, or any similar law.



      (3)   COIN DEALER.  Any establishment that, as a substantial
portion of its business, buys and sells coins, gold or other precious metals,
as the term is defined elsewhere by ordinance.



      (4)   FIREARM DEALER.  An establishment required to obtain a
federal firearms license to sell firearms and which engages in firearms
transactions.



      (5)    GAS STATIONS.  A retail establishment at which motor
vehicles are refueled.



      (6)    HOTEL or MOTEL.  Any building or structure equipped,
used, advertised as, or held out to the public as a facility or place where
sleeping quarters or other similar accommodations are furnished for a fee to
transient guests.



      (7)    LIQUOR OR ALCOHOL BUSINESS.  Any retailer required to
obtain a permit by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission which authorizes
the sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits to be consumed on or off the
premises where sold, and includes brew pubs, distilleries, or other similarly
licensed facilities.  It shall also include those facilities not required to
obtain such permit but which, directly or indirectly through a lease or
rental of the premises, allows beer, wine, or distilled spirits to be
consumed on premises.   



      (8)    MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS DEALER.  Any retailer of a
wireless two-way communication device, including a telephone used in cellular
telephone service, which represents, along with accessories related thereto,
more than 50% of the goods displayed for retail purchase.



      (9)   MONEY TRANSMISSION SERVICES.  A retailer selling or
issuing payment instruments or stored value devices or is receiving money or
monetary value for transmission.



      (10)   PHARMACY.  A facility or part of a facility that
dispenses prescription drugs, or prepares prescription drugs for delivery or
distribution, but does not include the office of a dispensing prescriber or
an automated device.



      (11)   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT.  Also refers
to those businesses required to obtain a license pursuant to §§ 110.27,
110.28, 110.30, 110.34 and 110.38.



   LUMEN.  The SI derived unit of luminous flux; a measure of the total
amount of visible light emitted by a source.



   MEDIA.  Material on which audio, video, and electronic data can be
recorded for the purposes of making a permanent record to aid in a criminal
investigation, that can be enlarged through projection or other means, in a
format able to be utilized by the Police Department, County Prosecutor and/or
other law enforcement agency.   



   OWNER.  The individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, joint venture, or other group enterprise licensed to do business
or otherwise operating a business establishment at a location within the city.



   VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM.  A continuous digital surveillance system
consisting of cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR)
that record in color with cameras and lenses of a type, minimum resolution,
number and location approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS must be capable of producing retrievable and
identifiable images and video recordings on approved media that can be
enlarged through projection or other means, and can be made a permanent
record for use in a criminal investigation.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.03  LIGHTING.



   Every business establishment in the city, unless the store is not open
for business after sunset and before sunrise, is hereby required to install
and provide lighting for its parking area during all hours of darkness when
employees and/or customers are on the premises.  Such lighting shall be at a
minimum average of two lumens per square foot.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.04  VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every business establishment in the city is hereby required to
install a video surveillance system.  Video surveillance systems shall be
maintained in proper working order at all times, shall be in operation at all
hours the establishment is open to customers, and shall meet the minimum
technological standards established in this chapter or by resolution of City
Council.



   (B)   A minimum of three high resolution surveillance cameras
located in the public areas of a business establishment are required of each
video surveillance system.  At least one camera shall provide an overall
view of the counter and register area; at least one camera shall be
positioned to provide a clear, identifiable, full-frame image of the face of
each person entering and leaving the business establishment; and at least one
camera shall be positioned to provide an overall view of the business
establishment’s parking lot.  Camera views shall not be obstructed by
store fixtures or displays.



   (C)   Business establishments which installed video surveillance
systems prior to the effective date of this chapter must ensure they are in
full compliance with this chapter. 



   (D)   Documentation evidencing the installation of such system must
be presented to the Police Department, who shall verify compliance with this
chapter.  The sufficiency of such documentation shall be determined at the
discretion of the Police Chief or their designee.  Upon approval of such
documentation, the Police Department will issue a written approval notice
which will be placed in plain view inside the premises.  This approval
notice will also inform customers and employees of the existence of the video
surveillance system.  A copy of the approval notice or other verification of
compliance shall then be transmitted by the Police Department to the City
Clerk.  Such verification must be on record and up-to-date at the time of a
business establishment’s application for or renewal of a business license,
or such license shall be denied.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.05  ACCESS TO MEDIA.



   If a crime occurs or an employee of a business establishment believes a
crime has occurred, the Police Department shall be contacted immediately, and
the business establishment shall retain the continuous digital images of the
event recorded by the video surveillance system for no less than 60 days. 
Subject to any constitutional restrictions, upon reasonable notification, the
business establishment shall provide access to the media containing the
recorded event to the Police Department.  Failure to provide access to the
video surveillance system may result in the Police Department or other law
enforcement agency making a request for a search warrant to seize the video
surveillance system, or any part or unit of the system, depending on the
nature of the incident.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.06  MINIMUM TECHNOLOGICAL STANDARDS.



   The video surveillance system must be capable of delineating on
playback of the system the activity and physical features of persons or areas
within the public areas of the premises and must be able to record such
images on an approved form of external media.  The continuous digital images
recorded by any video surveillance system shall be retained for no less than
30 days.  Cameras placed outdoors or in low light areas must have infrared
illuminators.  Additional minimum technological standards required for video
surveillance systems shall be established by resolution of the City Council,
which may be updated periodically.  The Police Department shall review the
video surveillance system standards bi-annually to ensure that they are
consistent with current technology and shall recommend appropriate updates to
the City Council when necessary. 



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.07  SITE ASSESSMENT AND SIGNAGE.



   The Chief of Police or his or her designee will conduct an assessment
of each site required to install a video surveillance system shortly
following installation, and upon approval will issue a written approval
notice which will be placed in plain view inside the premises.  This
approval notice will also inform customers and employees of the existence of
the video surveillance system. 



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.08  INSPECTIONS.



   The video surveillance system shall be subject to regular inspection by
the Chief of Police or their designee, who is authorized to inspect at
reasonable times any video surveillance system to determine if the system
conforms with this chapter and regulations adopted by City Council
resolution. 



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   Business establishments subject to the mandatory requirements of this
chapter shall have one year from the effective date of this chapter to comply
with the regulations set forth herein.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.10  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Within ten days of mailing of the written notice of violation,
the owner of the business establishment may appeal the alleged violation by
requesting a hearing before the City Manager or their designee.  Such a
request must be made in writing and must set forth the specific grounds for
the appeal.



   (B)   If the owner files a timely request for a hearing, the City
Manager or their designee shall set a time and place for the hearing within
14 days thereafter.



      (1)   All parties involved shall have the right to offer
testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be
represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine any witness against
them.   



      (2)   The decision of the City Manager or their designee shall
be in writing and shall be rendered within 14 days of their receipt of the
transcript of the hearing. 



      (3)   The decision of the City Manager or their designee shall
be final.  However, an owner having an interest affected by this chapter may
appeal to the Circuit Court.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.11  EXEMPTIONS.



   A business establishment which is required to install a video
surveillance system may, on an annual basis, apply to the Chief of Police or
their designee for exemption from the provisions of this chapter.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or their designee may exempt a business
establishment for a period of 12 months if they find that the business
establishment has or will undertake alternate security procedures which are
substantially equal to or more effective in preventing criminal activity and
in assisting in the apprehension of the perpetrators of crime or for the
protection of employees, or that they may authorize alternate procedures on
an experimental basis. Such an exemption shall carry a maximum duration of 12
months, and a business establishment must reapply for an exemption at the end
of the exemption period or bring the system into conformance with this
chapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or their designee may also, upon a showing
of good cause, authorize temporary extensions of time for installation when a
business establishment demonstrates that it is temporarily unable to comply.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter by any owner of
a business establishment subject to this chapter shall result in a written
notice of violation from the Chief of Police or their designee. 



      (1)   Violators shall have 30 days after receipt of the notice
to provide proof of compliance to the Police Department.



      (2)   If the violation continues after the 30-day period, and
an appeal has not been requested as set forth within this chapter, the Chief
of Police or their designee shall issue a Class C Municipal Civil Infraction
against the owner of the business establishment, and the violator shall pay a
civil penalty in accordance with Ch. 37.



   (B)   An employee who intentionally terminates or interferes with
the operation of a video surveillance system in the business establishment in
which they are employed may be cited a Class C Municipal Civil Infraction for
such conduct and shall pay a civil penalty in accordance with Ch. 37.



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing, the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
contrary to the public interest.  The owner of the business establishment
where such a nuisance exists is also responsible for a Class C municipal
civil infraction as set forth in § 94.002.



   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate violation.



   (E)   Violations of this chapter may result in the suspension or
revocation of the violator’s business license.  Such action shall be taken
in accordance with §110.006.



(Ord. O-201, passed 2-19-2018, effective 3-1-2018)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      132.   DRUG AND ALCOHOL OFFENSES



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY



      134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



General Regulations



   130.01   Abandoned ice boxes, refrigerators, or other containers



   130.02   Bows and arrows



   130.03   Firearms



Disorderly Conduct



   130.15   Definitions



   130.16   Causing or risking public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm



   130.17   Failure or refusal of disorderly persons or bystanders to
disperse upon official order



   130.18   Order to move from public hazard



   130.19   Obstructing public passage or place



   130.20   Disrupting meetings and processions



   130.21   False public alarm



   130.22   Prowling or loitering



   130.23   Prowling or loitering about schools or education, religious
or recreation centers



   130.24   Prowling or loitering around toilet in public place



   130.25   Unlawful occupancy



   130.26   Desecration of venerated objects



   130.27   Influence of alcohol, narcotic drug, other stimulant or
depressant



   130.28   Malicious destruction of property



   130.29   Criminal trespass



   130.30   Harassing, alarming, or offensive conduct



   130.31   Window peeping



   130.32   Disturb the peace of neighborhoods



   130.33   Illegal business or occupation



   130.34   Cock or dog fight



   130.35   Reservoir:  prohibited practices



   130.36   Swimming prohibited in certain areas



   130.37   Conduct at athletic events



   130.38   Offenses against property



Curfew for Minors



   130.50   Definitions



   130.51   Loitering



   130.52   Parental responsibility



   130.53   Notification of parent; record of notification



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 130.01  ABANDONED ICE BOXES, REFRIGERATORS, OR OTHER CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building,
dwelling, or structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling, or structure under his or her control in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or
any other container of any kind which has a cover, lid, or door which when
closed is sufficiently airtight so as to cause, or be in danger of causing,
the death by suffocation of a child enclosed therein, and which has a latch,
snap, catch, lock, or other device which may not be readily released from the
inside of said ice box, refrigerator, or container, without first rendering
said ice box, refrigerator, or container safe by the removal therefrom of the
cover, lid, door, latch, snap, catch, lock, or other device.



(Prior Code, § 130.01)  (Ord. D-322, passed 10-26-1953, effective
11-5-1953)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  BOWS AND ARROWS.



   No person shall discharge or propel any arrow, metal ball, pellet, or
other projectile by use of any bow, long bow, cross bow, slingshot, or
similar device within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 130.02)  (Ord. D-326, passed 1-11-1954, effective 1-21-1954;
Ord. D-1915, passed 2-25-2002, effective 3-7-2002)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  FIREARMS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREARM. Any weapon, whether loaded or unloaded, which will expel
a projectile by the action of an explosive, compressed air or gas, and
includes, but is not limited to, any such weapon commonly referred to as a
pistol, revolver, rifle, gun, or machine gun. Any weapon which can be readily
made into a FIREARM by the insertion of a firing pin or other similar thing
in the actual possession of the actor or an accomplice, is a FIREARM.



      PISTOL. Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, 30 inches or less in
length; or any firearm, loaded or unloaded, which by its construction and
appearance conceals it as a firearm.



      PURCHASER. Any person who receives a pistol from another by
purchase, gift, or loan.



   (B)   Sales and licensing.



      (1)   Records of sales of firearms. Every person, and his or
her agent or employee, selling or delivering pistols or other firearms within
the city shall keep a book in which shall be written in ink the name, age,
address, and personal description of every person purchasing or receiving a
pistol or other firearm from him or her, and the make, number if any, and
general description of such pistol or other firearm; also the date and hour
of such purchase. Such books shall at all times be open to the inspection of
any member of the Police Department. Such books shall be substantially bound
and of a size not less than six inches in width and breadth and shall have
legibly written therein, in the English language, the information aforesaid.
No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated, altered, or defaced.



      (2)   Weekly reports to police of firearm sales. Every person
who makes a sale or delivery of any firearm shall make out, at the end of
each business week, on a blank form to be furnished by the Police Department
for that purpose, a legible and correct copy of the record of sales required
to be kept concerning the particulars of sales and deliveries of such
firearms during that business week, and shall deliver or cause to be
delivered such copy of such record to the Chief of Police or his or her
authorized representative, at his or her office, not later than the Monday
following the end of each such business week.



      (3)   Failure to complete and return license to purchase
pistol. It shall be unlawful for the purchaser of any pistol to be or remain
in possession thereof if the completed license to purchase the same shall not
have been returned to the licensing authority within ten days of the purchase
of the pistol, as required by law.



   (D)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   Discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to discharge a firearm in the city.



      (2)   Exceptions. It shall not be a violation of this section
to discharge a firearm under the following conditions:



         (a)   In the protection of life;



         (b)   Law enforcement officers in the performance of
their duties;



         (c)   An established and lawfully permitted educational
program properly supervised; and



         (d)   Military functions, such as parades, funerals,
firing blank charges.



(Prior Code, § 130.03)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1016, passed 1-24-1972, effective 1-24-1972; Ord. D-1223, passed
5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977; Ord. D-1843, passed 8-9-1999, effective
8-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 130.99



DISORDERLY CONDUCT



§ 130.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Shall have the same meaning as that term is given
in the Michigan Liquor Control Code, Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L. §§
436.1101 et seq.



   LOITER.



      (1)   To stand or lounge around or move slowly about, to spend
time idly, to saunter, or to linger; or



      (2)   To repeatedly pass the same place without any apparent
reason.



   OBSCENE COMMUNICATION. Discussion, description, or representation of
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse which,
when taken as a whole, the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find appeals to the prurient or morbid interest; which
depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sado-masochistic abuse in a patently offensive way; and which when taken as a
whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.



   PUBLIC PLACE.



      (1)   A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access. Among places included are any:



         (a)   Highway, street, road, alley, sidewalk, park,
parking lot, river, public water, wharf, dock, waterfront, publicly-owned or
controlled open ground;



         (b)   Publicly-owned or controlled building, excluding
any interior portion thereof being used as a dwelling;



         (c)   Place of business;



         (d)   Place of amusement, entertainment, recreation, or
education open to the general public;



         (e)   Place where services are rendered to the public or
a substantial group of persons;



         (f)   Transport facility;



         (g)   Public conveyance;



         (h)   Place of religious worship;



         (i)   Place of manufacturing;



         (j)   Railroad right-of-way;



         (k)   Hospital;



         (l)   Cemetery;



         (m)   Common area of any hotel or apartment building;



         (n)   Private meeting place when a privately employed
special-duty police officer, special-duty deputy sheriff, or deputy sheriff
is on duty there;



         (o)   Grounds appurtenant to any of the above
designated; and



         (p)   Parking facility used in connection with any of
the above designated.



      (2)   The foregoing enumeration shall be deemed partial and
shall not operate to exclude other places which are within the general terms
of this definition.



(Prior Code, § 130.15)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1170, passed 8-25-1975, effective 9-4-1975)



§ 130.16  CAUSING OR RISKING PUBLIC INCONVENIENCE, ANNOYANCE OR ALARM.



   No person shall purposely cause, recklessly create a risk of, or
knowingly contribute to inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to any person in a
public place by:



   (A)   Engaging in fighting or threatening the physical safety or
another;



   (B)   Engaging in physically violent or tumultuous behavior; or



   (C)   Jostling or roughly crowding persons unnecessarily.



(Prior Code, § 130.16)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1481, passed 4-22-1985, effective 5-2-1985; Ord. D-1881, passed
1-2-2001, effective 1-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF DISORDERLY PERSONS OR BYSTANDERS TO
DISPERSE UPON OFFICIAL ORDER.



   When any person is participating in a course of conduct described in §
130.16 which is likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm, a peace officer may order the participant and others in
the immediate vicinity to disperse. No person shall refuse or knowingly fail
to obey such an order.



(Prior Code, § 130.17)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  ORDER TO MOVE FROM PUBLIC HAZARD.



   No person in dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard shall refuse
or knowingly fail to obey a reasonable official request or order to move for
the purpose of maintaining public safety.



(Prior Code, § 130.18)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.19  OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC PASSAGE OR PLACE.



   (A)   No person shall, without legal privilege to do so, and whether
alone or with others, purposely or recklessly obstruct or cause to be
obstructed any public passage or place.



   (B)   No person without legal privilege shall block, impede, or
otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
upon a public street by means of a barricade, object, or device, or with his
or her person. This division (B) shall not apply to persons maintaining,
rearranging, or constructing public utility facilities in or adjacent to a
street.



   (C)   No person shall refuse or knowingly fail to obey a reasonable
official order or request to move to prevent obstruction of any public
passage or place or blockage, impediment, or other interference with the
normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public street.



   (D)   OBSTRUCT and OBSTRUCTION mean to render impassable or unusable
without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard.



   (E)   When persons are lawfully assembled in a public place to
communicate publicly or to listen to or observe such communication, no person
(including communicators) so assembled shall be convicted of recklessly
obstructing in violation of division (A) above unless he or she has first
been given a reasonable opportunity to comply with division (C) above.



   (F)   No person whose lawful behavior attracts an obstructing
audience shall be guilty of violating division (C) above if the obstruction
can be readily remedied by reasonable police control of the size or location
of the audience.



(Prior Code, § 130.19)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1119, passed 10-7-1974, effective 10-17-1974)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.20  DISRUPTING MEETINGS AND PROCESSIONS.



   No person shall, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering:



   (A)   Do any act tending to obstruct or interfere with it
physically; or



   (B)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display designed to outrage
the sensibilities of the group.



(Prior Code, § 130.20)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  FALSE PUBLIC ALARM.



   No person shall initiate or circulate a report or warning of a fire or
an impending bombing or other catastrophe or crime knowing that the report or
warning is false or baseless and knowing or recklessly disregarding that it
is likely to cause evacuation of a building, place of assembly, or facility
of public transport, or otherwise likely to cause public inconvenience or
alarm.



(Prior Code, § 130.21)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.22  PROWLING OR LOITERING.



   (A)   No person shall prowl or loiter on foot, in a motor vehicle,
or in any other way in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for
law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and
reasonable alarm for immediate concern for the safety or health of any person
or property in the vicinity.



   (B)   Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to an arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any
alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting
the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and
conduct.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with division (B) above, or
if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and
would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern.



(Prior Code, § 130.22)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1965;
Ord. D-1758, passed 1-22-1996, effective 2-1-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.23  PROWLING OR LOITERING ABOUT SCHOOLS OR EDUCATION, RELIGIOUS OR
RECREATION CENTERS.



   (A)   No person shall prowl or loiter on foot, in a motor vehicle,
or in any other manner in or about any of the following places without an
apparent legitimate purpose reasonably connected therewith:



      (1)   School building;



      (2)   Recreation centers for minor;



      (3)   A public place where an educational, religious, or
recreation activity for minors is being conducted;



      (4)   Grounds or parking lots appurtenant to or used in
connection with divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) above; and



      (5)   A street or alley in the immediate vicinity of any
above-mentioned place.



   (B)   (1)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining that such loitering is not for an apparent legitimate purpose
reasonably connected therewith is the fact that:



         (a)   The person takes flight upon appearance of or
investigation by a law enforcement officer;



         (b)   The person is not within the age group to which
the educational, religious, or recreational center or activity is directed;
and/or



         (c)   The law enforcement officer has knowledge or
reliable information that the person has quit school or been expelled
therefrom or that the person has been ordered to stay away from the
educational, religious, or recreation center or activity by a person in
charge of or supervising said activity.



      (2)   This enumeration shall be deemed partial and shall not
operate to exclude other circumstances which are within the general terms of
division (A) above.



   (C)   Unless flight by the person or other circumstance makes it
impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to an arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to manifest a
legitimate purpose reasonably connected with said place or activity, by
requesting him or her to identify himself or herself and explain his or her
presence and conduct.



   (D)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with division (C) above, or
if it appears at trial that the identification and explanation was true and,
if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have established a
legitimate purpose reasonably connected with said place or activity.



(Prior Code, § 130.23)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1758, passed 1-22-1996, effective 2-1-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.24  PROWLING OR LOITERING AROUND TOILET IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   (A)   No person shall loiter or prowl in or about any toilet in any
public place without legitimate purpose.



   (B)   Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a peace officer shall prior to an arrest for an offense under
this section afford the person an opportunity to identify himself or herself
and explain the purpose of his or her presence and conduct.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the peace officer did not comply with division (B) above or if it appears
at trial that the identification and explanation were true and, if believed
by the peace officer at the time, would have established a legitimate purpose
for the person’s presence and conduct.



(Prior Code, § 130.24)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.25  UNLAWFUL OCCUPANCY.



   No person shall occupy, lodge, or sleep in or on any structure,
vehicle, or other means of conveyance, or vacant land without owning same or
without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof.



(Prior Code, § 130.25)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.26  DESECRATION OF VENERATED OBJECTS.



   (A)   No person shall purposely desecrate any public monument or
structure, or any place of burial or worship.



   (B)   DESECRATE means to deface, damage, pollute, or otherwise
mistreat in a way that the actor knows will outrage the sensibilities of
persons likely to observe or discover his or her action physically.



(Prior Code, § 130.26)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.27  INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, NARCOTIC DRUG, OTHER STIMULANT OR
DEPRESSANT.



   (A)   No person who is intoxicated and who is either endangering
directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner
that causes a public disturbance shall appear in any public place.



   (B)   No person shall appear in any public place manifestly under
the influence of any narcotic, drug, or other stimulant or depressant, except
alcohol, to the degree that he or she may endanger himself or herself or
other persons or property.



(Prior Code, § 130.27)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1252, passed 1-30-1978, effective 2-9-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.28  MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   No person shall maliciously destroy or injure any public property or
any private property not his or her own.



(Prior Code, § 130.28)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.29  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.



   No person shall willfully and without lawful authority:



   (A)   Enter upon the lands or premises of another after having been
forbidden to do so by the owner, occupant, person in control thereof, or the
agent or servant of the owner, occupant, or persons in control thereof; or



   (B)   Being upon the premises of another neglect or refuse to depart
therefrom after being notified to do so by the owner, occupant, person in
control thereof, or agent or servant of the owner, occupant, or person in
control thereof.



(Prior Code, § 130.29)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.30  HARASSING, ALARMING, OR OFFENSIVE CONDUCT.



   No person with purpose to harass or alarm another shall:



   (A)   Use lewd, disorderly, threatening, profane, or obscene words
or physical gestures in a fighting or taunting manner that is reasonably
likely to provoke another person of common intelligence to retaliate in a
physically violent or disorderly manner;



   (B)   Frighten or attempt to frighten another by threat, physical
gesture or menace of unlawful bodily harm that places the other in fear for
their personal safety; or



   (C)   Subject another to an offensive and/or unwelcome touching.



(Prior Code, § 130.30)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1481, passed 4-22-1985, effective 5-2-1985; Ord. D-1882, passed
1-2-2001, effective 1-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.31  WINDOW PEEPING.



   No person shall engage in window peeping.



(Prior Code, § 130.31)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.32  DISTURB THE PEACE OF NEIGHBORHOODS.



   No person shall purposely disturb, recklessly disregard, or incite any
person to purposely disturb or recklessly disregard the peace and tranquility
of any neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 130.32)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.33  ILLEGAL BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Engage in any illegal business or occupation;



      (2)   Knowingly attend or frequent any place in which an
illegal business is conducted or permitted; or



      (3)   Knowingly loiter about any building, house, structure,
vacant lot, street, curb, lawn, alley, yard, apartment, store, automobile,
parking lot, boat, boathouse, or other place where a controlled substance, a
controlled substance analogue, a counterfeit substance, or drug paraphernalia
are illegally manufactured, sold, used, dispersed, furnished, given away, or
stored.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE, and
COUNTERFEIT SUBSTANCE. As defined in the Public Health Code, Public Act 368
of 1978, being M.C.L. §§ 333.7101 et seq., as amended.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. As defined in § 132.21.



(Prior Code, § 130.33)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1653, passed 3-16-1992, effective 3-26-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.34  COCK OR DOG FIGHT.



   No person shall conduct or attend any cockfight or dogfight.



(Prior Code, § 130.34)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.35  RESERVOIR:  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   (A)   No person shall swim, wade, or bathe in, or place or dump any
sewage, rubbish, or junk in, or engage in skating or boating upon the water
of that portion of Lake Linton south of Ezra Rust Drive except as otherwise
provided herein.



   (B)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her authorized
representative, may issue a permit with the approval of the Superintendent of
Water Treatment allowing recreational use of Lake Linton south of Ezra Rust
Drive including use for model boating and activities associated therewith
upon the furnishing of a general liability policy of insurance issued to the
city by a company approved by the City Attorney and in an amount deemed
adequate by the City Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 130.35)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1272, passed 9-5-1978, effective 9-5-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  SWIMMING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.



   No person shall swim, wade, or bathe in any public waters on or
immediately adjacent to any city-owned land except where specifically
authorized by the city.



(Prior Code, § 130.36)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  CONDUCT AT ATHLETIC EVENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to invade the
playing area of any athletic contest or exhibition while said contest or
exhibition is in progress; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not
apply to the participants or officials in said contest or exhibition.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any persons or persons to cast,
throw, hurl, or fling any bottle, can, receptacle, or any other object which
could cause injury or damage in the spectator area where any athletic contest
or exhibition is conducted or into or upon the area used for the conduct of
said contest or exhibition while the same is in progress and during
intermissions and delays of said contest or exhibition.



(Prior Code, § 130.37)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1018, passed 4-17-1972, effective 4-27-1972)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY.



   No person shall expectorate, urinate, defecate, or perform any other
act which creates a hazardous or deleterious condition in any public place or
upon the property of any other person. This does not apply to public restroom
facilities.



(Prior Code, § 130.38)  (Ord. D-1908, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)  Penalty, see § 130.99



CURFEW FOR MINORS



§ 130.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DELINQUENT ACTS. Those acts which violate the laws of the United
States, the laws of the state, or the ordinances of the city; those acts
which cause or would tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction
of the Probate Code, Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L. § 712A.2; or those
acts by which the minor intentionally causes physical harm to another or
deliberately creates an unreasonable risk of physical harm to himself or
herself or to others. DELINQUENT ACTS do not included traffic violations.



   DRUGS. Any controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the
Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. §§ 333.7101 et
seq., for the State of Michigan.



   MINOR. Any unemancipated person under 17 years of age.



   PARENT. A mother, father, or legal guardian of a minor who has the
responsibility for the health, welfare, care, maintenance, and supervision of
the minor at the time the delinquent act is alleged to have been committed by
the minor.



(Prior Code, § 130.50)  (Ord. D-63, passed 6-28-1943, effective 6-28-1943;
Ord. D-1700, passed 9-13-1993, effective 9-23-1993)



§ 130.51  LOITERING.



   (A)   No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads,
alleys, parks, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment,
vacant lots, or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent as
defined in § 130.50 or where the minor is on emergency errand or legitimate
business or activity directed by his or her parent.



   (B)   No person who is subject to compulsory education under any
applicable state statute, shall wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. of the same day, or other hours
as designated by the respective public school or non-public school that the
child is, or would be if not suspended, required to attend under state law,
on days when the child’s school is in session.



   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above do not apply in the
following circumstances:



      (1)   The child is accompanied by a parent as defined in §
130.50;



      (2)   The child is on an emergency errand or legitimate
business activity directed by his or her parent;



      (3)   The child is permitted to leave his or her school’s
campus and the child has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued,
off-campus permit; and



      (4)   The child is being schooled at the child’s home, or
other selected venue, by his or her parent or legal guardian in an
educational program as required or permitted by state law.



   (D)   Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to be a delinquent child and may be complained against in the Probate
Court for the county.



(Prior Code, § 130.51)  (Ord. D-63, passed 6-28-1943, effective 6-28-1943;
Ord. D-1700, passed 9-13-1993, effective 9-23-1993; Ord. O-91, passed
11-9-2009, effective 11-19-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.52  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The parent of any minor has a continuing responsibility to
exercise reasonable control and supervision over the minor to prevent the
minor from committing or participating in the commission of any delinquent
act.



   (B)   The parental responsibility to exercise reasonable control
includes the following duties, set forth for the purposes of illustration and
not limitation:



      (1)   To keep drugs out of the home and out of the possession
of the minor, except those drugs duly prescribed by a licensed physician or
other authorized medical professional;



      (2)   To keep illegal firearms out of the home, and keep legal
firearms out of the possession of the minor except when being used for
hunting in accordance with local ordinance and state law and with the
knowledge and supervision of a parent;



      (3)   To know the Curfew Ordinance of the city (this
subchapter) and to require the minor to observe the Curfew Ordinance;



      (4)   To require the minor to attend regular school sessions
and to prevent the minor from being absent from school without parental or
school permission;



      (5)   To arrange for proper supervision for the minor when the
parent must be absent;



      (6)   To prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully
damaging, defacing, or destroying real or personal property belonging to
others, including that belonging to the city; and



      (7)   To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property,
illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known
juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental
authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when
necessary.



(Prior Code, § 130.52)  (Ord. D-63, passed 6-28-1943, effective 6-28-1943;
Ord. D-1700, passed 9-13-1993, effective 9-23-1993; Ord. O-93, passed
12-7-2009, effective 12-17-2009)



§ 130.53  NOTIFICATION OF PARENT; RECORD OF NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained by the City Police
Department for the commission of any delinquent act, the parent of the minor
shall be notified as soon as reasonably possible by the city police of the
minor’s arrest or detention and the reason therefor, and the parent’s
responsibility under this subchapter.



   (B)   A record of such notification shall be kept by the City Police
Department



(Prior Code, § 130.53)  (Ord. D-63, passed 6-28-1943, effective 6-28-1943;
Ord. D-1700, passed 9-13-1993, effective 9-23-1993)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall assist, aid or abet any minor in
violating §§ 130.50 through 130.53.



      (2)   A parent of a minor is rebuttably presumed to have
assisted, aided, or abetted a minor who is determined to have committed a
delinquent act under §§ 130.50 through 130.53.



      (3)   A parent of a minor shall be held civilly responsible in
an amount up to $10,000 for the damages caused by the commission of any
delinquent act by a minor.



      (4)   A person in violation of §§ 130.50 through 130.53
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and:



         (a)   Upon the first conviction of a violation of §§
130.50 through 130.53, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, or 30
days in jail, or both fine and jail in the discretion of the court;



         (b)   Upon the second conviction of a violation of §§
130.50 through 130.53, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition
that the person participate in and complete a court-approved, community-based
treatment program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and
training, and the like) and be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, or 60
days in jail, or both fine and jail in the discretion of the court; and



         (c)   Upon the third or subsequent conviction of a
violation of §§ 130.50 through 130.53, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500, or 90 days in jail, or both fine and jail in the discretion of
the court.



(Prior Code, § 130.54)  (Ord. D-63, passed 6-28-1943, effective 6-28-1943;
Ord. D-1700, passed 9-13-1993, effective 9-23-1993; Ord. O-93, passed
12-7-2009, effective 12-17-2009)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   131.01   Gambling and lottery



   131.02   Obscene literature, recordings, and pictures



   131.03   Public nudity



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 131.01  GAMBLING AND LOTTERY.



   (A)   No person or his or her agent or employee shall directly or
indirectly keep or occupy, or assist in keeping or occupying, any common
gambling house or any building or place where gaming is permitted; or shall
permit on any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her any
apparatus used for gaming or gambling; or shall use such apparatus for gaming
or gambling.



   (B)   No person shall, for hire, gain, or reward, keep or maintain a
gaming room or gaming table, or any game of skill or chance, or partly of
skill and partly of chance, used for gaming; or shall knowingly permit a
gaming room or gaming table or any such game to be kept, maintained, or
played on any premises occupied or controlled by him or her, and no person
shall aid, assist, or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming
rooms, gaming table, or game.



   (C)   No person or his or her agent or employee shall directly or
indirectly keep, maintain, operate, or occupy any building or room or any
part thereof or any place with apparatus, books, or any device for
registering bets or buying or selling pools upon the result of a trial or
contest of skill, speed, or endurance or upon the result of a game,
competition, political nomination, appointment, or election or any purported
event of like character; or shall register bets, or buy or sell pools; or
shall knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied, or controlled
by him or her to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid.



   (D)   No person shall have in his or her possession any policy or
pool tickets, slips, or checks, memoranda of any combination or other bet,
manifold, or other policy or pool books or sheets.



   (E)   No person shall attend or frequent any place where gaming or
gambling is permitted, or any place operated or occupied as a common gaming
or gambling house or room.



   (F)   No person shall set up or promote any lottery or gift
enterprise for money, or shall dispose of any property, real or personal,
goods, chattels, or merchandise or valuable thing by the way of lottery or
gift enterprise; and no person shall aid in the setting up, managing, or
drawing of any such lottery or gift enterprise, or shall in any house, shop,
or building owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her knowingly permit the
setting up, managing, or drawing of any such lottery or gift enterprise; and
no person shall sell or offer for sale or knowingly permit the sale of any
lottery ticket, or any other writing, certificate, bill, goods, chattels or
merchandise, token, or other device purporting or intended to entitle the
holder or bearer or other person to any prize or gift, or to any share of or
interest in any prize or gift to be drawn in any such lottery or gift
enterprise, or shall knowingly permit money or other property to be raffled
for in such house, shop, or building.



   (G)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The state lottery as provided in the
McCauley-Traxler-Law-Bowman-McNeely Lottery Act, Public Act 239 of 1972,
being M.C.L. §§ 432.1 et seq.; or



      (2)   Any bingo game held or conducted pursuant to the
McCauley-Traxler-Law-Bowman  Bingo Act, Public Act 382 of 1972, being M.C.L.
§§ 432.101 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 131.01)  (Ord. D-200, passed 11-7-1949, effective
11-17-1949; Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)  Penalty, see
§ 30.99



§ 131.02  OBSCENE LITERATURE, RECORDINGS, AND PICTURES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      HARMFUL TO MINORS. That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse when it:



         (a)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful,
or morbid interest of minors;



         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in
the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and



         (c)   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for
minors.



      KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of
both:



         (a)   The character and content of any material
described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the
defendant; and



         (b)   The age of the minor, provided, however, that an
honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the
defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of
such minor.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.



      NUDITY. The showing of human male or female genitals, pubic area,
or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
so clothed.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, or physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be a female, breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   (B)   Selling to minors. No person shall knowingly sell or loan for
monetary consideration to a minor:



      (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion
picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sado-masochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or



      (2)   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in
division (B)(1) above, or explicit and detailed verbal description or
narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sado-masochistic
abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.



   (C)   Exhibiting to minors. No person shall knowingly exhibit for a
monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly sell to a minor an admission
ticket or pass or knowingly admit a minor for a monetary consideration to
premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show, or other
presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sado-masochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors.



   (D)   Furnishing or exhibiting to minors without monetary
consideration. No person shall, without monetary consideration, do any act
which if performed for monetary consideration is prohibited by either
divisions (B) or (C) above.



(Prior Code, § 131.02)  (Ord. D-840, passed 8-12-1968, effective
8-22-1968)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 131.03  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and cited as the “City of
Saginaw Public Nudity Ordinance”.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit public
nudity within the city.



   (C)   Regulations. No person shall:



      (1)   Knowingly or intentionally provide for and/or promote or
participate in the display, in a public place located within the city, of his
or her genitals or anus unless a fully opaque material covers his or her
genitals and/or anus, or of a female individual’s breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola;



      (2)   Knowingly or intentionally provide for and/or promote or
participate in the display, in a public place located within the city, of any
individual’s genitals or anus unless a fully opaque material covers his or
her genitals and/or anus, or of a female individual’s breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of the nipple or areola; and



      (3)   For purposes of division (C)(2) above, providing for,
promoting, or participating in the display in a public place located within
the city of any individual’s genitals or anus unless a fully opaque
material covers his or her genitals and/or anus, or a female individual’s
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola,
includes public displays for money or items of value or promise of the same
by any person, firm, or other entity including, but not limited to, payment
or promise of payment of an admission fee.



   (D)   Exemptions. The following actions or materials shall be exempt
from application of this section:



      (1)   A woman’s breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the
nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;



      (2)   Material as defined in Public Act 343 of 1984, being
M.C.L. § 752.362; and



      (3)   Sexually explicit visual material as defined in Public
Act 33 of 1978, being M.C.L. § 722.673.



(Prior Code, § 131.03)  (Ord. D-1732, passed 1-3-1995, effective
1-13-1995)  Penalty, see § 30.99



CHAPTER 132:  DRUG AND ALCOHOL OFFENSES



Section



Alcoholic Beverages



   132.01   Consumption prohibited in certain places



   132.02   Permitting consumption in prohibited place



   132.03   Purchase, possession, transportation, and false
representation by persons under 21



   132.04   Furnishing alcohol to persons under 21



   132.05   False representations and documents



   132.06   Transportation or possession prohibited in certain places



Drug Paraphernalia



   132.20   Title



   132.21   Definitions



   132.22   Possession, manufacture, and sale prohibited; exceptions



   132.23   Civil forfeiture



 



   132.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 111



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 132.01  CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in:



      (1)   Any publicly-owned or controlled ground or building,
excluding the interior portion of any such building being used as a dwelling;



      (2)   Any transport facility or public conveyance; or



      (3)   Any parking lot, cemetery, or railroad right-of-way.



   (B)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any of the
following places when such place is not licensed to sell alcoholic beverage
for consumption on the premises:



      (1)   Store or establishment doing business with the public; or



      (2)   Place of amusement, entertainment, or recreation open to
the general public.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary,
alcoholic beverages may be sold and consumed on public property designated
and authorized by the City Council provided that prior to the use of the
public property the vendor of said beverages provides evidence of all of the
following to the satisfaction of said City Council:



      (1)   The precise location where said beverages are to be sold
and consumed;



      (2)   The dates and times for said activities;



      (3)   A proper state license for the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages at the place and times listed in divisions (C)(1) and
(C)(2) above;



      (4)   Adequate public liability and property damage insurance
for the benefit of the city with a company licensed to sell insurance by the
state;



      (5)   Such other insurance as the City Council deems adequate
for the benefit of the city;



      (6)   Adequate personnel to control the premises where the
alcoholic beverages are to be sold and consumed; and



      (7)   Such other reasonable requirements as said City Council
deems appropriate.



   (D)   The operators, lessees, or sublessees of the Anderson
Enrichment Center are exempt from the requirements of division (C) above
provided that prior to the use of the premises for the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages they provide satisfactory evidence to the City Manager or
his or her authorized representative of all the following:



      (1)   The dates and times for said activity;



      (2)   A proper state license, if required, for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages at the date and time listed in division
(D)(1) above;



      (3)   Adequate public liability and property damage insurance
for the benefit of the city with a company licensed to sell insurance in the
state;



      (4)   Such other insurance as the City Manager or his or her
authorized representative deems adequate for the city;



      (5)   Adequate personnel to control the premises where the
alcoholic beverages are to be served or sold and consumed; and



      (6)   Such other reasonable requirements as said City Manager
or his or her authorized representative may require.



(Prior Code, § 132.01)  (Ord. D-1365, passed 3-23-1981, effective 4-2-1981;
Ord. D-1697, passed 7-26-1993, effective 8-5-1993)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.02  PERMITTING CONSUMPTION IN PROHIBITED PLACE.



   No person who owns, operates, or controls any place specified in §
132.01(A)(2), (A)(3) or (B) shall permit the consumption of any alcoholic
beverages therein.



(Prior Code, § 132.02)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  PURCHASE, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, AND FALSE REPRESENTATION BY
PERSONS UNDER 21.



   (A)   No person under 21 years of age shall:



      (1)   Purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess or
transport any alcoholic beverage;



      (2)   Knowingly possess, transport, or have under his or her
control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic beverage;



      (3)   Falsely represent himself or herself to be 21 years of
age or over for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, or
otherwise procuring to himself or herself or any other person the sale or
furnishing of any alcoholic beverage; or



      (4)   Knowingly or recklessly, and falsely, represent another
person under 21 years of age to be 21 years of age or over for the purpose of
procuring to any person the sale or furnishing of any alcoholic beverage.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person employed by a
licensee under Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L. §§ 436.1101 et seq., who
is possessing, transporting, or having in a motor vehicle under his or her
control such beverage during regular working hours and in the course of his
or her employment.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to a person less than 21 years of
age purchasing an alcoholic beverage upon authority of and pursuant to a
prescription of a duly licensed physician and forthwith transporting said
beverage unopened to his or her place of abode.



(Prior Code, § 132.03)  (Ord. D-1298, passed 3-19-1979, effective
3-19-1979)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  FURNISHING ALCOHOL TO PERSONS UNDER 21.



   No person shall knowingly or recklessly sell, give, deliver, or
otherwise furnish any alcoholic beverage to a person less than 21 years of
age except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly
licensed physician.



(Prior Code, § 132.04)  (Ord. D-1298, passed 3-19-1979, effective
3-29-1979)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  FALSE REPRESENTATIONS AND DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any false
representation with purpose to procure the sale or furnishing of any
alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age.



   (B)   No person shall furnish to any other person any document or
other writing evidencing age or identity for the purpose of assisting any
person under 21 years of age to obtain any alcoholic beverage. The possession
and use of any such document or other writing by any person less than 21
years of age to obtain any alcoholic beverage shall be prima facie evidence
that such document or other writing was furnished to assist said person in
the purchase or other procurement of an alcoholic beverage.



(Prior Code, § 132.05)  (Ord. D-1298, passed 3-19-1979, effective
3-29-1979)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.06  TRANSPORTATION OR POSSESSION PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   No person shall transport or possess any alcoholic beverage in a
container which is open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, within
the passenger compartment of a vehicle on any street or highway, or any other
place open to the general public, including any area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles, within the city. The phrase STREET OR HIGHWAY
means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part of said width is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel. If the vehicle does not have a trunk or
compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a container which is
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken shall be encased or
enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered passenger vehicle
licensed by the Michigan Public Service Commission.



(Prior Code, § 132.06)  (Ord. D-1120, passed 10-7-1974, effective
10-17-1974)  Penalty, see § 132.99



DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



§ 132.20  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of
Saginaw’s Drug Paraphernalia Ordinance”.



(Prior Code, § 132.15)  (Ord. D-1534, passed 12-22-1986, effective
12-22-1986)



§ 132.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Shall share the same meaning as the term is
defined by the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. §§
333.7101 et seq.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



      (1)   All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is
not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species
of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



         (b)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use
in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing a controlled substance;



         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness,
or purity of controlled substances;



         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose used, intended for
use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seed from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana;



         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing
devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other
containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances;



         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;



         (l)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish
heads, or punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (2)   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA,
a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         (b)   The proximity of the object, in the time and
space, to a direct violation of this subchapter;



         (c)   The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;



         (d)   The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object;



         (e)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
subchapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object
as to a direct violation of this subchapter shall not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use, or designed for use as DRUG PARAPHERNALIA;



         (f)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         (g)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;



         (h)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



         (i)   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         (j)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         (k)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



         (l)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(Prior Code, § 132.16)  (Ord. D-1534, passed 12-22-1986, effective
12-22-1986)



§ 132.22  POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, AND SALE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Possession, manufacture, and sale of drug paraphernalia.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to



plant, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a controlled substance into
the human body.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, offer
for sale, display, supply, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or
manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia knowing that
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce a controlled substance into the human body.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



      (4)   Any person 18 years of age or over who violates division
(A)(2) above by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of
age who is at least three years his or her junior is guilty of a special
offense.



   (B)   Exceptions. To the extent of such permitted conduct only, this
section does not apply to any person or entity who is licensed, registered,
or otherwise permitted by law to manufacture, use, possess, prescribe,
dispense, distribute, conduct research with respect to, or administer a
controlled substance; including persons suffering from asthma, diabetes, or
other medical conditions requiring introduction of a controlled substance
into the human body.



(Prior Code, § 132.17)  (Ord. D-1534, passed 12-22-1986, effective
12-22-1986)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.23  CIVIL FORFEITURE.



   Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or
sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this subchapter
shall be seized and forfeited to the city.



(Prior Code, § 132.18)  (Ord. D-1534, passed 12-22-1986, effective
12-22-1986)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   A person less than 21 years of age who violates §
132.03(A)(1) shall be liable for the following civil fines and shall not be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 30.99:



      (1)   For the first violation, a fine of not more than $25;



      (2)   For a second violation, a fine of not more than $50, or
participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined by state law
and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services or both; and



      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more
than $100, or participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined
by state law, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, or both.



(Prior Code, § 132.03)



   (C) Any person who shall be convicted of any of the provisions of §
132.22(A)(1) through (A)(3) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense and may be punished accordingly.



   (D)   Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of the
provisions of § 132.22(A)(4), or any person who has previously been
convicted of a § 132.22(A)(1) through (A)(3) and is subsequently convicted
of a violation of the same subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and
conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than five days, but
not more than 90 days and, in addition, a fine not to exceed $500 may be
imposed.



(Prior Code, § 132.19)



(Ord. D-1298, passed 3-19-1979, effective 3-19-1979; Ord. D-1534, passed
12-22-1986, effective 12-22-1986)



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY



Section



   133.01   False reports to law enforcement authorities



   133.02   Resisting arrest or other law enforcement



   133.03   Hindering apprehension or prosecution



   133.04   Impersonating a public servant



   133.05   Unsworn falsification to authorities



   133.06   Use of false process



   133.07   Unlawful solicitation



Cross-reference:



   False alarms, see Ch. 90



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 133.01  FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Report to law enforcement authorities an offense or
other incident within their concern knowing that it did not occur; or



      (2)   Pretend to furnish law enforcement authorities with
information relating to an offense or incident when he or she knows he or she
has no information relating to such offense or incident.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly give false information to any law
enforcement officer with purpose to implicate another or to exculpate himself
of herself.



(Prior Code, § 133.01)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977; Ord. D-1874, passed
9-25-2000, effective 10-5-2000)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 133.02  RESISTING ARREST OR OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT.



   No person, with purpose to prevent a peace officer from effecting a
lawful arrest or discharging any other duty, shall create a risk of bodily
injury to the peace officer or anyone else or employ means justifying or
requiring substantial force to overcome the resistance.



(Prior Code, § 133.02)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 133.03  HINDERING APPREHENSION OR PROSECUTION.



   No person, with purpose to hinder the apprehension, prosecution,
conviction, or punishment of himself or herself or another for crime, shall:



   (A)   Harbor or conceal the other;



   (B)   Provide or aid in providing a weapon, transportation,
disguise, or other means of avoiding apprehension or effecting escape;



   (C)   Conceal or destroy evidence of the crime, or tamper with a
witness, informant, document, or other source of information, regardless of
its admissibility in evidence;



   (D)   Warn the other of impending discovery or apprehension, except
that this division (D) does not apply to a warning given in connection with
an effort to bring another into compliance with law; or



   (E)   Volunteer false information to a law enforcement officer.



(Prior Code, § 133.03)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964;
Ord. D-1873, passed 9-25-2000, effective 10-5-2000)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 133.04  IMPERSONATING A PUBLIC SERVANT.



   No person shall falsely pretend to hold a position in the public
service with purpose to induce another to submit to such pretended official
authority or otherwise to act in reliance upon that pretense to his or her
prejudice.



(Prior Code, § 133.04)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective 11-1-1964)



§ 133.05  UNSWORN FALSIFICATION TO AUTHORITIES.



   (A)   No person shall, with purpose to mislead a public servant in
performing his or her official function:



      (1)   Make any false written statement which he or she does
not believe to be true;



      (2)   Purposely create a false impression in a written
application for any pecuniary or other benefit, by omitting information
necessary to prevent statements therein from being misleading;



      (3)   Submit or invite reliance on any writing which he or she
knows to be forged, altered, or otherwise lacking in authenticity; or



      (4)   Submit or invite reliance on any sample, specimen, map,
boundary mark, or other object which he or she knows to be false.



   (B)   No person shall make a written false statement which he or she
does not believe to be true, on or pursuant to a form bearing notice,
authorized by law, to the effect that false statements made therein are
punishable.



   (C)   It is not a defense to prosecution for this offense that the
declarant was not competent to make said statement, omission, submission, or
invitation.



   (D)   No person shall be guilty of an offense under this section if
he or she retracted the falsification in the course of the proceeding in
which it was made before it became manifest that the falsification was or
would be exposed and before the falsification substantially affected the
proceeding.



   (E)   Where the defendant made inconsistent statements, omissions,
submissions, invitations, or combination thereof within the period of the
statute of limitations, the prosecution may proceed by setting forth the
inconsistent statements, omissions, submissions, invitations, or combination
thereof in a single charge alleging that one or the other was false and not
believed by the defendant. In such case it shall not be necessary for the
prosecution to prove which was false but only that one or the other was false
and not believed by the defendant to be true.



   (F)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
where proof of falsity rests solely upon contradiction by unsupported oral
testimony of a single person other than the defendant.



(Prior Code, § 133.05)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 133.06  USE OF FALSE PROCESS.



   No person shall serve upon any debtor any notice or demand for the
payment of money on behalf of any creditor which, in form or substance,
simulates any legal process issued out of any of the courts of this state.



(Prior Code, § 133.06)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 133.07  UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION.



   No person shall loiter in or about any public place for the purpose of
soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties on
criminal recognizance.



(Prior Code, § 133.07)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 30.99



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   134.01   Defacing motor or serial numbers



Cross-reference:



   Incorporation of state violations, see § 31.01



   Responsibility for violations, see § 31.02



§ 134.01  DEFACING MOTOR OR SERIAL NUMBERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership, or
corporation to conceal or misrepresent the identity of any motor, household
appliance, or mechanical device by:



      (1)   Removing or defacing the manufacturer’s serial or
motor number; or



      (2)   Altering or replacing any part of such motor, appliance,
or mechanical device bearing the serial or motor number with a new or
replaced part upon which the proper serial or motor number has not been
stamped or placed.



   (B)   In all prosecutions under this section, possession by any
dealer, distributor, wholesaler, or person, firm, copartnership or
corporation in the business of buying and selling of any motor, appliance, or
mechanical device with the manufacturer’s serial or motor number removed,
defaced, or altered, or with a part bearing such number replaced by one on
which the proper number does not appear, shall be prima facie evidence of
violation of the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 134.01)  (Ord. D-665, passed 9-8-1964, effective
11-1-1964)  Penalty, see § 30.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS



      152.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



      153.   ZONING CODE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Agency designated



   150.02   Fees



   150.03   Violations



   150.04   Building Official designated



   150.05   Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies



   150.06   Building Board of Appeals



   150.07   Plumbing Board of Appeals



   150.08   Electrical Board of Appeals



   150.09   Mechanical Board of Appeals



Sign Code



   150.20   Sign Code adopted by reference



   150.21   Sign Code amendments



 



   150.99   Penalty



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  AGENCY DESIGNATED.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, Michigan
Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, Michigan Electrical Code (NEC), and
the Stille-Derosset-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act 239
of 1972, being M.C.L. § 125.1508b(2), as amended, the Chief Inspector is
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of
the city under Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L. §§ 125.1501 through
125.1531, as amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for
the administration and enforcement throughout its corporate limits.



(Prior Code, § 150.01)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.02  FEES.



   The fee for each building permit shall be as set forth in division (A)
below. The fee for each plumbing permit shall be as set forth in division (B)
below. The fee for each electrical permit shall be as set forth in division
(C) below. The fee for each mechanical permit shall be as set forth in
division (D) below.



   (A)   Building permit and inspection fees. The building permit and
inspection fees be established by City Council and posted in the office of
the City Clerk.



   (B)   Plumbing permit and inspection fees. The plumbing permit and
inspection fees be established by City Council and posted in the office of
the City Clerk.



   (C)   Electrical permit and inspection fees. The electrical permit
and inspection fees be established by City Council and posted in the office
of the City Clerk.



   (D)   Mechanical permit and inspection fees. The mechanical permit
and inspection fees be established by City Council and posted in the office
of the City Clerk.



   (E)   Refundable reinspection fee. A refundable reinspection fees as
established by City Council and posted in the office of the City Clerk above
shall be paid at the time of application for all permits. The fee shall be
refunded to the applicant provided:



      (1)   The applicant has requested the refund of said fee prior
to the expiration of the permit;



      (2)   The applicant has received an approved final inspection
prior to the expiration of the permit; and



      (3)   The applicant has caused the work to be completed
without the need for additional inspections (i.e., reinspection of work which
was initially done in violation of the appropriate code).



   (F)   Plan review fee.



      (1)   Any person requesting that construction plans be
reviewed for code compliance shall make application to the Chief Inspector on
a form provided by the Inspections Division and pay a plan review fee equal
to 20% of the building permit fee as required in division (A) above.



      (2)   If the project only requires plumbing, mechanical, or
electrical review, the fee shall be equal to an amount established by City
Council and posted in the office of the City Clerk.



      (3)   The fee shall be required for all construction which
requires construction plans as provided for in the appropriate code.



(Prior Code, § 150.02)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001; Ord. O-5, passed 6-2-2003, effective 6-12-2003; Ord. O-103,
passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 150.03  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the
city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any of the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential
Code, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, or the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the state.



   (B)   Any building, structure, premises or property erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed,
converted, demolished, equipped, used, occupied, or maintained in violation
of these codes are hereby declared a nuisance per se. Upon application to any
court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated
and/or the violation or threatened violation restrained or enjoined.



(Prior Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.04  BUILDING OFFICIAL DESIGNATED.



   The Chief Inspector of the city shall be the Building Official and/or
Code Official under the Michigan Building Code as defined, and is therein
charged with its administration and enforcement.



(Prior Code, § 150.04)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.05  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT UTILITIES IN EMERGENCIES.



   The Code Official or his or her authorized representative shall have
the authority to disconnect or order disconnected the fuel-gas utility
service or any fuel source or energy supply to a building, structure,
premises, equipment, or property regulated by this code in the case of an
emergency when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or
property. The Code Official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving
utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure, premises,
equipment, or property of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such
action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner, and occupant of the
building, structure, premises, equipment, or property in writing of such
disconnection immediately thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 150.05)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.06  BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Building Board of Appeals, created and empowered as
provided in § 12.017, in order that the suitability of alternate materials
and types or methods of construction under this code may be determined and to
provide for reasonable interpretation of this code shall, upon application,
hear and determine any written appeal made to it by a person considering
himself or herself aggrieved by any action or decision of any official acting
under the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Service of an appeal shall be made to the Secretary of the
Board in care of the Chief Inspector within ten days after such action or
decision appealed from. All appeals shall be made in writing, providing the
address where the alleged grievance occurred, is occurring or will occur, the
name of the appellant, his or her address and telephone number, and the date.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its business pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Chief Inspector and may
recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent herewith.



   (D)   The Building Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative
to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the
Board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.



(Prior Code, § 150.06)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.07  PLUMBING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Plumbing Board of Appeals, created and empowered as
provided in § 12.021, in order that the suitability of alternate materials
and types or methods of construction under the Plumbing Code may be
determined and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the Plumbing Code
shall, upon application, hear and determine any written appeal made to it by
a person considering himself or herself aggrieved by any action or decision
of any official acting under the provisions of the Plumbing Code.



   (B)   Service of an appeal shall be made to the Secretary of the
Board in care of the Chief Inspector within ten days after such action or
decision appealed from. All appeals shall be made in writing, providing the
address where the alleged grievance occurred, is occurring or will occur, the
name of the appellant, his or her address and telephone number, and the date.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its business pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Chief Inspector and may
recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent herewith.



   (D)   The Plumbing Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative
to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the
Board be empowered to waive requirements of the Plumbing Code.



(Prior Code, § 150.07)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.08  ELECTRICAL BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Electrical Board of Appeals, created and empowered as
provided in § 12.016, in order that the suitability of alternate materials
and types or methods of construction under the Electrical Code may be
determined and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the Electrical
Code shall, upon application, hear and determine any written appeal made to
it by a person considering himself or herself aggrieved by any action or
decision of any official acting under the provisions of the Electrical Code.



   (B)   Service of an appeal shall be made to the Secretary of the
Board in care of the Chief Inspector within ten days after such action or
decision appealed from. All appeals shall be made in writing, providing the
address where the alleged grievance occurred, is occurring or will occur, the
name of the appellant, his or her address and telephone number, and the date.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its business pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Chief Inspector and may
recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent herewith.



   (D)   The Electrical Board of Appeals shall have no authority
relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor
shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of the Plumbing Code.



(Prior Code, § 150.08)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



§ 150.09  MECHANICAL BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Mechanical Board of Appeals, created and empowered as
provided in § 12.018, in order that the suitability of alternate materials
and types or methods of construction under the Mechanical Code may be
determined and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the Mechanical
Code shall, upon application, hear and determine any written appeal made to
it by a person considering himself or herself aggrieved by any action or
decision of any official acting under the provisions of the Mechanical Code.



   (B)   Service of an appeal shall be made to the Secretary of the
Board in care of the Chief Inspector within ten days after such action or
decision appealed from. All appeals shall be made in writing, providing the
address where the alleged grievance occurred, is occurring or will occur, the
name of the appellant, his or her address and telephone number, and the date.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its business pursuant hereto and shall render all decisions in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Chief Inspector and may
recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent herewith.



   (D)   The Mechanical Board of Appeals shall have no authority
relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor
shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of the Plumbing Code.



(Prior Code, § 150.09)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



SIGN CODE



§ 150.20  SIGN CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   A certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk
(City Clerk’s File #313-C-7) being marked and designated as “Uniform Sign
Code 1991 Edition” published by the International Conference of Building
Officials (hereinafter referred to as the “Uniform Sign Code” or “this
Code”), be and the same is hereby adopted as the sign code of the city and
made part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



   (B)   Printed copies of the Uniform Sign Code shall be kept in the
office of the City Clerk, available for inspection by and distribution to the
public at all times.



   (C)   The Chief Inspector of the city or his or her regularly
authorized representative, shall be the Building Official, under the Uniform
Sign Code as defined in § 103, Chapter 1, “Title, Scope and
Enforcement”, who is therein charged with its administration and
enforcement.



   (D)   Ord. D-1209 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.



   (E)   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities
existing, acquired, and incurred under any ordinances hereby repealed at the
time this section takes effect, are hereby retained, and such proceedings may
be consummated under and according to the ordinance in force at the time such
proceedings are or were commenced. It is the intent that this section shall
not be construed to alter, affect, or abate any pending prosecution or
prevent prosecution hereinafter instituted under such ordinances or any
section thereof for offenses committed prior to the effective date of this
section or for offenses committed thereafter in connection with permits
issued prior to the effective date of this section, and all prosecutions
instituted after the effective date of this section for offenses committed
prior to the effective date of this section or for work conducted under
permits issued prior to the effective date hereof, may be continued or
instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance or
sections thereof in force at the time of the commission of such offense.



(Prior Code, § 150.20)  (Ord. D-1675, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-9-1992)



§ 150.21  SIGN CODE AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Section 103, Enforcement. Section 103, “Enforcement”, of
Chapter 1, “Title, Scope and Enforcement” of the Uniform Sign Code, 1991
edition, as enacted in Ord. D-1675 (City Clerk’s File 313-C-7) referred to
as the “Uniform Sign Code” or “this Code”, is hereby amended to read
as follows:



   Section 103. Enforcement



      (a)   Authority. The Building Official is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. For these purposes the
Building Official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.



      (b)   Right of Entry. When necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building Official or an
authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in a building or upon a premises a condition or code violation which makes
the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building
Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect
the same or to perform the duties imposed upon the Building Official by this
Code. If the building or premises is occupied, the Building Official shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If the building or
premises is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building
Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.



      (c)   Board of Appeals. In order to provide for reasonable
interpretation of the provisions of this Code there is hereby established a
Board of Appeals as provided in the Building Code. The Board of Appeals
established under the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the city, and the
Board of Appeals established under this Code shall be one and the same.



      (d)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any sign in the
city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any of the provisions of this Code.



         Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this Code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any
such violation such persons shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 or more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



         Any sign erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
moved, improved, removed, converted, demolished, equipped, used, occupied or
maintained in violation of this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance per
se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may
order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation
restrained and enjoined.



      (e)   Liability. Any employee or official of the City of
Saginaw, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this Code or other
pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties.
Any suit brought against the Building Official or employee of the City of
Saginaw, Michigan because of such act or omission performed by him or her in
the enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or
ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this Code or enforced by
the City of Saginaw shall be defended by the City of Saginaw until final
determination of such proceedings, and any judgement resulting therefrom
shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.



         This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen
the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any
building, structure, or premises for any damages to persons or property
caused by defects, nor shall the City of Saginaw be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code or any permits
or certificates issued under this Code.



      (f)   Cooperation of Other Officials and Officers. The
Building Official may request, and shall receive the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is required in
the discharge of the duties required by this Code or other pertinent law or
ordinance.



   (B)   Section 303, Exemptions. Section 303, Exemptions, of Chapter
3, (page 5) “Permits, Fees and Inspections” of the Uniform Sign Code,
1991 edition as enacted in Ord. D-1675 (City Clerk’s File 313-C-7) referred
to as the “Uniform Sign Code” or “this Code”, is hereby amended to
read as follows:



   Section 303. Exemptions.



      A permit is not required for the following signs. These
exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility for its erection, maintenance and compliance with the
provisions of this Code or other laws or ordinances regulating signs.



      1.   Changing of the advertising copy or message on a painted
or printed sign only. Except for theater marquees and similar signs
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, electric signs shall
not be included in this exception.



      2.   Painting, repainting, or cleaning of an advertising
structure or changing the advertising copy or message thereon shall not be
considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit unless a
structural change is made.



      3.   Signs less than six feet above grade, other than special
purpose temporary signs, as defined and covered in § 153.146 of the Saginaw
Code of Ordinances.



   (C)   Section 304, Fees. Section 304, “Fees”, of Chapter 3,
(page 5) “Permits, Fees and Inspections” of the Uniform Sign Code, 1991
edition, as enacted in Ord. D-1675 (City Clerk’s File 313-C-7) referred to
as the “Uniform Sign Code” or “this Code”, is hereby amended to read
as follows:



   Section 304. Fees.



      A sign permit fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule
established as follows. All signs shall pay a permit fee of $25 per sign for
any new sign, replacement sign, or alteration of existing sign. Such fee
shall be paid prior to the erection or alteration of such sign. Permit fees
shall be paid to the Inspections Division.



      Any sign erected or altered, or any work which commencing to
erect or alter a sign, prior to securing the required permit shall be subject
to an additional penalty fee assessment equal to the actual cost of the
permit. Such penalty assessment fee shall be paid at the same time as the
permit fee and prior to continuing any work.



   (D)   Section 307, Annual Licenses for Certain Signs. Section 307,
“Annual Licenses for Certain Signs”, is added to Chapter 3, “Permits,
Fees and Inspections”, following Section 306 (page 6). Section 307 shall
read as follows:



   Section 307. Annual License for Certain Signs.



      An annual encroachment permit (license) shall be obtained from
the Licensed Inspector on a form provided by the City Clerk, by the owner of
any sign on or over, or which might fall into, any street, alley or public
place as required by §§ 96.055 through 96.069, “Encroachments”, of Ch.
96 of this code of ordinances. This license is separate from, and in addition
to, the permit fees listed in § 304 of this Code.



      No such permit/license shall be issued except upon the prepayment
of a permit fee established at § 96.061 of Ch. 96 of this code of
ordinances, and upon certification of the Licensed Inspector, after
inspection, that the sign complies with provisions of this Code and that it
is in good repair and in safe condition.



      The Licensed Inspector reserves the right to remove and/or
confiscate any sign for which a permit has not been obtained, the permit fee
paid and/or an insurance certificate provided, if applicable, in accordance
with § 96.066 of Chapter 96, Title IX of this code of ordinances. In the
event of failure to remove, the Licensed Inspector may, after having provided
30 days’ written notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is
located or suspended (as indicated by the records of the City Assessor),
remove the sign and charge the cost thereof to the owner in accordance with
the provisions of § 33.26 of this code of ordinances.



   (E)   Section 1401, General. Section 1401, “General”, of Chapter
14, (page 28) “Temporary Signs” of the Uniform Sign Code, 1991 edition,
as enacted in Ord. D-1675 (City Clerk’s File 313-C-7) referred to as the
“Uniform Sign Code” or “this Code”, is hereby amended to read as
follows:



   Section 1401. General.



      No temporary sign shall exceed the requirements and limitations
established within § 153.155 of this code of ordinances. Further, no
temporary sign shall remain in place beyond the time periods established for
such signs by § 153.155 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 150.21)  (Ord. D-1676, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-9-1992; Ord. O-102, passed 6-7-2010, effective 6-17-2010)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 30.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
the codes listed in § 150.03 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of these codes are committed,
continued or permitted, and such persons, firms or corporations shall be
punishable by issuance of a Class D municipal civil infraction, as defined
and described in § 30.99.



(Prior Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. D-1905, passed 12-3-2001, effective
12-13-2001)



CHAPTER 151:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Title



   151.002   Purpose



   151.003   Definitions



   151.004   Scope



Permits and Inspections



   151.015   Permit required



   151.016   Permit fees



   151.017   Inspections



Plumbing Standards



   151.030   General provisions



   151.031   Required facilities



Mechanical Standards



   151.045   General provisions



   151.046   Required facilities



Electrical Standards



   151.060   General provisions



   151.061   Facilities required



   151.062   Repair, maintenance, and alteration



Structural Standards



   151.075   General provisions



   151.076   Required facilities



   151.077   Vacant buildings



Other Standards



   151.090   Smoke detectors



   151.091   Garbage and rubbish disposal



   151.092   Dangerous appliances



   151.093   Fences and sidewalks



   151.094   Insects, rodents, and other pests



   151.095   Sanitation



   151.096   Security devices for prevention of burglary



   151.097   Responsibility of occupants



   151.098   Responsibility of owner



Unsupervised Properties



   151.110   Findings and purpose



   151.111   Definitions



   151.112   Non-owner occupied property; prohibited conduct



   151.113   Non-owner occupied property; registry



   151.114   Unoccupied property registry



   151.115   Certificates of compliance



   151.116   Violation; abatement



   151.117   Fees



Dangerous Buildings



   151.130   Scope



   151.131   General provisions



   151.132   Dangerous buildings as public nuisances



   151.133   Commencement of proceedings



   151.134   Notice and order to show cause



   151.135   Hearing officer; hearing; testimony; order; non-appearance
or non-compliance; costs



   151.136   Housing Board of Appeals; demolition/repair; costs/lien on
property



   151.137   Judicial review



   151.138   Waiver provision



   151.139   Emergency cases



   151.140   Conflicting ordinances



   151.141   Proceedings pending



Enforcement



   151.155   Administrative and enforcement officer



   151.156   Modifications



   151.157   Right of entry



   151.158   Notice of violations



   151.159   Appeals procedure



   151.160   Orders to vacate



   151.161   Unauthorized removal of notice or placard



 



   151.998   Violations and enforcement



   151.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Saginaw”, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as
“this chapter”.



(Prior Code, § 151.001)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. O-209, passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard health, safety, property, and public welfare of the people of the
city by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, repair, alteration,
maintenance, and operation of certain buildings, structures, and lots within
the city; to provide for registration of non-owner occupied residences and
unoccupied properties; to determine responsibilities of owners and occupants
of residences; and to provide for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter and penalties for its violation.



(Prior Code, § 151.002)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. O-209, passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words used
in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words used
in the masculine gender include the feminine, and in the feminine include the
masculine.



   ACCESSIBLE. (As applied to electrical equipment.) Admitting close
approach; not guarded by locked doors, elevation, or other effective means.
(See ACCESSIBLE, READILY.)



   ACCESSIBLE, READILY (READILY ACCESSIBLE). Capable of being reached
quickly for operation, renewal, or inspections, without requiring those to
whom ready access is requisite to climb over or remove obstacles or to resort
to portable ladders, chairs, and the like. (See ACCESSIBLE.)



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A supplementary building or a portion of a main
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and
which is located on the same lot as the main building. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
include garages, garden equipment sheds, small greenhouses, swimming pools,
and similar structures.



   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.



   AIR CONDITION EQUIPMENT. All of that equipment intended or installed
for the purpose of cooling air by mechanical means and discharging such air
into any room or space.



   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in
construction or occupancy.



   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof which contains three
or more dwelling units and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes
residential condominiums.



   APPLIANCE. Utilization equipment, generally other than industrial,
normally built in standardized sizes or types, which is installed or
connected as a unit to perform one or more functions such as clothes washing,
air conditioning, food mixing, deep frying, and the like.



   APPROVED. Approval as to materials and types of construction by the
Chief Inspector as the result of investigation or tests conducted by him or
her, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities
or technical or scientific organizations.



   BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a story (first)
as defined herein.



   BATHROOM. A room equipped with facilities consisting of one or more
water closets, lavatories, and either bathtubs or showers.



   BRANCH CIRCUIT. The circuit conductors between the final overcurrent
device protecting the circuit and the outlets.



   BRANCH CIRCUIT, APPLIANCE. A branch circuit supplying energy to one or
more outlets to which appliances are to be connected; such circuits to have
no permanently connected lighting fixtures not a part of an appliance.



   BRANCH CIRCUIT, GENERAL PURPOSE. A branch circuit that supplies a
number of outlets for lighting and appliances.



   BRANCH CIRCUIT, INDIVIDUAL. A branch circuit that supplies only one
utilization equipment.



   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.



   BUILDING CODE. The Michigan Building Code promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the city.



   CLOSET. A small private room or recess used primarily for storing
clothes, linens, and the like.



   CONDEMN. To declare that a dwelling structure is unfit for human
habitation, use, or occupation. The term may also include an order that the
structure shall be vacated.



   CONDUCTOR (ELECTRICAL). An approved material used for the transmission
of electrical energy.



   CONDUIT (ELECTRICAL). An approved material enclosing only air and
unspliced electrical conductors.



   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other either water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, gas, or
chemical whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the
direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two
systems.



   DEAD FRONT (ELECTRICAL). Without live parts exposed to a person on the
operating side of the equipment.



   DEVICE (ELECTRICAL). A unit of an electrical system which is intended
to carry but not utilize electric energy.



   DORMITORY. A room occupied by more than two guests.



   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which contains not more than
two dwelling units.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation, as required by this chapter, for not more than one family.



   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit containing only one habitable
room.



   ELECTRICAL CODE. The National Electrical Code promulgated by the
National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by the city.



   ELECTRICAL SYSTEM. Every supplied piece of electrical equipment,
including, but not limited to, services, permanently connected electrical
appliances, conductors, boxes, fittings, conduit, receptacles, switches,
devices, cover plates, and fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the
Electrical Code of the city and shall be maintained in a safe, satisfactory
working condition, free of hazards, and adequate to carry the loads required.



   EXIT. A place or means of going out.



   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the local or state authority having such administrative
authority.



   FAMILY. As defined in division (1)(a) of the definition of FAMILY found
in § 153.021.



   FIRE CODE. The Uniform Fire Code promulgated jointly by the Western
Fire Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building
Officials, as adopted by the city.



   FIRE-RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION. Construction complying with the
requirements of the Building Code for the time period specified.



   FLOOR AREA. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of
a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The FLOOR
AREA of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding
exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of
the roof or floor above.



   GROUND. A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental,
between an electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, or to some
conducting body that serves in place of the earth.



   GROUND-FAULT CIRCUIT-INTERRUPTER. A device intended for the protection
of personnel that functions to de-energize a circuit or portion thereof
within an established period of time when a current to ground exceeds some
predetermined value that is less than that required to operate the
overcurrent protective device of the supply circuit.



   GROUND-FAULT PROTECTION OF EQUIPMENT. A system intended to provide
protection of equipment from damaging line-to-ground fault currents by
operating to cause a disconnecting means to open all ungrounded conductors of
the faulted circuit. This protection is provided at current levels less than
those required to protect conductors from damage through the operation of a
supply circuit overcurrent device.



   GROUNDED. Connected to earth or to some conducting body that serves in
place of the earth.



   GUEST. Any person hiring or occupying a room for living or sleeping
purposes. A GUEST shall be considered an occupant upon the expiration of 30
consecutive days of such occupancy.



   GUEST ROOM. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest
for sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a
dormitory shall be considered a GUEST ROOM.



   HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage
or utility space, and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACE.



   HEATING EQUIPMENT. Includes all warm-air furnaces, warm-air heaters,
combustion products vents, heating air-distribution ducts and fans, all steam
and hot-water piping together with all control devices and accessories
installed as part of, or in connection with, any environmental heating system
or appliance regulated by the Mechanical Code.



   HEATING SYSTEM. A warm-air heating plant consisting of a heat exchanger
enclosed in a casing, from which the heated air is distributed through ducts
to various rooms and areas. A HEATING SYSTEM includes the circulating-air and
conditioned-air supply and all accessory apparatus and equipment installed in
connection therewith.



   HOT WATER. Water at a temperature greater than or equal to 110°F.



   HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or
designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied,
or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.



   INSPECTOR. The official also known as Chief Inspector who has been
assigned the duty of enforcing this chapter, and all deputies and assistants
of said official designated by him or her to enforce this chapter.



   LODGING HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof containing not more than
five guest rooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise.



   MECHANICAL CODE. The Michigan Mechanical Code as adopted by the state
and the city.



   MOTEL. A building or a group of buildings in which overnight lodging is
provided and offered to the public for compensation and catering primarily to
the public traveling by motor vehicles.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.



   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used
or intended to be used.



   OCCUPANT. Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking,
or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit,
except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an OCCUPANT.



   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, control, or management of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OUTLET. A point on the electrical wiring system at which current is
taken to supply utilization equipment.



   OVERCURRENT. Any electrical current in excess of the rated current of
equipment or the amperage of a conductor.



   OWNER. Every person who is listed on the records in the office of the
City Assessor or Register of Deeds Office for Saginaw County as owning an
interest in a parcel of property on which any dwelling or dwelling unit is
located.



   PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the Building
Official authorizing performance of a specified activity.



   PERSON. A natural person, his or her heirs, executor, administrator,
agents, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation,
its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.



   PLUMBING. The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
plumbing appliances, and plumbing appurtenances in connection with sanitary
drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting system and public or private
water supply systems; within or adjacent to any building or structure. Not
included in this definition are installations of gas piping; chilled water
piping in connection with refrigeration, process, and comfort cooling; hot
water piping in connection with building heating; and piping for fire
sprinklers and standpipes.



   PLUMBING APPLIANCE. Any one of a special class of plumbing fixtures
which is intended to perform a special function. Its operation or control may
be dependent upon one or more energized components, such as motors, controls,
heating elements, or pressure or temperature sensing elements. Such fixtures
may be manually adjusted or controlled by the user or operator, or may
operate automatically through one or more of the following actions: a time
cycle; a temperature range; or a pressure range, a measured volume or weight.



   PLUMBING APPURTENANCE. A manufactured device or prefabricated assembly
of component parts which is an adjunct to the basic piping system and
plumbing fixtures. An appurtenance does not demand additional water supply,
nor does it add any discharge load to a fixture or the drainage system. It is
presumed that it performs some useful function in the operation, maintenance,
servicing, economy, or safety of the plumbing system.



   PLUMBING FIXTURE. A receptacle or device which is either permanently or
temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and
demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, waste
materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of
the premises; or requires both water supply connection and a discharge to the
drainage system of the premises. Plumbing appliances as a special class of
fixture are further defined.



   PLUMBING SYSTEM. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes;
plumbing fixtures, and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; and sanitary and
storm sewers and building drains; including their respective connections,
devices, and appurtenances within a building or premises.



   PORTABLE HEATING APPLIANCE (PORTABLE HEATING EQUIPMENT). A heating
appliance designed for environmental heating which may have a self-contained
fuel supply and is not secured or attached to a building other than by fuel
piping or electrical wiring.



   RECEPTACLE (ELECTRICAL). A contact device installed at the outlet for
the connection of a single attachment plug.



   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
building for the purpose of its maintenance.



   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner to three or
more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, grandson or
granddaughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or
operator.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of
either:



      (1)   Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic
containers, yard clippings, and wood; or



      (2)   Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass, and
crockery.



   SERVICE. The conductors and equipment for delivering energy from the
electricity supply system to the wiring system of the premises served.



   SERVICE EQUIPMENT. The necessary electrical equipment, usually
consisting of a circuit breaker or switch and fuses, and their accessories,
located near the point of entrance of supply conductors to a building or
other structure, or an otherwise defined area, and intended to constitute the
main control and means of cutoff of the supply.



   SHALL. As used in this chapter, is mandatory.



   SMOKE DETECTOR. An approved detector which senses visible or invisible
particles of combustion. The DETECTOR shall bear a label or other
identification issued by an approved testing agency having a service for
inspection of materials and workmanship at the factory during fabrication and
assembly.



   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost STORY shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than
six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total
perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point,
such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered a STORY.



   STORY (FIRST). The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a
story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only
one floor level shall be classified as a FIRST STORY, provided such floor
level is not more than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for more
than 50% of the total perimeter, or not more than eight feet below grade, as
defined herein, at any point.



   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.



   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of
the owner, operator, or agent.



   SWITCH. An approved electrical device, other than circuit breakers and
fuses, manually used to interrupt electrical current.



   UBC STANDARDS. The Uniform Building Code Standards promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the city.



   VENT (MECHANICAL). A listed factory-made vent pipe and vent fittings
for conveying flue gases to the outside atmosphere.



   VENTING SYSTEM (MECHANICAL). The vent or chimney and its connectors
assembled to form a continuous open passageway from an appliance to the
outside atmosphere for the purpose of removing products of combustion. This
definition also shall include the venting assembly which is an integral part
of an appliance.



   WATER CLOSET. An approved plumbing fixture designed, installed, and
used, or intended to be used, for the deposit and disposition of human wastes.



   WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT. Any room containing a water closet.



   WATER HEATER. Any heating device that heats potable water and supplies
it to the potable hot water distribution system.



   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The water service pipe, water distributing pipes,
and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all
appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 151.003)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1884, passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. D-1911,
passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



§ 151.004  SCOPE.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
buildings or portions thereof used, designed, or intended to be used for
human habitation and to accessory buildings and structures. These buildings
may not be occupied if they are in violation of the requirements contained in
this chapter. All non-owner occupied residences and unsupervised properties
shall be registered with the office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   Where any building or portion thereof is used or
intended to be used as a combination apartment house and hotel, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to the separate portions as if they
were separate buildings.



   (B)   Alteration. All alterations, enlargements, additions to,
and/or relocations of existing buildings shall be in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws or ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 151.004)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. O-209, passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)  Penalty, see §
151.999



PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS



§ 151.015  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or
demolish any building or structure regulated by this chapter without first
obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the office of
the Inspector in the manner and according to the applicable conditions
prescribed in the Building Code, the Plumbing Code, the Mechanical Code, or
the Electrical Code of the city.



(Prior Code, § 151.015)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.016  PERMIT FEES.



   Whenever a permit is required by § 151.015, the appropriate fees shall
be paid to the office of the Inspector as specified in the Building Code, the
Plumbing Code, the Mechanical Code, or the Electrical Code of the city.



(Prior Code, § 151.016)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.017  INSPECTIONS.



   All buildings or structures and properties containing such buildings or
structures within the scope of this chapter and all construction or work for
which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Inspector,
in accordance with and in the manner provided by this chapter, the Building
Code, the Plumbing Code, the Mechanical Code, the Electrical Code and the
code of ordinances of the city. Further, the city reserves the right to
inspect buildings and structures within the scope of this code on a periodic
basis due to complaints, registration-license requirement, or other reasons
as permitted by law.



(Prior Code, § 151.017)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1911, passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



PLUMBING STANDARDS



§ 151.030  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   General. Every supplied plumbing fixture, piece of plumbing
equipment, all piping, and fittings required under this subchapter shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing Code of the
city and shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary working condition, free
of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures. Unaltered existing
plumbing which conformed to the applicable laws in effect at the time of
installation may continue in use, provided that it is maintained in a safe
and sanitary working condition, is free of cross-connections and siphonage
between fixtures, complies with § 151.031, and is not dangerous to life,
health, safety, or public welfare.



   (B)   Application. This subchapter shall apply to existing plumbing
systems as described in this section.



   (C)   Alteration or repairs. Alterations or repairs may be made to
any plumbing system without requiring the existing plumbing to comply with
all the requirements of this chapter, provided such alteration or repair work
conforms to that required for a new plumbing system. Alterations or repairs
shall not cause an existing plumbing system to become unsafe or adversely
affect the performance of the plumbing.



   (D)   Additional loads. Where additions or alterations subject parts
of existing system to loads exceeding those permitted herein, such parts
shall be made to comply with the current requirements in the Plumbing Code of
the city for new structures and systems. This is not meant to imply that the
remaining portions, left unaltered, shall be made to be upgraded due to such
partial upgrading of deficient portions.



(Prior Code, § 151.030)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective 12-9-1991)



§ 151.031  REQUIRED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Bathrooms required.



      (1)   Generally. Every dwelling unit, hotel, and every lodging
house shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting
of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower.



      (2)   Hotels. Where bathrooms are not provided in rooms
immediately adjacent to, and for the sole use of, the occupants of a guest
room, there shall be provided on each floor, for each sex, bathrooms
accessible from a common hallway for the first ten guests. Additional
bathrooms shall be provided on each floor, for each sex, at the rate of one
for every additional ten guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of
ten. These rooms shall be clearly marked for “Men” or “Women”.



   (B)   Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen.
Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink.



   (C)   Fixtures.



      (1)   All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary
sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures
shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with
hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation.



      (2)   All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed
earthenware type or of an approved similarly nonabsorbent material.



   (D)   Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet
compartments, except in dwelling units, shall be finished in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code of the city.



   (E)   Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub, or shower
required by this chapter shall be installed in a room which will afford
privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be
separated from food preparation or storage rooms by a tight-fitting door.



   (F)   Prohibited locations of water heaters. Water heaters shall be
located in locations as prescribed by the Plumbing Code and the Mechanical
Code.



   (G)   Laundry facilities. Whenever a dwelling exists which does not
presently possess laundry facilities, it shall not be required to install
such unless mandated by the Plumbing Code of the city at the time of
upgrading of the plumbing system. Whenever partial facilities or improper
facilities exist, it shall be permitted to remove such facilities to gain
compliance with the housing regulations. Whenever laundry facilities are
provided in a dwelling they shall comply with the requirements of the
Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the city.



   (H)   Main water distribution system.



      (1)   All water distribution systems within dwelling units and
buildings shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Plumbing Code of
the city. All main distribution lines shall be a minimum of three-fourths
inch diameter and all branch distribution lines shall be at least one-half
inch diameter. If individual fixtures or appliances require larger diameter
pipe or increased volume or pressure, then alteration shall be made to
conform to those requirements.



      (2)   If existing piping was installed prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter, the following provisions shall apply.



         (a)   The water distribution system and all portions
thereof shall have been installed in accordance with the applicable Plumbing
Code provisions in effect at the time of the installation.



         (b)   The water distribution system and all portions
thereof shall be in a safe and sanitary condition and be properly maintained.



      (3)   A variance for an individual distribution system or
portion thereof existing in a structure which does not comply with this
section may be granted when it can be proven by the Chief Inspector or his or
her authorized representative that the system or the applicable portion of
that system is capable of providing adequate pressure or volume. The
determination of adequate pressure and volume shall be made by the Chief
Inspector or his or her authorized representative using acceptable field
testing procedures.



      (4)   A water distribution system shall consist of a cold
water main distribution line with necessary branches to all fixtures and
appliances requiring cold water and a hot water distribution line with
necessary branches to all fixtures and appliances requiring hot water.
Failure to provide either hot or cold water or both to a dwelling or portion
thereof shall be deemed a serious violation and shall be abated immediately.



   (I)   Drain-waste-vent system.



      (1)   All drain-waste-vent systems serving dwellings or
buildings containing dwelling units shall comply with these requirements. All
such systems shall be sized according to the applicable provisions of the
Plumbing Code of the city or such codes as were in effect at the time of the
installation provided:



         (a)   The system bas been properly maintained and is in
a safe and sanitary condition;



         (b)   Proper venting is provided; and



         (c)   Proper capacity is provided.



      (2)   A variance for individual systems or portions thereof
which do not, in part or whole, comply with these requirements may be granted
by if the Chief Inspector or his or her authorized representative determines,
by use of accepted field tests, that no hazard exists, adequate capacity is
provided, and lack of proper venting does not present a potential for hazard.



(Prior Code, § 151.031)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective 12-9-1991; Ord. D-1911,
passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



MECHANICAL STANDARDS



§ 151.045  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Every supplied piece of mechanical equipment, including food
preparation, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, or other
energy-consuming, heat-producing equipment and all piping, venting, and
electrical connections thereto, shall be installed in accordance with the
Building Code of the city, the Mechanical Code of the city, and all other
applicable laws and ordinances of the city and the state, and shall be
maintained in a safe and satisfactory working condition. Unaltered existing
mechanical installations which conformed to the applicable laws in effect at
the time of installation may continue in use, provided that they are
maintained in a safe and sanitary manner, comply with § 151.046, and are not
dangerous to life, health, safety, or the public welfare.



(Prior Code, § 151.040)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.046  REQUIRED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Heating. Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided
with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70°F at
a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water closet compartments. Unvented fuel-burning heaters, portable heating
equipment employing a flame, or heating equipment using gasoline, kerosene,
or alcohol as fuel shall not be permitted. All heating devices or appliances
shall be of an approved type.



   (B)   Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation systems
provided in lieu of natural ventilation shall be capable of providing not
less than two air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable
rooms, and public corridors. One-fifth (20%) of the air supply shall be taken
from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms,
kitchens, and similar rooms, such a mechanical ventilation system shall be
connected directly to the outside and capable of providing five air changes
per hour.



   (C)   Air conditioning. Permanently installed air conditioning
systems which also provide mechanical ventilation in lieu of natural
ventilation shall comply with division (B) above and the Mechanical Code.
Individual unit room air conditioners shall not be used in lieu of natural
ventilation, but where installed in exterior openings shall not be considered
as reducing the required light and natural ventilation available through such
opening.



   (D)   Gas appliances.



      (1)   Guards. Heating appliances shall be listed by the
American Gas Association or other recognized testing agency. The heating
element or combustion chamber in any such application shall be permanently
guarded so as to prevent accidental contact by any person or material.



      (2)   Connections. Gas appliances shall be connected to the
gas supply by approved connectors in conformance with the Mechanical Code.



      (3)   Flues. Gas appliances shall be vented to approved flues
in conformance with the Mechanical Code.



      (4)   Clearances. Heating appliances shall be installed and
maintained with clearance from combustibles in conformance with the
Mechanical Code.



   (E)   Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be located in
conformance with the Mechanical Code of the city.



(Prior Code, § 151.041)  (Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective
12-9-1991; Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989; Ord. D-1911,
passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



ELECTRICAL STANDARDS



§ 151.060  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Every dwelling unit, dormitory, apartment house, hotel,
lodging house, and motel shall be provided with electrical energy.



   (B)   Every supplied piece of electrical equipment, including, but
not limited to, services, permanently-connected electrical appliances,
conductors, boxes, fittings, conduit, receptacles, switches, devices, cover
plates, and fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the Electrical
Code of the city and shall be maintained in a safe, satisfactory working
condition, free of hazards and adequate to carry the loads imposed.



   (C)   Unaltered existing electrical systems which were properly
installed in accordance with the applicable laws in effect at the time of
installation may continue in use, provided that they are maintained in a
safe, satisfactory working condition, free of hazards and adequate to carry
the loads imposed and are not dangerous to life, health, safety, or the
public welfare; and in addition, for all circuits where overcurrent
protection is provided by a fuse, “S” type 15 amp fusestadt adapters
shall be installed immediately.



(Prior Code, § 151.050)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.061  FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally. Effective immediately, each dwelling unit,
dormitory, apartment house, hotel, lodging house, and motel shall comply with
the requirements of this section; provided, however, any of the
aforementioned structures existing on the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of this section not later than January 1,
1991.



   (B)   Facilities.



      (1)   Entrances and exits. Entrances and exits shall be
illuminated by exterior light fixtures, which shall be controlled by interior
wall switches located for convenient and readily accessible use.



      (2)   Living room.



         (a)   The living room shall be provided with
illumination. The lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch,
located for convenient and readily accessible use, nearest to an entrance to
the living room. Receptacle outlets controlled by a wall switch in lieu of a
lighting outlet shall be permitted.



         (b)   There shall be at least one duplex electrical
outlet on each wall. The outlets shall be conveniently spaced around the room.



      (3)   Kitchen.



         (a)   Each kitchen shall be provided with illumination.



         (b)   Lighting outlets shall be controlled by a wall
switch, located for convenient and readily accessible use, nearest to the
entrance to the room.



         (c)   Separate small appliance circuits shall meet or
exceed the following minimum requirements.



            1.   There shall be a minimum of one small
appliance circuit. Such circuits shall be grounded and have a grounding type
duplex receptacle installed. Such small appliance circuits shall have 12
gauge copper wire and be on a 20 ampere rated circuit breaker or fuse.



            2.   There shall be at least three duplex
receptacle outlets in the kitchen area. All receptacle outlets in the kitchen
shall be grounded.



            3.   At least two of the required receptacle
outlets shall serve the countertop area. These outlets shall be located at
least 30 inches above the floor and adjacent to the countertop.



            4.   The small appliance circuits shall not
contain any appliances, motors, equipment, lights, or receptacle outlets
except those receptacle outlets within the kitchen.



         (d)   Any kitchen failing to meet these requirements
shall meet the requirements of the Electrical Code of the city. All
replacement receptacles shall be grounded. Any receptacles located within a
kitchen are required to be provided with ground fault circuit interrupter
protection in addition to the grounding requirement.



      (4)   Bathroom. Each bathroom shall be illuminated. Lighting
outlets shall be controlled by a wall switch, located for convenient and
readily accessible use nearest to the entrance to the room. A grounding type
electrical duplex receptacle outlet separate from the lighting outlet shall
be provided and shall be located at least 30 inches above the floor and
adjacent to the lavatory. Any new electrical duplex receptacle outlets must
be provided with ground fault protection.



      (5)   Other habitable room. Each habitable room shall be
illuminated. Lighting outlets shall be controlled by a wall switch, located
for convenient and readily accessible use nearest to the entrance to the
room. Convenient duplex electrical receptacle outlets shall be provided with
a minimum of two outlets on opposite walls. An additional electrical outlet
controlled by a wall switch shall be permitted in lieu of a light outlet.



      (6)   Basements. Basements shall be wired for a minimum of one
lighting outlet for each 200 square feet of area or major fraction thereof
for use as general illumination. All enclosed areas that can be walked into
such as toilet rooms, fruit storage rooms, utility rooms, excavated areas,
and the like, shall be provided with at least one lighting outlet (except
areas used as coal bins). Stairway and laundry lighting outlets shall not be
counted as the required basement light outlets.



      (7)   Laundry areas. Laundry areas shall be provided with
illumination. The laundry appliance circuit shall be an independent circuit
with grounding-type duplex receptacle outlets mounted on the wall adjacent to
the laundry area, convenient for use of laundry appliances.



      (8)   Heating equipment. Heating equipment, furnaces, or
heating equipment requiring electrical energy for operation or control shall
be provided with an individual circuit. A disconnect switch shall be provided
on or adjacent to the unit.



      (9)   Lighting in public halls.



         (a)   Every public hall and stairway in every
multiple-dwelling serving five or more dwelling units and in every rooming
house or hotel serving ten or more rooming units shall be adequately lighted
at all times.



         (b)   Every public hall and stairway in structures
devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and serving less than the above number
of dwelling or rooming units may be supplied with multiple switch control,
one at the head and the other at the foot of the stairway controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of
full-time lighting.



      (10)   Service. Services to a dwelling unit either in a
single-family structure or in any other dwelling shall conform to the
following standards.



         (a)   All service equipment shall be “dead front”.
By this it is meant that the equipment shall be so manufactured as to provide
a cover or barrier between those sections to be regularly accessed and those
which contain live connections.



         (b)   Type “S” fusestats fuses and adaptors shall be
installed wherever fusible equipment is used. The January 1, 1991 date set
forth in division (A) above shall not apply to this requirement for the
installation of “S” type fuses. “S” type fusestat fuses and adaptors
shall be installed immediately wherever fused overload protection is
provided. Such type “S” fuses shall be properly sized in accordance with
the allowable ampacity amperage of the conductors and branch circuits as set
forth in the Electrical Code as adopted by the city.



         (c)   All service equipment which controls power to an
individual unit shall be readily accessible to all tenants of that unit at
all times. This must be provided by direct interior access to such equipment
as set forth in the Electrical Code as adopted by the city. At no time can
such equipment be locked so as to deny tenant access nor shall it be so
located that tenants must first exit then re-enter the structure at another
point of entry to access the equipment. An exception to these provisions
shall be granted by the Chief Inspector when the owner provides 24-hour
on-site management of the facility and such management personnel have direct
access to the service equipment. Such 24-hour management shall meet the
requirements for such management as set forth in the Electrical Code as
adopted by the city.



         (d)   No service to any dwelling unit or structure shall
be less than three wire, 120/240 volt, 60 ampere capacity.



         (e)   1.   Service capacity may remain at the minimum
60 ampere capacity if any one of the following conditions are met.



               a.   There are no more than four 120 volt
branch circuits rated at 20 amperes or less.



               b.   The dwelling unit does not exceed 600
square feet and has no more than four 120 volt branch circuits.



               c.   The dwelling unit has more than 600
square feet but less than 1,200 square feet and has not more than any two of
the following circuits: furnace circuit, laundry circuit, one kitchen circuit
(this being allowed as a variance under the provisions of the Electrical Code
of the city).



            2.   If the existing service does not comply with
the above and it is then necessary to increase the service capacity or change
service equipment, the altered or replaced service shall comply with all the
provisions of the National Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the
city. In no case shall such an altered service have a capacity of less than
three wire 120/240 volt 100 ampere capacity.



            3.   Each dwelling unit in a structure shall
require service equipment sized in accordance with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the city with an overall
service with adequate capacity to handle any combined loads of the structure.



            4.   Exception to divisions (B)(10)(e)1. or
(B)(10)(e)2. above: in pre-existing situations, one additional circuit shall
be permitted for a furnace circuit if that circuit was previously installed
under a permit from the city and inspected and approved by the city at the
time of installation.



   (C)   Exception. The provisions in division (B) above may be set
aside by order of the Chief Inspector or his or her designated representative
if the structure has been upgraded under permit from the city, such upgrading
has occurred within the last ten years, and the work has been inspected and
approved by the city at the time of installation and upgrade. Further, such
variance shall be granted only if no hazard is present and if further
updating or upgrading is not undertaken. Presence of a hazard or updating or
upgrading of the electrical system shall negate any variance granted and
shall require full compliance with all applicable provisions.



(Prior Code, § 151.051)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective 12-9-1991; Ord. D-1911,
passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



§ 151.062  REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, AND ALTERATION.



   (A)   Existing wiring and electrical equipment. Existing wiring and
electrical equipment shall be maintained and used as originally listed,
approved, and designed to be used. All new wiring and electrical equipment
used to replace existing inadequate wiring shall comply with all the
provisions of the Electrical Code of the city.



   (B)   Application to existing electrical systems and equipment.



      (1)   Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions,
alterations, or repairs may be made to any electrical system and equipment
without requiring the existing electrical system and equipment to comply with
the requirements of the Electrical Code, provided the addition, alteration,
or repair conforms to that required for a new electrical system and equipment
and provided further that no hazard to life, health, or safety will be
created by such additions, alterations, or repairs. Minor additions,
alterations, and repairs to existing electrical systems and equipment may be
made in accordance with the law in effect at the time the original
installation was made, when approved by the Inspector. Deputy or Assistant
Inspectors shall approve such changes only when authorized by the Chief
Inspector.



      (2)   Existing installations. Electrical systems and equipment
lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter may have
their use, maintenance, or repair continued; provided the use, maintenance,
or repair is in accordance with the original design, no hazard to life,
health, or property is created by such electrical system and equipment or use
thereof, and such use, maintenance, or repair otherwise complies with this
chapter.



      (3)   Changes in building occupancy. Electrical systems and
equipment which are a part of any building or structure undergoing a change
in use or occupancy, as defined in the Building Code, shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter which are applicable to the new use or occupancy.



      (4)   Maintenance. All existing and new electrical systems and
equipment and all parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating
condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe and
hazard-free condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this
chapter shall be maintained in conformance with this chapter. The owner or
his or her designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
electrical system. To determine compliance with this division (B)(4), the
Chief Inspector may cause any electrical system to be reinspected.



(Prior Code, § 151.052)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



STRUCTURAL STANDARDS



§ 151.075  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Generally. Every dwelling, dormitory, apartment house, lodging
house, hotel, or motel and any structure or building located on the same
property and used or designed to be used as an accessory to them, shall be
designed, constructed, and used in accordance with the provisions of the
Building Code of the city. These structures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary, sound, weather-resistant, and hazard-free condition. Existing
structures which were properly designed and constructed in accordance with
the applicable laws in effect at the time of their construction may continue,
provided such structures are maintained as required above and as required
under the terms of the Building Code, comply with § 151.076, and are not
dangerous to life, health, safety, or the public welfare.



   (B)   Exception. Windows which were originally designed and
installed to open may be rendered inoperable, provided that the requirements
of § 151.076(C) are complied with.



(Prior Code, § 151.065)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.076  REQUIRED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Habitable living space.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of floor space for the first occupant, and at least 100 additional
square feet of floor space for every additional occupant. The floor space
shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.



      (2)   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor space for each occupant.



      (3)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room, bathroom, water closet compartment, and hallway shall have a ceiling
height of not less than seven feet. The floor area of the part of any
habitable room or other rooms as mentioned above where the ceiling height is
less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining its
maximum permissible occupancy.



      (4)   A room used as a kitchen shall comply with the ceiling
height requirement, i.e., shall not be less than seven feet. Such designated
rooms (kitchens) shall contain a sink and an area for food preparation. The
food preparation area shall not be the required sink basin.



   (B)   Basements. Space below the first story of a building may be
used as a dwelling unit or guest room, provided that it is free of dampness
and complies with all requirements of this chapter and of all other
applicable laws, codes, and ordinances.



   (C)   Natural lighting.



      (1)   Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window
area measured between stops for every such room shall be 10% of the floor
area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstructing structures are located
less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, the window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type
window in the top of such room, the total window area of that skylight shall
equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.



      (2)   Exceptions. This does not apply to rooms used for
sleeping purposes.



   (D)   Natural ventilation. Natural ventilation shall be provided in
accordance with the Michigan Residential Code.



   (E)   Exits. Every dwelling unit and guestroom shall have access to
at least one approved unobstructed exit. All exits must comply with the
requirements of the Building Code of the city.



   (F)   Security. All individual dwelling units and rooming units
shall be equipped with the following minimum security devices.



      (1)   All windows and doors to the exterior of a dwelling unit
shall be equipped with appropriate locking devices.



      (2)   Exterior doors and dwelling unit doors which are
required by this chapter as means of exit shall not be equipped with locks
which require a key for operation from the side from which exit is to be made.



(Prior Code, § 151.066)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective 12-9-1991; Ord. D-1911,
passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



§ 151.077  VACANT BUILDINGS.



   Whenever dwellings, dormitories, apartment houses, lodging houses,
hotels and motels and properties and portions thereof are vacant and become
open to entry, the owners shall effectively secure the property. If
necessary, the city shall order the boarding of the building, per the
Building Code of the city. In such an event the owners or agents shall cause
the structure(s) to be boarded as directed within the time period designated
by the city but not to exceed ten days. Such boarding shall not be permitted
to remain during occupation of a dwelling, dormitory, apartment house,
lodging house, hotel, or motel, or portion thereof, nor shall it be deemed a
permanent solution to any deficiencies or violations, insomuch that if the
building(s) or structure(s) is not restored to its original use within 180
days from the date the building or structure is boarded it shall be deemed a
nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the dangerous building
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 151.067)  (Ord. D-1911, passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



OTHER STANDARDS



§ 151.090  SMOKE DETECTORS.



   (A)   Requirement.



      (1)   Each dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel room, motel room,
apartment house, guest room, and lodging house, all or any portion of which
is occupied, shall be provided with approved smoke detectors or approved
smoke detection and alarm systems as provided in this section, except for
interior common areas of the buildings covered by the Fire Code of the city,
which are:



         (a)   Buildings which contain three or more dwelling
units or guest rooms or any combination of dwelling units and guest rooms
equal to three or more and which are three stories or more in height; and



         (b)   Buildings which contain 20 or more dwelling units
or guest room or any combination of dwelling units and guest rooms equal to
20 or more, regardless of height.



      (2)   Smoke detectors and smoke detection and alarm systems
shall be maintained in a sound operating condition in accordance with their
original approval.



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   Smoke detectors (one- and two-family dwellings). Smoke
detectors shall be installed in each sleeping room, outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on each
additional story of the dwelling including basements and cellars but not
including crawlspaces or uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels, a smoke detector need be installed only on the upper
level, provided the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level, except that if there is a door between levels, then a detector is
required on each level. All detectors shall be approved and listed and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.



      (2)   Smoke detectors for other than one- and two-family
dwellings. Detectors shall be installed as required by the Building Code of
the city.



      (3)   Power source. Detectors in existing buildings may be
battery-operated type detectors unless one or more of the following occurs.



         (a)   The wiring in the structure is upgraded or the
structure is rewired.



         (b)   Remodeling is performed to the structure which
reasonably permits the installation of wiring to interconnect the detectors
and connection to the building wiring. If detectors are powered by building
wiring, they shall also be equipped with a battery-backup feature.



      (4)   Large apartment houses. In apartment houses which
contain six or more dwelling units, smoke detectors shall be located as
required for small apartment houses. However, all detectors in common areas
shall be connected to an approved fire alarm control panel, supplied by both
primary and secondary power supply sources.



      (5)   Lodging houses. In lodging houses, smoke detectors shall
be installed in the following locations.



         (a)   Guest rooms. Smoke detectors shall be installed in
each guest room.



         (b)   Stairways. Smoke detectors shall be installed near
the top of each stairway as required for dwellings.



         (c)   Common areas. Smoke detectors shall be installed
in each common hall, corridor, or other area immediately adjacent to and
providing access to the guest rooms, located not more than 15 feet, measured
horizontally, from any door or other opening providing such access. They
shall not be separated from the guest rooms by more than one door. All smoke
detectors in common areas shall provide an alarm signal audible within all
guest rooms when all intervening doors are closed. When necessary to meet
this requirement, these detectors shall be connected to sounding devices,
other detectors, or an approved fire alarm control panel.



      (6)   Hotels. In hotels, smoke detectors shall be located as
required for lodging houses. However, all detectors in common areas shall be
connected to an approved fire alarm control panel, supplied by both primary
and secondary power supply sources.



   (C)   Detectors.



      (1)   In new buildings for which building permits are issued
after the effective date of this section, smoke detectors and connected
equipment required by this section shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring, providing this power shall be permanent and without
disconnecting switches other than those required for overcurrent protection.
Approved fire alarm control panels may utilize batteries to provide power for
their secondary source.



      (2)   In all other buildings, smoke detectors and connected
equipment wiring shall be as provided above or from batteries. Required fire
alarm control panels shall receive primary power from the building wiring.



      (3)   All smoke detectors shall be of approved design and
construction. Conformance with the Building Code standard of the city may be
accepted as evidence for such approval.



   (D)   Occupancy prohibited. No owner shall knowingly rent, lease, or
allow to be occupied any building, including its common areas, which does not
contain smoke detectors installed and maintained as required herein. No
person shall knowingly occupy any dwelling unit or guest room which does not
contain smoke detectors installed and maintained as required herein.



   (E)   Maintenance. For all smoke detectors operated by a battery in
a dwelling unit, it shall be the obligation of the owner to install a new
battery in such smoke detector upon renting to a tenant. It shall then be the
obligation of the tenant to maintain the smoke detector with a functional
battery at all times thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 151.075)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1911, passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



Cross-reference:



   Responsibility of owner, see § 151.098



§ 151.091  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL.



   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage and rubbish storage
containers provided in which to place the garbage and rubbish from the
dwelling unit. The containers shall consist of watertight cans or other
containers approved in Ch. 50 of this code and the rules and regulations
adopted thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 151.076)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.092  DANGEROUS APPLIANCES.



   A defective or hazardous appliance, including, but not necessarily
limited to, a cooking range, oven, or refrigerator, not otherwise addressed
in this chapter, which constitutes a danger to the public or to the occupants
of a dwelling, dormitory, apartment house, lodging house, hotel, or motel
shall be repaired or altered to a safe condition or properly disconnected
from sources of energy or fuel and disposed of in a proper manner.



(Prior Code, § 151.077)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.093  FENCES AND SIDEWALKS.



   Fences, sidewalks, driveways, and all other similar constructed
artifacts shall be maintained in reasonably good repair and in a safe
condition.



(Prior Code, § 151.078)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.094  INSECTS, RODENTS, AND OTHER PESTS.



   All dwellings, dormitories, apartment houses, lodging houses, hotels
and motels shall be kept free of infestation of insects, rodents, and/or
similar pests.



(Prior Code, § 151.079)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.095  SANITATION.



   (A)   General. All dwellings, dormitories, apartment houses, lodging
houses, hotels and motels, and properties upon which such structures reside
and all portions thereof shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition.



   (B)   Responsibility of occupants, interior conditions. All
interiors of dwellings, dormitories, apartment houses, lodging houses, hotels
and motels, and all potions thereof, shall be maintained free of unsanitary
conditions. Among unsanitary conditions, but not limited to, shall include:



      (1)   Trash improperly stored:



      (2)   Trash stored in a manner which attracts infestation,
rodents, or vermin;



      (3)   Animal or human waste;



      (4)   Improperly stored food;



      (5)   Unclean or unsanitary kitchen and/or bath conditions; and



      (6)   Bacteria, fungus, or molds.



(Prior Code, § 151.080)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1911, passed 1-28-2002, effective 2-7-2002)



§ 151.096  SECURITY DEVICES FOR PREVENTION OF BURGLARY.



   (A)   Security requirements: exemptions. Except as hereinafter
specifically exempted, all existing and future buildings in the city used by
any person for the purpose of conducting, managing, or carrying on any
business shall, when not occupied by a watchman, maintenance personnel, or
other authorized persons during the period that such building is closed to
business, be so secured as to prevent unauthorized entry or exit in
accordance with specifications for physical security of exterior accessible
openings as provided in divisions (E) and (F) below; provided, that buildings
used for Group “C”, “D”, “H”, “I”, or “J” occupancy as
defined in the Michigan Building Code shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section; and provided further, that the following buildings shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section relating to exterior doors:



      (1)   Buildings used for Group “A” or “B” occupancy as
defined in the Building Code; and



      (2)   Buildings required by the Building Code to have exit
doors equipped with panic, hardware locks.



   (B)   Enforcement; right of entry. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section; and upon
presentation of proper credentials, the Chief of Police or his or her duly
authorized representative may, with the consent of the occupant or pursuant
to a lawfully issued warrant, enter at any reasonable time, any building or
premises used for business purposes, for the purpose of inspecting the
physical security of exterior accessible openings of such building or
premises.



   (C)   Responsibility for compliance. Responsibility for compliance
with the specifications set forth in divisions (E) and (F) below shall be as
follows:



      (1)   As to buildings occupied by a business establishment
which does not share the exterior openings of such building with any other
business establishment, the person operating such business shall be
responsible;



      (2)   As to buildings occupied by two or more business
establishments which share the use of exterior openings of such building, the
owner of the building, or his or her agent having charge, care, or control of
such building, shall be responsible for the security of all such shared
openings; and



      (3)   The security of all other exterior openings shall be the
responsibility of the operator of the business having the use of such
exterior opening.



   (D)   Inspection; notice. The Chief of Police shall inspect or cause
to be inspected the accessible exterior openings of every building subject to
the provisions of this section; and if he or she shall find accessible
exterior openings in any such building which do not comply with the
specifications set forth in divisions (E) and (F) below, he or she shall give
notice in writing to the person responsible, as designated in division (C)
above, setting forth the deficiencies which are to be corrected and the
reasonable period of time within which such corrections shall be completed.
Failure to comply with such notice within the period of time specified shall
be a violation of this section.



   (E)   Security measures: locking devices.



      (1)   Exterior openings of any building. All exterior openings
of any building used for business purposes and subject to the provisions of
this section and not otherwise protected by an intrusion detection system,
approved by the Chief of Police, shall be secured as provided in this
division (E); provided, that locking devices on exit doors in buildings used
for Group “E”, “F”, and “G” occupancies as defined in the
Michigan Building Code shall comply with the requirements of said Building
Code.



      (2)   Front doors. For the purposes of this division (E), any
door intended and suitable for business patron access from a street, public
way, or parking area available to business patrons shall be deemed to be a
front door. All front doors of any such building or premises shall comply
with the following requirements:



         (a)   Solid wood or metal doors shall be secured as
follows.



            1.   A single door shall be equipped with either
double cylinder deadlock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by
key, or with cylinder deadlock that unlocks from the outside by key and
inside by turnpiece, handle, or knob.



            2.   On double doors, the active leaf shall be
equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the
inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and foot.



         (b)   Doors with glass or wood panels and doors that
have glass or wood panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as
follows.



            1.   A single door shall be equipped with cylinder
deadlock that unlocks from both the outside and the inside by a key.



            2.   On double doors, the active leaf shall be
equipped with cylinder deadlock that unlocks from both the outside and inside
by a key and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and
foot.



         (c)   Rolling overhead doors that are not controlled or
locked by electric power operation shall be equipped on the inside with the
following protective devices.



            1.   Manually-operated doors shall be provided
with slide bolts on the bottom bar.



            2.   Chain-operated doors shall be provided with a
cast iron keeper and pin for securing the hand chain.



            3.   Crank-operated doors shall be provided with a
means for securing the operating shaft.



         (d)   A solid overhead, swinging, sliding, or accordion
garage-type door shall be secured with cylinder deadlock, padlock, and/or
metal slide bar, bolt, or crossbar on the inside when not otherwise
controlled or locked by electric power operation. If padlock is used, it
shall be of hardened steel shackle, with minimum four-pin tumbler operation.
In the event that this type of door provides the only entrance to the front
of the building, a cylinder lock or padlock may be used on the outside.



         (e)   Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors shall be
equipped with metal guide track at top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or
padlock with hardened steel shackle and minimum four-pin tumbler operation.



         (f)   Outside hinges on all front doors shall be
provided with nonremovable pins.



      (3)   Rear, side and basement doors. All accessible rear,
side, and basement doors of any such building or premises shall comply with
the requirements of this division (E)(3); provided, however, that
accessibility, visibility, location, and lighting of such doors and whether
or not such door faces or is located on a street shall be considered in
determining classification of door.



         (a)   All doors. All doors of the types listed below
shall comply with the requirements of division (E)(2) above for front doors:



            1.   Solid wood doors;



            2.   Metal doors;



            3.   Rolling overhead doors;



            4.   Solid overhead, swinging, sliding, or
accordion garage-type doors; and



            5.   Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors.



         (b)   Doors with glass panels. Doors with glass panels
and doors that have glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured
as follows.



            1.   The glass panel shall be covered with iron
bars of at least one-half inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat
steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart.



            2.   Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth
inch material of two-inch mesh.



            3.   If the door or glass panel barrier is on the
outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolt on the outside.



            4.   If the remaining portion of a door panel
exceeds eight inches by 12 inches (excluding door frame) and is of wood, but
not of solid core construction or is less than one and three-eighths inches
thick, the portion shall be covered on the inside with at least 16 gauge
sheet steel attached with screws.



         (c)   Wood doors. Wood doors, not of solid core
construction, or with panels therein less than one and three-eighths inches
thick, shall be covered on the inside with at least 16 gauge-sheet steel
attached with screws.



         (d)   Locking devices.



            1.   A single door shall be equipped with either
double cylinder deadlock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by
key, with cylinder deadlock that unlocks from the outside by key and inside
by turnpiece, handle, or knob, or, except on required exit doors, with
approved slide bar bolt, crossbar, and/or padlock. If padlock is used, it
shall be of hardened steel shackle, with minimum four-pin tumbler operation.



            2.   On double doors, the active leaf shall be
equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the
inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and foot.



            3.   Outside hinges on all rear, side, and
basement doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins.



      (4)   Roof doors. All doors that exit onto the roof of any
such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements.



            1.   Doors with glass panels and any glass panels
that are adjacent to the door frame shall be protected as follows.



               a.   The glass portion shall be covered with
iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material of no more than
two-inch mesh securely fastened.



               b.   If the door or glass panel barrier is
on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded smooth head flush bolt on
the outside.



               c.   If the remaining portion of a door
panel exceeds eight inches by 12 inches (excluding door frame) and is of
wood, but not of solid core construction, or is less that one and
three-eighths inches thick, the portion shall be covered on the inside with
at least 16 gauge sheet steel attached with screws.



            2.   Wood doors not of solid core construction, or
with panels therein less than one and three-eighths inches thick, shall be
covered on the inside with at least 16 gauge sheet steel attached with screws.



            3.   All roof doors shall be provided with locking
devices in accordance with division (E)(3)(d) above.



            4.   Outside hinges on all roof doors shall be
provided with nonremovable pins.



      (5)   Glass windows. The Chief of Police shall, with the
advice and assistance of the Chief of the Fire Department or his or her duly
authorized representative, determine the extent of protection, if any that
will be required for accessible glass windows at the side or rear of such
building. Glass windows shall be deemed accessible if less than 18 feet above
ground. In making his or her determination, he or she shall consider whether
the side of the building fronts on a street, the area, location, lighting,
visibility, and contents thereof, and whether such openings are protected by
intrusion detection devices.



         (a)   The Chief of Police except where prohibited by the
Michigan Building Code may require side and rear glass windows with a pane
exceeding 96 square inches in area, with its smallest dimension exceeding six
inches, to be protected in the following manner:



            1.   Inside or outside iron bars of at least
one-half inch round or one-inch by one-inch flat steel material, spaced not
more than five inches apart securely fastened; or



            2.   Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at
least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh securely fastened. If such
barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded smooth head flush
bolts on the outside.



         (b)   If the side or rear window is of the type that can
be opened, it shall where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a
slide bar, bolt, crossbar, and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle, and
minimum four-pin tumbler operation.



         (c)   Outside hinges on all side and rear glass windows
shall be provided with nonremovable pins.



      (6)   Accessible transoms. Unless transom is solid wood at
least one and three-eighths inches thick or of solid metal, all exterior
transoms exceeding eight inches by 12 inches on the side and rear of any such
building or premises shall be protected by either of the following:



         (a)   Moveable transoms shall be secured on the inside
with either a cylinder deadlock, padlock, metal slide bar, bolt, or crossbar.
If padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel shackle with minimum
four-pin tumbler action;



         (b)   Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or
one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material, spaced no more than five
inches apart; or



         (c)   Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch
material but not more than two-inch mesh. If such barrier is installed on the
exterior of the building, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts.



      (7)   Roof openings. All exterior openings on the roof of any
such building or premises shall be protected as follows:



         (a)   Glass skylights shall be provided with:



            1.   Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or
one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material under the skylight and
securely fastened; or



            2.   A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch
material of two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.



         (b)   Hatchway openings shall be secured as follows.



            1.   If the hatchway is of wooden material less
than one and three-eighths inches solid wood, it shall be covered on the
inside with at least 16 gauge sheet steel attached with screws.



            2.   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside
with a slide bar, slide bolts, crossbar, or padlock.



            3.   Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall
be provided with nonremovable pins.



         (c)   1.   Exterior air duct or air vent openings
exceeding eight inches by 12 inches shall be secured by covering the same
with either of the following:



               a.   Iron bars of at least one-half inch
round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material, spaced no more that
five inches apart and securely fastened; or



               b.   A steel grill of at least one-eighth
inch material of two-inch mesh and securely fastened.



            2.   If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be
secured with rounded smooth head flush bolts on the outside.



   (F)   Security measures; intrusion detection systems.



      (1)   If it is determined by the Chief of Police that the
security measures and locking devices prescribed in division (E) above do not
adequately secure the building, he or she may, after reducing his or her
findings and reasons therefor to writing, require the installation and
maintenance of an adequate and reliable intrusion detection system. In making
such determination, he or she shall consider whether:



         (a)   The business establishment has experienced a high
incidence of burglary in the past; or



         (b)   The type of merchandise and its inventory value
require added security protection.



      (2)   If he or she determines that such installation is
required, notice in writing shall be given to the responsible person
designated in division (C) above specifying the installation to be made, the
reason or reasons for the determination that such installation is required,
and the reasonable period of time within which such installation shall be
completed. Unless an appeal is filed in accordance with division (G) below,
failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall be a
violation of this section.



   (G)   Appeal from intrusion detection system requirements.



      (1)   Within ten days after the receipt of written notice from
the Chief of Police requiring the installation and maintenance of an
intrusion detection system, the person responsible for compliance therewith
may appeal in writing to the Board of Building Appeals, in filing such notice
of appeal, the appellant shall set forth the specific grounds wherein it is
claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Chief of Police or
wherein the issuance of the written notice was not supported by proper
evidence.



      (2)   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board of Building
Appeals shall set the matter for hearing and cause notice thereof to be given
to the appellant and to the Chief of Police not less than five days prior to
the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the appellant shall show cause
on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to
should not be affirmed. The Board of Building Appeals may affirm, reverse, or
modify the decision of the Chief of Police requiring the installation and
maintenance of an intrusion detection system. If the decision is affirmed or
modified by the Board of Building Appeals, the appellant shall be given
written notice thereof by the Chief of Police setting forth the installation
to be made and a reasonable period of time within which the same shall be
completed. In no event shall the period be less than that originally granted
appellant. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall
be a violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 151.081)  (Ord. D-1045, passed 11-13-1972, effective
1-12-1973; Ord. D-1223, passed 5-9-1977, effective 5-19-1977)



§ 151.097  RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANTS.



   Occupants shall be responsible to:



   (A)   Make safe and/or properly dispose of dangerous appliances
owned by them as required in § 151.092;



   (B)   Keep dwellings which contain only one dwelling unit free of
insects, rodents, and other pests as required in § 151.094;



   (C)   Keep portions of structures occupied and controlled by them in
a clean, sanitary condition as required in § 151.095;



   (D)   Keep all plumbing fixtures located within the dwelling or
dwelling unit in a clean and sanitary condition and exercise reasonable care
in the proper use and operation thereof; and



   (E)   Provide garbage and rubbish disposal containers in accordance
with § 151.091; except the owner of a multiple-dwelling shall be responsible
for providing the garbage and rubbish disposal containers.



(Prior Code, § 151.082)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.098  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   Owners shall be responsible for complying with all provisions of this
chapter not specifically designated as the responsibility of the occupants in
§§ 151.090(E) and 151.097.



(Prior Code, § 151.083)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



UNSUPERVISED PROPERTIES



§ 151.110  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Unsupervised properties have a negative impact on surrounding
properties and neighborhoods. Owners of such properties should be held
accountable for the condition of same, because properties which are not
maintained constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare,
create blight and nuisances, and lower property values and neighborhood
integrity.



   (B)   It is the purpose and intent of the city, through the adoption
of this subchapter, to establish a non-owner occupied property registry and
unoccupied property registry as a mechanism to protect residential
neighborhoods and other areas from becoming blighted through the lack of
adequate maintenance and security of such properties.



(Prior Code, § 151.095)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.111  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Saginaw.



   CONTROLLER. The person under contract with the owner for the management
and/or maintenance of the property or who is otherwise authorized by the
owner to exercise any physical control over the property, including but not
limited to any property management or property preservation company
responsible for the maintenance and security of the property.



   DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY. The illegal manufacture, sale, distribution,
possession, or use of a controlled substance (as defined by Article 7,
Controlled Substances, of Michigan’s Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of
1978, being M.C.L. §§ 333.7101 et seq.).



   LOCAL AGENT. A Michigan-based person or business entity appointed in
writing by the owner to be the contact person on behalf of the owner and/or
controller with the city.



   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED PROPERTY. Any dwelling, dormitory, dwelling unit,
apartment house, or guest room in a lodging house, rooming house, bed and
breakfast establishment, hotel or motel within the city which is occupied by
someone other than the owner.



   NUISANCE. A nuisance as defined by § 94.001 of this code of ordinances.



   OWNER. The person noted as the last owner of record (i.e., person
holding legal title to the property) in the records of the City Assessor.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, trust, estate, partnership,
incorporated or unincorporated association, limited partnership, limited
liability company, or any other legal entity.



   QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATION.



      (1)   Occurs when the resident, any members of the
resident’s household or a guest or other person under the resident’s
control has been convicted of, defaulted on, or otherwise held responsible
for, by or in a court of competent jurisdiction, a violation of any state law
or local ordinance on the non-owner occupied property that involves:



         (a)   Drug related activity,



         (b)   Prostitution,



         (c)   Criminal gang activity,



         (d)   Assaultive, threatening, or intimidating behavior
(including but not limited to unlawful discharge of firearms),



         (e)   Malicious destruction of property, or



         (f)   Conduct that jeopardizes the health, safety,
and/or welfare of others. “Conduct that jeopardizes the health, safety,
and/or welfare of others” could include, but is not limited to, the
following:



            1.   Dangerous dog violation contrary to §§
94.031 and 94.999 of this code of ordinances,



            2.   Unlawful discharge of a firearm violation
contrary to § 130.03(D) of this code of ordinances,



            3.   Illegal business or occupation violation
contrary to § 130.33 of this code of ordinances,



            4.   Noise violation contrary to § 94.047 of this
code of ordinances, and



            5.   Violation of the maximum occupancy
overcrowding, illegal use of space provisions of the city ordinance contrary
to Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   A violation shall be deemed to have occurred in the
vicinity of non-owner occupied property if it occurs in an adjacent common
area or in the adjacent public right-of-way in front of the non-owner
occupied property.



   REPEATED QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATIONS. Will be considered to be three
quality of life violations by one or more tenants or their guests, with
respect to any dwelling unit within any 12-month period.



   UNOCCUPIED PROPERTY. Any improved property or lot that contains a
vacant dwelling or other structure, and regardless of the zoning
classification of such property.



(Prior Code, § 151.096)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.112  NON-OWNER OCCUPIED PROPERTY; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No owner or controller of non-owner occupied property shall
allow it to be occupied by someone other than the owner without first
registering the property with the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   No owner or controller of non-owner occupied property shall
allow occupancy of the property without first being in compliance with this
subchapter.



   (C)   No owner or controller of non-owner occupied property shall
allow occupancy of the property without first paying any property taxes or
other city debts, such as rubbish and water, due and owing on the property.



   (D)   No owner or controller shall allow a non-owner occupied
property to fall into a state of disrepair, to become in violation of
applicable state statutes or city codes, or to otherwise become a nuisance or
create a nuisance condition.



   (E)   Once registered, no owner or controller shall allow non-owner
occupied property to remain occupied if it is in a state of disrepair, in
violation of applicable state statutes or city codes, or otherwise has become
a nuisance condition or created a nuisance condition.



   (F)   No owner or controller shall knowingly permit a resident to
remain in occupancy of non-owner occupied property if that resident, members
of the resident’s household, or guests or other persons under the
resident’s control commit repeated quality of life violations.



(Prior Code, § 151.097)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-2019,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.113  NON-OWNER OCCUPIED PROPERTY; REGISTRY.



   (A)   To register non-owner occupied property, the owner or
controller shall:



      (1)   Complete and file with the City Clerk, in-person, a
registration application for each non-owner occupied property, which shall
state or have attached, as applicable:



         (a)   The name, date of birth, driver’s license
number, mailing address, telephone number, email address, and webpage address
of the owner and of any controller of the property. If the owner of the
property resides out-of-state, the applicant shall designate a local agent by
name, mailing address, telephone number, email address, and webpage address.



         (b)   A copy of the written agreement appointing a local
agent or controller for the owner.



      (2)   Pay in full the registration fees, as well as any
applicable late fees, owed to the city for each non-owner occupied property.



      (3)   Provide a copy of a current certificate of compliance to
the City Clerk, where such is required pursuant to § 151.115.



      (4)   Pay in full any property taxes and other city debts due
and owing on the property.



      (5)   Pay in full any fines that may be owed due to a
violation of this subchapter.



      (6)   Agree to provide all residents a lease disclosure letter
which provides information regarding frequently violated city regulations,
including:



         (a)   The city’s noise ordinance (as codified in §§
94.045 through 94.047 of this code of ordinances);



         (b)   The city’s curfew for minors ordinance (as
codified in §§ 130.50 through 130.54 of this code of ordinances);



         (c)   The city’s disturb the peace of neighborhoods
ordinance (as codified in § 130.32 of this code of ordinances);



         (d)   The city’s property maintenance regulations
(including §§ 151.097 and 151.098); and



         (e)   The city’s parking regulations (including §
72.23 of this code of ordinances);



      (7)   Agree that each lease or rental agreement entered into
for non-owner occupied property shall include the following addendum:



 




CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM



In consideration of the execution or renewal of a lease of the dwelling unit
identified in the lease, Owner and Resident agree as follows:


   1.   Resident, members of the resident’s household, and a guest or
other person under the resident’s control shall not engage in criminal
activity, or any act intended to facilitate criminal activity, including
drug-related criminal activity, on or near said premises.


   2.   Resident and members of resident’s household will not permit
the dwelling unit to be used for, or facilitate criminal activity, including
drug-related criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging
in such activity is a member of the household or a guest.


VIOLATION OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL CONSTITUTE A QUALITY OF LIFE
VIOLATION AND BE A MATERIAL AND IRREPARABLE VIOLATION OF THE LEASE AND GOOD
CAUSE FOR IMMEDIATE TERMINATION OF THE TENANCY.


   A single violation of any of the provisions of this addendum shall be
deemed a serious violation and material and irreparable noncompliance with
your lease.


   In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any
other provisions of the lease, the provisions of this addendum shall govern.


   This LEASE ADDENDUM is incorporated into the lease executed or renewed
this day between Owner and Resident.


   This LEASE ADDENDUM is not intended to diminish Resident’s or broaden
Owner’s rights with regard to Michigan’s laws pertaining to the recovery
of possession of property.




 



   (B)   (1)   Upon the City Clerk’s receipt of the completed
registration application and applicable fees, the City Clerk shall verify
whether the property is eligible for registration and, if so, shall register
the property.



      (2)   If the property is not eligible for registration, the
City Clerk shall inform the owner or controller of the deficiencies
preventing registration, including what additional information,
documentation, and/or fees are required.



   (C)   After a non-owner occupied property has been registered, the
owner or controller shall:



      (1)   Notify the City Clerk in writing of any change in the
information provided in the original registration application, including but
not limited to a change in occupancy status or a change in contact
information for the owner, controller, or local agent, within 30 days of the
date of the change.



      (2)   Cause the dwelling to be inspected by appropriate
representatives of the city for compliance with this subchapter within 30
days of a new application for registration. Proof of such inspections must be
provided to the City Clerk upon renewal of registration to document that the
property remains in compliance with this subchapter.



      (3)   If the non-owner occupied property has become ineligible
for this registry, the City Clerk shall remove the property from the registry
and shall provide the owner or controller with written notification of this
action, the reason therefor, and shall inform the owner or controller of the
deficiencies preventing continued registration, including what additional
information, documentation, and/or fees are required.



   (D)   An owner or controller of non-owner occupied property shall
register the property with the City Clerk within 60 days of transfer of title
to the property to the name of the new owner. If the title was transferred
prior to the effective date of this subchapter, the owner or controller of
the property shall register the property with the City Clerk no later than 60
days after the effective date of this subchapter.    



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Owners or purchasers of structures which contain only
one dwelling unit, with or without an accessory garage, carport or shed, and
which contain no other occupancy, may occupy that dwelling unit themselves
without registering the unit or paying a fee. The owner’s immediate family,
defined as the owner’s spouse or significant other, children, and up to two
grandparents, may also occupy that dwelling with the owner. All other
requirements of this chapter shall apply in such instances.



      (2)   Owners and controllers of property properly registered
under this section who are actively advertising and holding the property out
for rental and/or sale shall not be required to also register the property as
unoccupied property under § 151.114. Evidence of same, such as a copy of any
advertisement or listing, shall be provided to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 151.098)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.114  UNOCCUPIED PROPERTY REGISTRY.



   (A)   The Office of the City Clerk shall maintain a registry of all
unoccupied properties within the city.   



   (B)   An owner or controller of unoccupied property shall register
the property with the City Clerk within 60 days of transfer of title to the
property to the name of the new owner. If the title was transferred prior to
the effective date of this subchapter, the owner or controller of the
property shall register the property with the City Clerk no later than 60
days after the effective date of this subchapter.   



   (C)   To register unoccupied property, the owner or controller shall:



      (1)   Complete and file with the City Clerk, in-person, a
registration application for each unoccupied property, which shall state or
have attached, as applicable:



         (a)   The name, date of birth, driver’s license
number, mailing address, telephone number, email address, and webpage address
of the owner and of any controller of the property. If the owner of the
property resides out-of-state, the applicant shall designate a local agent by
name, mailing address, telephone number, email address, and webpage address.



         (b)   A copy of the written agreement appointing a local
agent or controller for the owner.



         (c)   A statement describing the expected period of
vacancy, a detailed plan for the regular maintenance of the property during
the period of vacancy (for example, lawn maintenance and securing of any
structures), and a timeline for the lawful re-occupancy of the property, the
rehabilitation of the property, or the demolition of the dwelling and/or
structure(s) on the property.



      (2)   Pay in full the registration fees, as well as any
applicable late fees, owed to the city for each unoccupied property.



      (3)   Provide a copy of a current certificate of compliance to
the City Clerk, where such is required pursuant to § 151.115.



      (4)   Pay in full any property taxes and other city debts due
and owing on the property.



   (D)   Any change in the information provided in the registry,
including but not limited to a change in ownership, change in vacancy status,
or a change in contact information for the owner, controller, and/or local
agent shall be provided in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
date of the change.



   (E)   Unoccupied property may not be occupied until all outstanding
taxes, costs, assessments, and/or liens owed to the city have been paid in
full and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city.



   (F)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Unoccupied properties owned by governmental
subdivisions/agencies need not be registered in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   An owner or controller of unoccupied property shall be
exempt from registration under this section for the first 12 months following
the owner’s purchase of the property so long as the owner is actively
working to rehabilitate the property for use and occupancy. Such
rehabilitation shall be evidenced by the owner or controller obtaining the
necessary permits for structural, electrical, mechanical, or similar work. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner or controller to provide evidence
supporting their right to this exemption from registration to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 151.099)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.115  CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   (1)   All owners/controllers of non-owner occupied property
and unoccupied property containing a building or other structure that is more
than one story and less than ten feet from the city’s right-of-way shall
have all roof-mounted structures and every exterior wall of or part of the
building's exterior, including connecting bridges, cornices, copings, eaves,
bays, or similar projections, thoroughly inspected and examined by competent
professionals, at their own expense, at intervals not to exceed five years
and shall furnish the city’s Chief Inspector with a written report setting
forth the true condition of the structure inspected. The Chief Inspector
shall be notified in advance of such an inspection of an existing building
and may have an authorized designee present. Where conditions of a structure
or wall cannot be determined by inspection of the exterior of the structure
or wall, the Chief Inspector, or his or her designee, may require portions
thereof to be removed for a more thorough examination.



      (2)   A competent professional shall be defined as a licensed
architect, structural engineer, or other professional deemed acceptable by
the city’s Chief Inspector.



   (B)   Upon successful completion of such inspection, a certificate
of compliance shall be issued by the Chief Inspector, or his or her designee.
With regard to unoccupied property, the certificate of compliance shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the building or structure and readily
available for inspection. Certificates of compliance for non-owner occupied
property shall be maintained by the owner/controller and made available upon
request by the Chief Inspector, or his or her designee, or by any current or
prospective tenant.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to occupy or use a building, premises, or
structure required to have a certificate of compliance under this section, or
cause same to be occupied, without the required certificate of compliance for
the building, premises, or structure.



   (D)   Upon a finding that the building, premises, or structure is
unsatisfactory for human habitation or is otherwise structurally unsound, the
Chief Inspector may deem such property to be a nuisance and order such
building, premises, or structure vacated, as well as issue a written order to
repair/correct.



(Ord. O-209, passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.116  VIOLATION; ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise stated, violations of this chapter shall
be treated as strict liability offenses regardless of intent.



   (B)   An owner or controller of non-owner occupied property or
unoccupied property that is found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as set forth in
Ch. 37 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   (1)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall at all
times be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk,
building materials, and the accumulation of other debris and shall otherwise
comply with the city property maintenance code. Additionally, the property
shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, and similar markings. Yards
shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to this subchapter.



      (2)   If the property has not been maintained, the city may
maintain the property and assess costs to the owner or controller. Such
assessments may become a lien against the property.



   (D)   (1)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall at all
times be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible by
unauthorized persons. The city shall have the authority to require the owner
or controller to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures as
deemed necessary.



      (2)   If a property has not been secured, the city may secure
the property and assess costs to the owner or controller. Such assessments
may become a lien against the property.



   (E)   (1)   Failure to properly maintain or secure either
non-owner occupied property or unoccupied property will be deemed a nuisance
for which the city may issue a written notice to correct. The city may abate
any such nuisance upon the failure of the owner or controller of the property
to take abatement action within ten days of the written notice to correct.
When the city has abated such a nuisance, the cost of the abatement,
including any applicable administrative charges, will be billed to the owner
of the property. Such billing shall be a personal debt of the owner to the
city, which may be collected as other personal debts, as enforcement costs or
by restitution orders as allowed by law, or which may be assessed as a lien
against the property, including interest thereon, until paid.



      (2)   The owner of the property where such a nuisance exists
is also responsible for a Class D municipal civil infraction as set forth in
§ 94.002 of this code of ordinances.



   (F)   (1)   On each occasion that a resident in a non-owner
occupied property, any members of the resident’s household, or a guest or
other person under the resident’s control commits a quality of life
violation, the City Manager or designee shall send notice of such violation
to the owner or controller. Upon the occurrence and notice of three quality
of life violations by a resident, any members of the resident’s household
or a guest or other person under the resident’s control, with respect to
any non-owner occupied property within any 12-month period, the non-owner
occupied property will be deemed a nuisance.  An unsuccessful good faith
attempt to evict the offending resident, after commission of two quality of
life violations, shall constitute an absolute defense. It is not a violation
if the owner or controller reported the violation.



      (2)   The owner of the property where such nuisance exists is
responsible for a Class F municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a
civil fine as set forth in § 37.07, plus costs and other sanctions for each
infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided
by § 37.07.



(Prior Code, § 151.100)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



§ 151.117  FEES.



   (A)   Fees for each registry shall be established by City Council
and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   All registrations for non-owner occupied property
shall be due on March 15 of each year.



      (2)   For the period from the effective date of this section
to March 15, 2014 all properties with a valid registration shall continue to
be registered until March 15, 2014. Registrations shall all expire on March
15 of each year regardless of application date. If March 15 should fall on a
holiday or weekend the fee shall be due on the next regular business day.



   (C)   All registrations for unoccupied property shall be due on
December 30 of each year.



      (1)   All unoccupied properties must be registered within 60
days of the enactment of this subchapter.  For the period from the effective
date of this section to December 30, 2013, the annual registration fee shall
be reduced by 50%.



      (2)   Registrations shall expire on December 30 of each year
regardless of application date. If December 30 should fall on a holiday or
weekend the fee shall be due on the next regular business day.



   (D)   An additional late charge of 100% of the base fee shall apply
and be assessed in the event of any of the following:



      (1)   Failure to register unoccupied property within 60 days
of the enactment of this subchapter.



      (2)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied or unoccupied
property within 15 days of date of written notice from the city that the
property is in violation of this subchapter.



      (3)   Failure to pay the registration renewal fee by the
required date each year.



      (4)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied or unoccupied
property within 60 days of transfer of title in the property.



      (5)   Failure to provide the City Clerk the required notice of
any change in the information provided in the registry, including but not
limited to a change in vacancy status or a change in contact information for
the owner and/or controller within 30 days of the date of the change.



   (E)   Failure to pay any applicable fees or late fees shall be
deemed a personal debt of the owner to the city, which may be collected as
other personal debts, as enforcement costs or by restitution orders as
allowed by law, or assessed as a lien against the property, including
interest thereon, until paid.



(Prior Code, § 151.101)  (Ord. O-151, passed 9-23-2013, effective
10-3-2013; Ord. O-160, passed 4-20-2015, effective 4-30-2015; Ord. O-209,
passed 4-1-2019, effective 4-11-2019)



DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



§ 151.130  SCOPE.



   It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or part thereof which is a dangerous building. The city does
establish this subchapter to govern the abatement of dangerous buildings,
structures, or parts thereof, to establish procedures to determine if a
building, structure, or part thereof is dangerous, to provide for review,
notice and due process in the actions involved with such buildings,
structures, or parts thereof. The “Ordinance for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings, Structures, or Parts Thereof”, thereafter also referred to as
“this subchapter”, is hereby adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 151.110)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.131  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, DANGEROUS BUILDING means any
building or structure which has any of the defects or is in any of the
conditions hereinafter described:



   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means
of exit does not conform to the city’s approved Fire Code (i.e., is not
sufficient in width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic, for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to, or might use, such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway, or other means of exit);



   (B)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure has been
damaged by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism,
or by any other cause in such manner that the structural strength or
stability is appreciably less than it was before the damage and is less than
the minimum requirements of state law and/or city ordinance for a new
building or structure, purpose or location;



   (C)   Whenever any portion of or appurtenance to a building or
structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or to collapse,
and thereby injure persons or damage property;



   (D)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure has settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds than is required by state law or city ordinance in the
case of new construction;



   (E)   Whenever the building or structure, or any part thereof,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or
because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the purpose of supporting such building or structure, or for any other
reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the
foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way;



   (F)   Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is used;



   (G)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by
fire, wind, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated, as to
become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their
danger, afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or
enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or
unlawful or immoral act;



   (H)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used
for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of
dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement, or
otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation; is in a condition
that the County Health Officer, or his or her representative, determines is
likely to cause sickness or disease; or is likely to cause injury to the
health, safety or general welfare of those living within;



   (I)   Whenever any building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and
open at door, window or other opening, leaving the interior of the building
exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers;



   (J)   Whenever any swimming pool is permitted:



      (1)   To become stagnant;



      (2)   To become a breeding ground for mosquitoes or other
insects;



      (3)   To become algae ridden;



      (4)   To become otherwise unsafe for the intended purposes; or



      (5)   To have the required enclosure surrounding the swimming
pool either not properly constructed or maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the city.



   (K)   Whenever a building or structure remains unoccupied for a
period of 180 consecutive days or longer and is not listed as being available
for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under the
Occupational Code, Public Act 299 of 1980, being M.C.L. §§ 339.2502a, as
amended. For purposes of this division (K), BUILDING OR STRUCTURE includes,
but is not limited to, a commercial building or structure. This division (K)
does not apply to the following:



      (1)   A building or structure as to which the owner or agent
does both of the following:



         (a)   Notifies the Police Department that the building
or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The
notice shall be given to the Police Department by the owner or agent not more
than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied; and



         (b)   Maintains the exterior of the building or
structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with state law and/or city
ordinance.



      (2)   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly
unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner
notifies the Police Department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a
period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the
notice prescribed by this division (K)(2) shall notify the Police Department
not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this
exception. As used in this division (K)(2), SECONDARY DWELLING means a
dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home that is
occupied by the owner or a member of the owner’s family during part of the
year.



(Prior Code, § 151.111)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.132  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AS PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   All such dangerous buildings or structures are hereby determined to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by alteration, repair, or
rehabilitation, or by demolition and removal in accordance with the
procedures specified elsewhere in this subchapter. Further, no owner or agent
thereof shall keep, maintain, or allow occupancy of any such dangerous
building or structure.



(Prior Code, § 151.112)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001)



§ 151.133  COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The Chief Inspector, or his or her designee, shall examine or cause to
be examined every building, structure or portion thereof reported as unsafe
or damaged, and if such is found to be a dangerous building as defined in
this subchapter, he or she shall commence proceedings to cause the
alteration, repair, or rehabilitation, or the demolition and removal of the
building, structure or portion thereof.



(Prior Code, § 151.113)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.134  NOTICE AND ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE.



   (A)   (1)   The Chief Inspector shall issue a notice of defects
in writing to the owner of record or agent of the building or structure
stating the defects thereof. This notice of defects shall include a time and
place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous
building.



      (2)   If the building or structure is a multiple dwelling or
rooming house containing units offered to let for more than six months of a
calendar year, all notices under this subchapter shall also be served upon
the lessee, if known.



   (B)   Service of the notice shall be made upon the owner or
owner’s agent. Determination of ownership shall be as indicated by the
records of the Register of Deeds for the county and the records of the
city’s Assessor. Service shall be on owner or agent thereof by any of the
following methods:



      (1)   Personally delivering a copy to the owner or agent
thereof; or



      (2)   Mailing a copy by certified mail, postage paid, return
receipt requested, to the owner or agent and posting a copy thereof upon a
conspicuous part of the building or structure.



   (C)   Notice shall be effective upon the earliest occurrence of any
of the following:



      (1)   Personal service upon the owner or the owner’s agent;
or



      (2)   The date of mailing by certified mail when a signed
return receipt is received.



   (D)   The notice shall be served upon the owner or agent at least
ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice.



(Prior Code, § 151.114)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1710, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1711,
passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886, passed 2-19-2001,
effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective 6-16-2016)



§ 151.135  HEARING OFFICER; HEARING; TESTIMONY; ORDER; NON-APPEARANCE OR
NON-COMPLIANCE; COSTS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint a Hearing Officer to conduct a public
hearing at which the owner shall be granted an opportunity to show cause why
the hearing officer should not order the building or structure be demolished
or otherwise made safe and properly maintained. The Hearing Officer may not
be the City Manager or any officer or employee of the city. The Hearing
Officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters.



   (B)   In any proceedings under this section, the Hearing Officer has
the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts.
The Hearing Officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any
matter before him or her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and
necessity of the parties and their representatives.



   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall cause a record of the entire
proceeding to be made by tape recording or by other means of permanent
recording determined appropriate by the Hearing Officer. A transcript of the
proceedings or copy of the recording shall be made available to all parties
upon request and upon payment of a fee prescribed therefor. The fee may be
established by the Hearing Officer but shall not be greater than the cost of
making the transcript.



   (D)   The hearing need not be conducted according to the technical
rules of evidence adopted for the Courts of Record in the state.



      (1)   The Hearing Officer shall take testimony from the Chief
Inspector, or his or her representative, the owner of the property and any
interested person. Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation
of the party offering the testimony.



      (2)   Hearsay evidence may be used under the following
guidelines.



         (a)   Hearsay evidence may be used to explain other
direct evidence.



         (b)   Hearsay evidence may be used to support other
direct evidence.



         (c)   Hearsay evidence shall not be used in itself to
support a finding, unless it would be admissible in civil action in courts of
competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted. RELEVANT
EVIDENCE shall be defined, for the purposes of this section, as the type of
evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct
of serious affairs. Such relevant evidence shall be admitted regardless of
whether or not it may be admissible in civil actions in courts of competent
jurisdiction.



      (4)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded.



   (E)   Each party shall have these rights:



      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to
the issues of the hearing;



      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



      (4)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first
called the witness to testify;



      (5)   To refute the evidence;



      (6)   To represent himself or herself or to be represented by
anyone of his or her choice who is lawfully permitted to do so; and



      (7)   To make a closing statement at the conclusion of the
evidentiary portion of the hearing.



   (F)   Failure of the owner or his or her representative to appear at
the hearing may be deemed to be an admission by the owner that the building
or structure, or part thereof, that is the subject of the hearing is a
dangerous building. Consideration shall be given to the following when
rendering a decision:



      (1)   The evidence presented;



      (2)   The condition of the building or structure as a whole;



      (3)   The extent of the deterioration of the building or
structure;



      (4)   The cost of demolishing the building or structure;



      (5)   The cost of making the building or structure safe;



      (6)   Whether a reasonable person exercising prudent business
judgement would determine the cost of making the building or structure safe
would exceed the market value of the structure after the repairs were
completed;



      (7)   Whether there are any conflicts with other ordinances,
state laws, or federal statutes;



      (8)   The effect the completion of the demolition and removal
or of making the building or structure safe would have upon the health,
safety and welfare of the area immediately surrounding the building or
structure in question; and



      (9)   Whether actual substantial progress has been made by the
owner to make the building safe. In determining whether substantial progress
has been made, the Hearing Officer considers such factors as whether a
building permit has been obtained relative to the repairs, whether the owner
has contracted for necessary materials or services, and the extent to which
the repairs or demolition has progressed.



   (G)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
make written findings of fact based upon the competent evidence and testimony
admitted during the hearing. If applicable, the Hearing Officer may conduct
an on-site inspection of the building or structure.



   (H)   Not more than five business days after completion of the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render a decision either closing the
proceedings or determining that the building is a dangerous building. He or
she shall then order the building or structure to be demolished or made safe
and properly maintained, as the facts determined by the Hearing Officer shall
dictate. The Hearing Officer shall fix a time by which the owner of the
building or structure shall complete the demolition or make the building or
structure safe and properly maintained. The Hearing Officer’s notice of
findings and order shall be given to the owner in the manner set forth in
this subchapter. The effective date of the Hearing Officer’s notice of
findings and order shall be upon service as provided in this subchapter.



   (I)   The authority of the Hearing Officer ceases upon the service
of the Hearing Officer’s notice of findings and order as set forth in this
subchapter. Upon such service, the Hearing Officer shall have no authority to
reverse his or her decision, to grant an extension of time, or to entertain a
request to reopen the hearing or to grant any other request of the owner or
the owner’s agent. Each written notice of findings and order of the Hearing
Officer shall contain a statement advising the owner, or the owner’s agent,
of the limitations of the Hearing Officer as set forth in this section.



(Prior Code, § 151.115)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.136  HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS; DEMOLITION/REPAIR; COSTS/LIEN ON
PROPERTY.



   (A)   If the owner or agent fails to appear or neglects to comply
with the Hearing Officer’s decision and order, the Hearing Officer shall
file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the City Inspector
not more than five days after the date for compliance set in the order and
request that the necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of
the Hearing Officer’s notice of findings and order and request that
necessary action be taken to enforce the order shall also be filed with the
Housing Board of Appeals.



   (B)   The Housing Board of Appeals shall set a date not less than 30
days after the initial hearing for a hearing on the findings and order of the
Hearing Officer. The Housing Board of Appeals shall give notice to the owner
or agent of the time and place for the hearing as set forth herein. At the
hearing, the owner or agent shall be given the opportunity to show cause why
the order should not be enforced. The Housing Board of Appeals shall approve,
disapprove, or modify the order.



   (C)   If the Housing Board of Appeals approves or modifies the
order, the City Inspector, or his or her designee, shall take all necessary
action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner
or agent shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the
Housing Board of Appeals’ hearing.



   (D)   If the building or structure has been substantially destroyed
by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or
other cause, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be
greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the
Housing Board of Appeals shall issue an order of demolition. The owner or
agent shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date
of the Housing Board of Appeals’ hearing.



   (E)   The cost of demolition, making the building safe, or
maintaining the property includes, but is not limited to, the costs of
serving notices, fees paid to Hearing Officers, costs of title searches or
commitments used to determine the parties in interest, recording fees for
notices and liens filed with the County Register of Deeds, demolition and
dumping charges, court reporter fees, and costs of the collection of the
charges authorized herein. The cost of the demolition, making the building
safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds
adjoining the building or structure incurred by the city to bring the
property into conformance with this subchapter shall be reimbursed to the
city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears.
This includes owners who have an interest when these proceedings commence or
who acquire their interest during the pendency of the proceedings.



   (F)   The owner in whose name the property appears upon the last
local tax assessment records and within the records of the Register of Deeds
shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first- class mail at the
address shown on the records. If the owner fails to pay the same within 30
days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the
city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the
property into conformance with this subchapter. The lien shall not take
effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by
law. A lien provided for in this division (F) does not have priority over
previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost
shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property
tax liens under state law.



   (G)   In addition to other remedies under this subchapter, the city
may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the
full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining
the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building
or structure incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with
this subchapter. The city shall have a lien for the amount of the judgment
against the owner’s interest in all real property located in this state
that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or structure
against whom the judgment is obtained. The lien provided for in this section
shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as
provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded
liens and encumbrances. The judgment may be enforced against assets of the
owner other than the building or structure.



(Prior Code, § 151.117)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.137  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   An owner aggrieved by any decision or order of the Housing Board of
Appeals under this subchapter may appeal the decision or order to a court of
competent jurisdiction by filing a petition within 20 days from the date of
service of the order.



(Prior Code, § 151.118)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.138  WAIVER PROVISION.



   The owner of any building or structure, or the owner’s agent, may, at
any time, admit in writing that such building or structure is a dangerous
building within the meaning of this subchapter, and waive notice, a hearing,
findings, order, and service of the order under this subchapter, and court
review of such order. The owner or the owner’s agent may consent that such
building or structure be demolished and the cost charged against the
property. In such event, the Chief Inspector, or his or her representative,
may have said building or structure demolished and the cost charged against
said property shall be collected in the same manner as provided for in §
33.21.



(Prior Code, § 151.119)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.139  EMERGENCY CASES.



   (A)   In cases where there is evidence of an immediate and serious
danger to the public safety or health unless a dangerous building or
structure as defined in this subchapter is immediately demolished or
otherwise made safe, the Chief Inspector, or his or her designee, may cause
the immediate repair or demolition of such dangerous building or structure.
Determination of immediate and serious danger to the public safety or health
shall be determined by the Chief Inspector, or his or her designee,
including, but not limited to, the City Fire Marshal. The determination of an
immediate and serious danger includes, but is not limited to, situations
which may lead to the immediate potential for injury, death, spread of
disease or infection, or for property or structural damage which indicates an
immediate and serious danger to the public safety or health. The potential
for harm to emergency personnel who may have to re-enter such structures in
the course of their duties may be considered when determining an immediate
and serious danger to public safety or health exists. The costs of such
emergency repair or demolition shall be collected in the manner as provided
for in § 33.21.



   (B)   Written notice shall be provided to the owner or agent of the
property on which the emergency case existed as soon as practicable after the
dangerous building or structure has been demolished or otherwise made safe.
At a minimum, the written notice will detail what action was taken by the
city, why such action was necessary, and the date of such action.



   (C)   If the emergency case requires more than 24 hours to remedy,
the city shall obtain the permission of the owner or agent of the property to
continue entry onto the property, and such contact shall be documented,
and/or the city shall obtain a court order authorizing continued entry.



(Prior Code, § 151.120)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective
6-16-2016)



§ 151.140  CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   All previous ordinances or sections thereof pertaining to the abatement
of dangerous buildings which may be in conflict with these provisions of this
subchapter are hereby repealed except as hereinafter otherwise provided. Said
repealed ordinances or sections thereof shall remain in full force and effect
as to all actions commenced ongoing prior to the effective date of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 151.122)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001)



§ 151.141  PROCEEDINGS PENDING.



   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired or incurred under any ordinances hereby repealed at the time this
subchapter takes effect, are hereby retained, and such proceedings may be
consummated under and according to the ordinance in force at the time such
proceedings are or were commenced. It is the intent that this subchapter
shall not be construed to alter, affect, or abate any pending prosecution or
prevent prosecution hereinafter instituted under such ordinances or any
section thereof for offenses committed prior to the effective date of this
subchapter, and all prosecutions instituted after the effective date of this
subchapter for offenses committed prior to the effective date of this
subchapter or for work conducted prior to the effective date hereof, may be
continued or instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinance or sections thereof in force at the time of the commission of such
offense.



(Prior Code, § 151.123)  (Ord. D-1668, passed 11-9-1992, effective
11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective 3-17-1994; Ord. D-1886,
passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.155  ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Inspector of the city and any inspector assigned to the Chief
Inspector (collectively described as “Inspectors”) are hereby authorized
and directed to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the Inspector shall have the
powers of a police officer, except the Inspector shall not have the power of
arrest.



(Prior Code, § 151.130)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.156  MODIFICATIONS.



   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Chief Inspector may, as the Chief Inspector
deems to be appropriate under the circumstances, grant modifications for
individual cases. No modification shall be approved unless the Inspector
shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of
this chapter impractical and that the modification is in conformity with the
intent and purpose of this chapter. Such modification may be granted only
when the modification does not lessen any fire protection requirements,
compromise structural integrity, or otherwise adversely affect any other
safety requirements. The details of any action granting modification shall be
recorded and entered in the files of the city, Division of Inspections.



(Prior Code, § 151.131)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.157  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any
condition or code violation which makes the building or premises unsafe,
dangerous, or hazardous, the Inspector may enter the building or premises at
all reasonable times to inspect it or to act to enforce this chapter. If the
building or premises is occupied, the Inspector shall first present proper
credentials and request entry. If the building or premises is unoccupied, the
Inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request
entry.



   (B)   When the Inspector has requested entry as provided above, no
owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care, or control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect to promptly permit entry therein
by the Inspector for the purpose of inspection pursuant to this chapter. If
entry is then refused, the Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to enforce this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 151.132)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.158  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notice of violation.



      (1)   (a)   Whenever the Inspector determines that there
exists a violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she shall give
notice of the violation and shall order compliance with the provisions of
this chapter to the owner of the premises.



         (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, the OWNER is:



            1.   The person or persons identified in the
records of the Assessor of the city as the owner(s) of record of the
premises, if any;



            2.   The person identified there as the payor of
the taxes on the premises;



            3.   Any other person claiming, in writing to the
Inspector, an ownership interest in the property (“other claimant”)
regarding all violations for which the owner is responsible under this
chapter; or



            4.   The occupant regarding all violations for
which the occupant is responsible under this chapter.



      (2)   The notice and order shall:



         (a)   Be in writing;



         (b)   Include a list of the violations referring to the
sections of this chapter violated;



         (c)   Set a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days in
any event, for the performance of any act it requires;



         (d)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will result in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



         (e)   Advise the owner and/or occupant of the procedure
for appeal; and



         (f)   Be served upon the owner, any other claimant,
and/or occupant by delivering it to him or her personally; or by leaving it
at his or her or their residence, office, or place of business with some
person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of its contents;
or, by mailing a copy of it by certified mail to his or her last known
address with a return receipt requested and by posting the notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises; or by legal publication made pursuant to
Michigan Court Rules.



      (3)   If any person to be served pursuant to this section
refuses or fails to accept such service; if an owner is not identifiable from
the records of the City Assessor; if there is no other claimant as described
in this section known to the Inspector, or if such other claimant fails, in
his or her writing, to provide an adequate address for service; or if there
is no known occupant of the premises; then the service required by this
section is accomplished solely by the posting of the notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises or by legal publication made pursuant to
Michigan Court Rules.



      (4)   The failure to receive notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings against the owner or occupant.



   (B)   Duplicate notice. Whenever the owner or other claimant of the
premises regulated by this chapter is notified of a violation for which he or
she is responsible under this chapter, a copy of the notice shall also be
delivered or sent by ordinary mail to the occupant of the premises. Whenever
an occupant is notified of a violation for which the occupant is responsible,
a copy of the notice shall also be delivered or sent by ordinary mail to the
owner of the premises. Failure to send the duplicate notice, however, shall
not affect the validity of any proceedings against the owner or occupant.



(Prior Code, § 151.133)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989)



§ 151.159  APPEALS PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Appeals procedure. Any person affected by any notice of
violation(s) which has been issued under this chapter may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals, as
established by § 12.019 of the code. The affected person shall file a
written appeal in the office of the Chief Inspector requesting the hearing.
The appeal shall include the name, address, and phone number of the appellant
and a brief statement of the grounds for the hearing. The appeal shall be
filed within 21 days after the day the notice of violation or order is
served. Failure to file the written notice of appeal within the 21-day period
shall be deemed a waiver of the person’s right to a hearing or to otherwise
contest the notice of violation(s) or order. Upon timely receipt of an
appeal, the Chief Inspector shall set a time for a hearing before the Housing
Board of Appeals and shall give the appellant written notice of the date,
time, and location for the hearing.



   (B)   Hearings. Hearings shall be commenced within a reasonable time
after an appeal has been filed. At such hearings, the appellant shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of
violation or order should be modified or withdrawn. Such hearings shall be
open to the public.



   (C)   Decisions and powers of Housing Board of Appeals.



      (1)   After a hearing, the Housing Board of Appeals may
sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice of violation or order depending upon
its findings. In rendering these determinations, the powers of the Housing
Board of Appeals shall be strictly limited to making interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter, to the applicability of its specific provisions
to the specific case being heard, and to granting variances to the provisions
of this chapter. In granting variances, this Board shall be allowed to grant
a variance if it clearly appears that, by reason of special condition, undue
hardship would result from strict application of any section of this chapter.



      (2)   In these cases the Board may permit a variance from
mandatory provisions thereof in such a manner that the public safety shall be
secured, substantial justice done, and the spirit and intent of the
provisions of this chapter are upheld. In no case shall this Board grant a
variance which would lessen the safety, health, and welfare requirements of
this chapter. Any variances granted shall be for this chapter and shall not
and cannot waive the requirements and provisions of any other applicable
code, ordinance, or law. All decisions rendered under this section shall be
in writing and shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal.



      (3)   The failure of the appellant, or his or her
representative, to appear and state his or her case at the hearing shall have
the same effect as if no appeal was filed and the Board shall proceed to deny
the appeal and affirm the notice of violation or order.



   (D)   Meetings. The Housing Board of Appeals shall meet in a fixed
place and all meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall adopt its
own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings, showing the
actions of the Board, and the vote of each member upon each question
considered. These records shall be considered public records.



   (E)   Appeal of Board decision. The decision of the Housing Board of
Appeals shall be final. However, a party aggrieved by the order of decision
of the Housing Board of Appeals may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by state statute(s) and court rule(s).



(Prior Code, § 151.134)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1855, passed 6-15-2000, effective 6-25-2000; Ord. D-1652,
passed 2-10-1992, effective 2-10-1992; Ord. D-1911, passed 1-28-2002,
effective 2-7-2002; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective 6-16-2016)



§ 151.160  ORDERS TO VACATE.



   Where a notice of violation and order to comply has been served as
provided for in § 151.158(A) and upon reinspection at the end of the time
specified for compliance it is found that the violation or violations have
not been corrected and if no appeal before the Housing Board of Appeals is
pending, the Inspector may declare the dwelling structure unfit for human
habitation and on that basis declare the structure condemned and may order
the building affected by the continued violations vacated in accordance with
the following procedures.



   (A)   A building or part thereof shall be vacated within a
reasonable time set by the Inspector, which in no event shall exceed 30 days.



   (B)   A condemned building shall have posted at each entrance a sign
which reads:



 

CONDEMNED.

DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY!



 



   (C)   (1)   A condemned vacated building or part thereof shall
not again be used for human habitation until all violations have been
corrected and a written determination is obtained from the Inspector
indicating that the building is in substantial compliance with this chapter.



      (2)   (a)   When the Chief Inspector determines special
circumstances which make the strict application of this division (C)(2)
impractical, the Chief Inspector may, as he or she deems to be most
appropriate under the circumstances, grant additional time for compliance or
allow temporary occupancy of the premises.



         (b)   Such actions shall contain a specific time period
for compliance and shall be entered in the files of the Inspection Division
and shall not constitute a waiver of any of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter nor compromise or preclude resort by the Inspector to any
enforcement right or remedy provided by this chapter or other laws or
ordinances.



   (D)   If a building or part thereof is not vacated within the time
specified in the vacation order, the Inspector may seek an order to vacate
from a court of competent jurisdiction notwithstanding the fact that such
violation may also be punishable by fine or imprisonment as otherwise
provided in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 151.135)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1647, passed 11-18-1991, effective 12-9-1991)



§ 151.161  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF NOTICE OR PLACARD.



   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, deface, conceal, or
remove any official notice or placard posted by an Inspector unless the
Inspector gives permission to remove the notice.



(Prior Code, § 151.136)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.998  VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or
structure or cause or permit the same to be done, or fail to pay any required
fees, in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Authorized city official. The Chief Inspector and/or his or
her designees are hereby designated as the authorized city official(s), as
defined in Ch. 37, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal
civil infraction violations notices as provided in Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 151.998)  (Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective
9-1-1989; Ord. D-1772, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1787,
passed 11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which another penalty is not specifically provided is responsible for a Class
D municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth
in Ch. 37, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Ch. 37. Each
violation and each day’s failure to comply with any provision of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.



   (B)   In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter,
an Inspector may institute appropriate legal action to prevent, enjoin, or
abate any violations or any use or occupancy of any building or structure not
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and buildings or
structures in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance
per se.



(Prior Code, § 151.999)



   (C)   A person or persons who fail or refuse to comply with an order
approved or modified under §§ 151.130 through 151.141 within the time
period mandated by such an order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 120 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000,
or both.



(Prior Code, § 151.121)



(Ord. D-1595, passed 7-31-1989, effective 9-1-1989; Ord. D-1668, passed
11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992; Ord. D-1711, passed 3-7-1994, effective
3-17-1994; Ord. D-1772, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996; Ord. D-1787,
passed 11-18-1996, effective 12-2-1996; Ord. D-1886, passed 2-19-2001,
effective 3-1-2001; Ord. O-182, passed 6-6-2016, effective 6-16-2016)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



Miscellaneous Provisions



   152.001   Purpose



   152.002   Authority



   152.003   Definitions



   152.004   Compliance; conflict



   152.005   Fees



Procedure for the Preparation and Filing of Preliminary Plats



   152.020   Requirement for platting



   152.021   Application



   152.022   Preliminary plat



   152.023   Tentative approval of preliminary plat



   152.024   Final approval of preliminary plat



Procedure for the Preparation and Filing of Final Plats



   152.035   Requirement for platting



   152.036   Final plat administrative review and approval



   152.037   Final plat legislative review and approval



Design Standards



   152.050   General requirements



   152.051   Streets



   152.052   Blocks



   152.053   Lots



   152.054   Acceptance of parks and public open space



   152.055   Utilities



   152.056   Naming or renaming streets, parks, buildings, and other
property



Improvement Requirements



   152.070   General provisions for permanent improvements



   152.071   Permanent Improvements to be installed by city



   152.072   Improvements provided or installed by proprietor



   152.073   Extent of improvement installations or petitions for
improvements



   152.074   Temporary road surfacing and drainage



   152.075   Agreement between proprietor and city



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  PURPOSE.



   Provisions governing the subdivision of land within the city are hereby
established to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; and to
further the orderly layout and use of land. These regulations provide for
certain minimum design standards and the provision of improvements, such as
pavements, sewers, sidewalks, street signs, street trees, and water mains.
They also pertain to the making, approving, filing and recording of plats;
and any person who shall hereafter subdivide any lands shall make and record
a plat thereof in accordance with this chapter and city departmental
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 152.01)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.002  AUTHORITY.



   These provisions are adopted pursuant to the Land Division Act, Public
Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended, and conform
with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.
§§ 125.3801 et seq., as amended.



(Prior Code, § 152.02)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.003  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the terms defined in the Land Division Act, Public Act
288  of 1967, being M.C.L. §§ 560.101 et seq., which are hereby
incorporated in this chapter, certain other words and terms used herein shall
be as defined in this section.



   BUILDING LINE. A line indicating the limit beyond which a main wall of
a building or structure may not project.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Saginaw or his or her
duly authorized representative.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Saginaw Comprehensive Plan, or any part or
amendments thereof, adopted by the City Planning Commission pursuant to the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L. §§
125.3801 et seq., as amended.



   COORDINATED SYSTEM OF TRAFFICWAYS or TRAFFICWAYS PLAN. The part of the
Comprehensive Plan relating to the major street system of the city, showing
the general location, character, and extent of major and secondary streets.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT or THROUGH LOT. An interior lot with frontage on
two streets.



   IMPROVED STREET. A street which has been paved in a continuous stretch
to at least one approved outlet.



   IMPROVEMENTS. Any or all of the following: street pavements; curb and
gutter; sidewalks; driveway approaches; watermains; combined or storm and
sanitary sewers; street trees; street signs; and may include walkways or any
other items normally considered public improvements.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing to the public
under federal, state, or municipal regulations, electric, gas, steam,
communications, telegraph, sewer, or water.



   UNIMPROVED STREET. A street wherein sewer and water lines have been
constructed, and upon which an approved temporary road surface has been
applied in a continuous stretch to at least one approved outlet and is usable
at all times of the year.



   VICINITY MAP. A map of the immediate area within which the proposed
subdivision is to be located.



   ZONING REGULATIONS. Ord. D-465 (as codified in Ch. 153 of this title),
as amended, or any new zoning regulations which may be hereafter adopted by
the City Council and all new ordinances relating to zoning restrictions and
districts which may hereafter be adopted under the provisions of the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L. §§ 125.3101 et
seq., as amended.



(Prior Code, § 152.03)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.004  COMPLIANCE; CONFLICT.



   Compliance with these regulations shall be pre-requisite to the
approval by the city of any plat or subdivision, except insofar as such
regulations may be in conflict with any applicable state law or any
applicable provisions of the City Charter and Comprehensive Plan.



(Prior Code, § 152.04)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.005  FEES.



   (A)   (1)   To help defray the costs of examining plans,
advertising, and public hearings and other expenses incidental to the
approval of a subdivision, the proprietor shall pay a fee at the time of
application for tentative approval of a preliminary plat. Such fee will be
based upon the estimated number of lots created.



      (2)   At the time of application for final plat approval, the
required fee will be recalculated on the basis of the actual number of lots
created, and an adjustment of the fee will be made, the proprietor to pay an
additional amount or to receive a refund if the adjusted fee differs from the
original fee.



      (3)   There will be no refund of any portion of the fee if the
proprietor fails to apply for final approval of the subdivision.



      (4)   If because of the failure of the proprietor to submit a
final preliminary plat within 12 months after receiving tentative approval of
a preliminary plat or to submit a final plat within two years after receiving
approval of the final preliminary plat, it will be necessary to resubmit a
preliminary plat for tentative approval, and the proprietor shall be required
to pay the fee currently in effect at the time of resubmission.



   (B)   The fees established by Council and posted in the Office of
the City Clerk for review and approval shall be charged and collected.



   (C)   All fees for review and approval of subdivisions shall be paid
to the City Clerk at the time the preliminary plat is submitted and shall be
credited to the General Fund. Any adjustment refunds shall be authorized by
the City Clerk and paid out of the General Fund upon authorization of the
Director of Community Development.



   (D)   Payment of fees will be waived for urban renewal plats,
replats, and for Assessor’s plats.



(Prior Code, § 152.05)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



PROCEDURE FOR THE PREPARATION AND FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLATS



§ 152.020  REQUIREMENT FOR PLATTING.



   Each preliminary plat involving property in the city must carry the
approval of the City Council and the City Planning Commission before the
final plat will be considered.



(Prior Code, § 152.15)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.021  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The owner, subdivider, proprietor, or his or her authorized
representative, hereinafter used interchangeably, shall submit to the City
Clerk an application in writing, on a form as may be drafted and provided by
the Director of Community Development, together with eight copies of the
preliminary plat for which approval is requested. The City Clerk shall
forward the application and copies of the plat to the City Council. The City
Council shall refer it to the City Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.



   (B)   Whenever a preliminary plat application has been presented to
the City Council, it shall be the duty of the Council to take action on said
plat within 90 days after filing of the same by the proprietor with the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 152.16)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.022  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The preliminary plat drawn at a scale of not more than 200
feet to the inch shall show the following:



      (1)   The location of existing property lines bounding the
tract to be subdivided and all property lines within or outside the tract
which intersect these boundary lines;



      (2)   Title under which proposed subdivision is to be
recorded, description of the land to be platted, names and addresses of owner
or owners;



      (3)   The location on the property and adjoining properties of
existing streets, sewers, watermains, culverts, drain pipes, electric lines
and insert elevations of sewers at points of proposed connections, names of
subdivisions immediately adjacent, streets and other public spaces on
immediately adjoining properties; as well as the location and type of
existing buildings, watercourses, floodplains, railroads and any other
physical or topographical features as are readily available which may affect
the location of a proposed street, road, or alley;



      (4)   Names, location, and widths of proposed streets,
building lines, alleys, easements, parks, plantings, open spaces, lot lines,
and utilities;



      (5)   All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public
use and the conditions of such dedication;



      (6)   Date, cardinal point, scale;



      (7)   The use district or districts in which the land to be
subdivided falls according to the zoning regulations;



      (8)   Ground elevations at extremities of and intersections of
all public ways;



      (9)   Suitable certificates on its face for all approvals
required by the municipality; and



      (10)   The City Engineer may require a topographical map
showing directions of stormwater drainage within lands to be subdivided and
from the lands as subdivided.



   (B)   The preliminary plat application shall be accompanied by the
name and address of any persons to whom the proprietor desires to have notice
of hearing sent, and the names and addresses of the owners of all abutting
lands to whom notice of hearing shall also be sent.



   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by letters from any
public utility which furnishes electric, gas, or telecommunications service,
giving assurance that the proposed street system, sewers, watermains, and
public utility installations have been coordinated with the respective
utility companies. In the case of electric and telecommunications the letters
shall also state that all lots and, where applicable, all street lights can
be adequately served from underground service. In cases of dispute between
the utility and this regulation as to adequate service by underground
placement, the City Council may modify the above requirement upon the written
recommendation of the City Engineer and City Planning Commission.



   (D)   The application shall also be accompanied by a letter from the
County Road Commission which indicates that the proposed street, alley, or
road names have been reviewed and accepted by that office.



   (E)   The design of the subdivision shall be in accordance with the
design standards set forth in §§ 152.050 through 152.056.



   (F)   In addition, the City Engineer or City Planning Commission
staff may require that a vicinity map at a scale of 400 feet to one inch (400
ft. = one in.) relating the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area
accompany the preliminary plat. A vicinity map will be required where deemed
necessary to relate the proposed subdivision to a larger surrounding area or
to clarify the proposal for the public hearing.



(Prior Code, § 152.17)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.023  TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Tentative approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council
shall be subject to tentative approval of the City Planning Commission after
approval by the City Engineer and the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   After receipt of the application and seven copies of the
preliminary plat, the Department of Community Development shall act as the
plat coordinating agency. The Department of Community Development staff shall
distribute copies of the plat to the City Engineer and the City Assessor.



   (C)   The City Engineer shall determine survey accuracy and physical
and economic feasibility of providing utility service in accordance with the
city’s standard design criteria, which are on file and available for
inspection in the City Engineer’s office. Following this review, the City
Engineer shall note approval or rejection on four copies of the plat and
return them to the Department of Community Development. If rejected, the
reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be given the
proprietor and Department of Community Development in writing.



   (D)   The City Assessor shall determine if there are any special
assessments outstanding against any of the lands which are proposed to be
dedicated for streets and advise the Department of Community Development.



   (E)   The Director of the Department of Community Development shall
determine general suitability of land for platting, compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan, and this chapter, and acceptability of street layout.
Following his or her review, the Director of Community Development shall note
approval or rejection on four copies of the plat. If rejected, the reasons
for rejection and the changes necessary to render the plat acceptable shall
be submitted in writing to the applicant.



   (F)   Upon receiving approval by the City Engineer and the Director
of Community Development, the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the City
Planning Commission, which shall hold a public hearing thereon as required by
law (Municipal Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.
§§ 125.3801 et seq., as amended). If the preliminary plat receives
tentative approval of the City Planning Commission, it shall be recommended
to the City Council. If rejected, the Commission shall give in writing to the
applicant and City Council the reasons for rejection and requirements for
approval. Preliminary plats thus tentatively approved by the Planning
Commission shall bear the signature of its Secretary.



   (G)   The City Planning Commission shall transmit the preliminary
plat with its tentative approval to the City Council. The City Council shall
tentatively approve and note its approval on the preliminary plat, or set
forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative
approval. Preliminary plats thus tentatively approved shall bear the
signature of the City Clerk. Such tentative approval shall confer upon the
proprietor for a period of one year from date approval of lot sizes, lot
orientation, and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if
applied for by the proprietor and granted by the City Council in writing.



   (H)   After City Council approval the City Clerk shall retain one
copy of the tentatively approved plat which shall bear the signatures of all
required municipal officials and distribute similarly executed copies to the
following: proprietor; City Planning Commission; and City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 152.18)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.024  FINAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Prior to submission of the preliminary plat to the City
Council for final approval, the proprietor shall submit the preliminary plat
to the Department of Community Development to determine compliance with the
tentatively approved preliminary plat. The plat shall be accompanied by
letters from all public utilities, giving assurance that the preliminary plat
being submitted for final approval has been coordinated with the respective
utilities, and that all lots, and, where applicable, all street lights can be
adequately served from underground service. If the proprietor has met all
conditions laid down for approval, the Director of Community Development
shall advise the proprietor in writing. If not acceptable, the proprietor
shall be notified in writing of the reasons for rejection.



   (B)   Upon receipt of tentative approval as provided in division (A)
above, the proprietor shall submit the preliminary plat to the City Clerk.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall submit the approved copies and
certification to the City Council, where it will be acted upon within 20 days
of the date of submission.



   (D)   After review and consideration the City Council shall:



      (1)   Approve the final preliminary plat, if the proprietor
has met all conditions laid down for tentative approval of the preliminary
plat; and



      (2)   Instruct the City Clerk to promptly notify the
proprietor of approval or rejection in writing and, if rejected, give the
reasons.



   (E)   Final approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council under
this section shall constitute acceptance thereof as the basis for preparation
of the final plat and be valid for two years. The two-year period may be
extended, if applied for by the proprietor and granted by Council in writing.
Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the City Clerk to the other
approving authorities.



(Prior Code, § 152.19)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



PROCEDURE FOR THE PREPARATION AND FILING OF FINAL PLATS



§ 152.035  REQUIREMENT FOR PLATTING.



   Each final plat involving property in the city must carry the approval
of the City Council and City Planning Commission before it can be recorded.



(Prior Code, § 152.30)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.036  FINAL PLAT ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   Prior to submission of the final plat to the City Council, the
proprietor shall submit the final plat and any restrictive covenants to the
following:



   (A)   City Engineer:



      (1)   To determine accuracy of description and relative error
of closure. To review all public and private streets, alleys and roads for
determination of proper drainage, grading, and construction with approved
materials of a thickness and width as provided in these regulations and for
the installation of bridges and culverts where deemed necessary, for
accomplishment of which he or she may require submission of complete plans
for grading, drainage, and construction which shall have been prepared and
sealed by a civil engineer in the state; and



      (2)   To determine whether any part of a proposed subdivision
lies within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek, or lake.



   (B)   City Planning Commission: to determine conformance to the
approved preliminary plat. In order to receive consideration at the next
subsequent meeting of the Planning Commission, the final plat shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Commission not less than eight days prior to such
meeting; and



   (C)   City Attorney: to prepare any necessary agreements to
guarantee the construction or installation of any temporary or permanent
improvements as provided in §§ 152.070 through 152.075.



(Prior Code, § 152.31)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.037  FINAL PLAT LEGISLATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of tentative approval as provided in § 152.035,
the proprietor shall deliver the final plat to the City Clerk to be submitted
to the City Council where it will be acted upon within 20 days of the date of
submission.



   (B)   After review and consideration, the City Council shall:



      (1)   Approve the final plat, if it conforms to the provisions
of the city ordinances and department regulations and instruct the Clerk to
certify the Council’s approval on the plat, showing the date of the
Council’s approval; or



      (2)   Reject the plat if it does not conform to the provisions
of division (B)(1) above, and instruct the Clerk to return the plat to the
proprietor, along with a copy of the proceedings setting forth the reasons.



(Prior Code, § 152.32)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 152.050  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provision for the continuation of the principal existing streets in the
adjoining subdivisions (or their proper projection when adjoining property is
not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements.
Streets that are continuous shall bear the same name throughout. The City
Planning Commission may, in addition, require the continuation of such minor
streets as are necessary for the extension of public improvements or for
access by adjoining property owners. Where, in the opinion of the City
Planning Commission, topography makes such conditions or conformity
impracticable, or where the Council or the City Planning Commission has
adopted a plan for a community or neighborhood area of which the subdivision
is a part, and such plan provides for coordination with the street system of
the city different from said continuations or projections of existing
streets, and the subdivider’s plat conforms to such community or
neighborhood plan, the Council may approve the subdivider’s plat.



   (B)   Where land lies adjacent to the lands embraced in a plat,
which in the opinion of the City Planning Commission is suitable for
subdividing but which has not yet been subdivided, a strip of land within the
bounds of the plat two feet in width and abutting the boundary line
separating such unplatted



land from the plat shall be reserved for the full length of a half street, or
other public way, which abuts said boundary line and for the full width of
any street or other public way terminating at said boundary line. All such
reservations shall be designated by the plat as “Two-Foot Reservation”,
and held by the owner as a reservation until adjacent lands along the
boundary and outside the plat shall be dedicated or otherwise established as
a street or other public property, at which time such “Two-Foot
Reservation” shall automatically become a street or other public property,
all of which shall be stated in the dedication.



   (C)   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider’s plat, a sketch of the prospective future design of the
unsubmitted part shall be furnished, and the street system of the part
submitted shall be considered in the light of adjustments in connection with
the street system of the part not submitted.



   (D)   Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for
building lots, such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening
of major streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.



   (E)   Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets as
the only means of connecting two or more public streets will not receive
approval.



   (F)   Insofar as is practical, acute angles between streets at their
intersections are to be avoided.



   (G)   (1)   Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing
street names either by sound or sight; however, any proposed street which, in
future plats, can be extended in a logical manner to connect with an existing
named street shall bear the same name.



      (2)   All proposed street names shall be approved by the
County Road Commission.



(Prior Code, § 152.45)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.051  STREETS.



   (A)   The width of major and secondary streets shall conform to the
widths designated on the official maps relative to streets or to such widths
as the City Planning Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out
the intended function of the Trafficways Plan.



   (B)   The minimum width of streets whose ultimate length is in
excess of 500 feet shall be 60 feet and shall not be less than 50 feet in any
case. In cases where physical conditions appear to make the required minimum
width of street impractical, the City Planning Commission may modify this
requirement.



   (C)   Streets designed to have one end permanently closed
(cul-de-sac) shall be not less than 50 feet in width and shall have a turning
circle at the closed end with a radius of not less than 55 feet and a
pavement width of not less than 22 feet. Such streets shall not extend for
more than 450 feet from the centerline of the nearest intersecting street.
Where conformance to this provision results in lots of greater depth than 150
feet at the end of such cul-de-sac, the maximum length of such streets may be
increased to 500 feet. In cases where physical conditions make this maximum
length of cul-de-sac impractical, the City Planning Commission may modify
this requirement in any proposal for subdividing lands where a street cannot
be extended in any practical manner to intersect the cul-de-sac within 450
feet of its terminus because of the existing adjacent development. The
property line at the intersection of the turning circle and the straight
portion of the street shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 20 feet.



   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
street or major trafficway, the City Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets adjacent to such major trafficway where such lots front on
such major street.



   (E)   Whenever a subdivision is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way,
there shall be a street which is parallel to the railroad so as to restrict
the number of grade crossings. The intersection of the centerline of the
parallel street with that of any street that crosses the railroad shall not
be less than 150 feet from the line of the railroad right-of-way.



   (F)   Access and right-of-way to all proposed streets across
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or ditches shall be provided by the
subdivider at his or her expense in a standard manner approved by the City
Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 152.46)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



Cross-reference:



   Streets, see §§ 32.15, 32.16, and Ch. 96



§ 152.052  BLOCKS.



   No block may be more than 1,320 feet in length between the centerlines
of intersecting streets, except where, in the opinion of the City Planning
Commission, extraordinary conditions unquestionably justify a departure from
this maximum. In blocks over 600 feet in length, the Commission may require
at or near the middle of the block a public way or easement of not less than
ten feet in width for use by pedestrians and/or as an easement for public
utilities. All easements for public utilities shall not be less than 12 feet
wide.



(Prior Code, § 152.47)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.053  LOTS.



   (A)   All lots shall conform in width and area requirements to the
zoning regulations, as amended.



   (B)   In all quadrangular lots, and insofar as it is practicable all
other lots, the side lines shall be at right angles to straight lines and
radial to curved street lines.



   (C)   Double frontage lots, when less than 200 feet in depth, are
prohibited unless the City Planning Commission determines that the
application of this regulation will impose an undue hardship upon the
proprietor, and that the area of such lots is more than twice the minimum lot
area required.



   (D)   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
construction of a structure comparable in size to those common to the
subdivision, as well as provide standard side yards as determined by the
zoning regulations.



   (E)   No lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat
shall be further partitioned or divided except as follows.



      (1)   Groups of small lots may be combined to form standard
lots to meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the particular zoning
district as established by the zoning regulations.



      (2)   Existing lots larger than the minimum for the zoning
district may be split into not more than three pieces to form new parcels
which meet or exceed the minimum lot size for the particular zoning district.



   (F)   In no case shall standard lots be split into independent
parcels which do not meet minimum requirements for the zoning district.



(Prior Code, § 152.48)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.054  ACCEPTANCE OF PARKS AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE.



   The City Planning Commission may recommend the acceptance of the
dedication of parks, playgrounds, and other public open spaces when it
appears that the community will benefit from such dedication.



(Prior Code, § 152.49)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.055  UTILITIES.



   (A)   The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution
lines for telephone, electric, television, and other similar services
distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely through the
residential subdivided area.



   (B)   Division (A) above shall not be construed to prohibit the
construction above ground of surface equipment associated with an underground
distribution system, including manholes which cannot be made flush with the
ground, surface mounted transformers, power, and communication terminal
pedestals, meters and meter boxes, cabinets to house switches and other
electrical distribution apparatus, concealed wires, street lights, and street
light poles.



   (C)   Overhead lines may also be permitted upon written
recommendation of the City Engineer and City Planning Commission, and the
approval of the City Council where it is determined that overhead lines will
not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, design,
and character of the subdivision.



   (D)   Conduits, cables, and gas mains shall be placed within private
easements provided to public utilities by the proprietor or within dedicated
public ways. All utilities, water, sewer, gas, electric, and
telecommunications shall be so planned as to location so as not to conflict
with each other.



   (E)   All underground public utility installations, including lines
for street lighting systems, which traverse privately-owned property shall be
protected by easements granted by the proprietor. These easements may be
recorded on the final plat as private easements for public utilities.
Easements for underground utilities shall be graded to within five-tenths of
one foot of finished grade before trenching for utilities is begun.



(Prior Code, § 152.50)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.056  NAMING OR RENAMING STREETS, PARKS, BUILDINGS, AND OTHER PROPERTY.



   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes a process and criteria for
consideration of a request by a member of the public to name or rename a
public (or private) street, a public park, public building, or other real or
personal public property located within the city limits. This process also
includes a request for an additional name or sign to be added to an already
existing name.



   (B)   Petition. Any request for naming or renaming a street, park,
building, or other property within the city limits, shall be initiated in
writing from one or more resident(s) within the city by completing a petition
for naming or renaming form and provide the following information:



      (1)   Name of petitioner;



      (2)   Type of request;



      (3)   Reason the request to name or rename is being proposed;



      (4)   Detailed description of the building, park, street, or
other property (real or personal); and



      (5)   Location within the city. (Petitions for naming or
renaming a street must have an attached street map and must be signed by at
least 51% of the property owners on the affected street or portion thereof.)



   (C)   Petition filing. The petition, and any filing fee established
by Council, shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office, by 12:00 noon, ten
days prior to the City Council meeting in which the petition will be
presented. The City Clerk will provide copies of the petition and supporting
documentation to City Council, the City Manager, City Attorney, City
Engineer, Chief Inspector, and Associate Planner prior to the Council meeting.



   (D)   City Council initial action. At the Council meeting in which
the petition for naming or renaming is presented, the City Manager will
request City Council receive and file the petition and refer it to the City
Planning Commission for a recommendation.



   (E)   City Planning Commission consideration.



      (1)   Research. The City Planning Commission will evaluate the
petition and supporting documentation, and shall base its recommendation on
what is in the best interest of the city. If the request is for renaming a
street, park, building, or other property, the Commission shall research the
historical significance, if any, of the current name and how the renaming
shall affect the abutting property owners.



      (2)   Public hearing. The City Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing at which time all interested persons will be heard. Notice of
the public hearing shall be mailed via regular mail to all property owners
abutting the affected building, park, street, or other property, at least 15
days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall be posted for the
general public in the City Clerk’s office, the city’s website, and on the
city’s cable network.



      (3)   Recommendation. The City Planning Commission may
recommend approval, denial, or approval with conditions of the request. The
recommendation of the City Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City
Council for its consideration. The petitioner will be given written notice of
the recommendation of the City Planning Commission. Any recommendations for
approval affecting a street must be forwarded to the County Road Commission
for its approval prior to Council consideration.



   (F)   Council final action. Upon receipt and review of the
recommendation from the City Planning Commission on the petition, City
Council may sustain the recommendation or may rule otherwise. The decision of
City Council is final.



   (G)   Assessment of costs.



      (1)   Upon receipt of petition.  The petitioner shall be
provided an estimate of the cost to be incurred by the city in reviewing the
petition, researching the requested change, providing the public notices
required in this section, and conducting the public hearing, which costs
shall be the sole responsibility of the petitioner.  Upon receipt of payment
in full of the estimated costs, the steps set forth in division (E) shall
proceed.  If payment is not received within 30 days of an estimate being
provided, the petition will be considered withdrawn.



      (2)   Petition approval.  If the petition is approved, the
petitioner shall be provided an estimate of the cost determined to implement
the naming or renaming, which costs are the sole responsibility of the
petitioner. Upon receipt of payment in full of the estimated costs, city
staff shall implement the recommendation. If payment is not received within
30 days of an estimate being provided, the petition will be considered
withdrawn.  At the time of granting the petition, City Council may, at its
discretion, waive any or all costs to be incurred.



      (3)   Estimated costs.  Petitioners shall be responsible for
payment of any costs associated with their petition that are in excess of any
estimate provided.  Should the actual costs involved in processing a
petition or implementing a naming or renaming be less than the estimate paid,
any overpayment shall be returned to the petitioner by the city.



   (H)   Withdrawal. If the petitioner(s) wishes to voluntarily
withdraw their petition, they must do so in writing and file same with the
City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 152.51)  (Ord. O-69, passed 5-19-2008, effective 5-29-2008;
Ord. O-198, passed 11-20-2017, effective 11-30-2017)



IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.070  GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS.



   The proprietor shall agree that the following permanent improvements
shall be installed by the city as provided in §§ 152.071 and 152.072,
unless otherwise agreed upon by the city: sewers; water; sidewalks; driveway
approaches; pavement; street trees; and street signs.



(Prior Code, § 152.60)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.071  PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS TO BE INSTALLED BY CITY.



   Improvements to be installed by the city shall be initiated by the
proprietor, who shall file petitions with the City Clerk requesting the
installation of any or all of the improvements required (sewers, water,
sidewalks, driveway approaches, and pavement). The cost of such improvements
or any part thereof shall be assessed against benefitted properties as
determined by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 152.61)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.072  IMPROVEMENTS PROVIDED OR INSTALLED BY PROPRIETOR.



   (A)   Improvements provided by the proprietor with prior city
approval shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the City
Engineer and in the order approved by the city. Where necessary to assure the
actual construction and completion of such improvement, the city may require
a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit from the
proprietors in an amount as determined by the city.



   (B)   In order to assure uniformity in street tree plantings and
street signs, the proprietor shall arrange for the furnishing and
installation of street trees and street signs with the Superintendent of
Streets and Bridges and City Engineer, respectively, of the city, at the
established current unit cost.



      (1)   Street tree planting plans shall be prepared by the
Superintendent of Streets and Bridges, and tree requirements shall be
determined on the basis of a spacing of approximately 50 feet between trees.



      (2)   Street sign requirements shall be determined by the City
Engineer on the basis of one street sign for each intersection of two streets
or other public ways.



(Prior Code, § 152.62)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.073  EXTENT OF IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATIONS OR PETITIONS FOR
IMPROVEMENTS.



   Installation of or petitions for improvements shall apply to the full
length of all streets or other public ways; provided, however, that
installation of sewers may not be required on sections of streets having no
lot frontage and on which sewer extensions are not planned.



(Prior Code, § 152.63)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.074  TEMPORARY ROAD SURFACING AND DRAINAGE.



   After sewers have been installed the owner shall grade all streets or
other public ways and apply road gravel or stone to a compacted depth of six
inches for a width of 20 feet to provide access to any lot before building
construction thereon has been started. No building permits will be issued for
construction on an undeveloped street.



(Prior Code, § 152.64)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



§ 152.075  AGREEMENT BETWEEN PROPRIETOR AND CITY.



   The proprietor shall enter into an agreement with the city providing:



   (A)   All improvements to be installed by the proprietor shall be
completed within a reasonable period of time as designated in said agreement;
and



   (B)   The proprietor shall record with the Register of Deeds of the
county, at the time of recording the plat and furnish proof of such recording
to the city, a restrictive covenant to run with the land for a period of five
years from and after the date of final approval of the plat. Said restrictive
covenant shall provide that all owners of any of the land in the plat shall
consent to the construction by the special assessment method of pavement with
curb and gutter, combined or sanitary and storm sewer, driveway approaches,
and sidewalks except as to any such improvement furnished by the owner of the
plat.



(Prior Code, § 152.65)  (Ord. D-962, passed 10-19-1970, effective
10-29-1970)



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING CODE



Section



Miscellaneous Provisions



   153.001   Purpose



   153.002   Preamble



   153.003   Enabling authority



   153.004   Responsibility



   153.005   Short title



   153.006   Interpretation and application



Definitions



   153.020   Construction of language



   153.021   Definitions



Zoning Map and Districts



   153.035   Districts established



   153.036   Map



   153.037   District boundary exceptions



General Provisions and Exceptions



   153.050   Conflicting regulations



   153.051   Scope



   153.052   Street and alley rights-of-way



   153.053   Permitted uses



   153.054   Permitted area



   153.055   Permitted height; exceptions



   153.056   Zoning lot



   153.057   Lots, yards and open spaces



   153.058   Projections, yard encroachments



   153.059   Existing porches



   153.060   New basements under existing dwellings



   153.061   General yard exceptions



   153.062   Front and rear yard exceptions



   153.063   Outside storage and parking on residentially zoned and/or
used lots



   153.064   Street access



   153.065   Visibility



   153.066   Dwellings in nonresidential district



   153.067   Dwellings in other than main structures in R-1 and R-2
Districts



   153.068   Number of buildings on lot; restriction



   153.069   Use exceptions



   153.070   Accessory buildings



   153.071   Automobile service stations and public garages



   153.072   Drive-in restaurants



   153.073   Grade requirements



   153.074   Building to be moved



   153.075   Excavations or holes



   153.076   Excavation, removal and filling of land



   153.077   Restoring unsafe buildings



   153.078   Construction begun prior to adoption of chapter



   153.079   Voting places



   153.080   Plat approval



   153.081   Greenbelts



   153.082   Protective screening of nonresidential areas from
residential areas



   153.083   Site plan review



   153.084   Performance standards



   153.085   Areas added to the city



   153.086   Fences



   153.087   Telecommunications towers and antennas



Nonconforming Uses, Buildings, Structures, and Lots



   153.100   Nonconformance regulated



   153.101   Nonconforming uses of land



   153.102   Nonconforming uses of structures



   153.103   Nonconforming structures



   153.104   Substandard lots of record



   153.105   Repairs and maintenance



   153.106   Reconstruction of damaged nonconforming buildings and
structures   



   153.107   Forfeiture of right to continue nonconforming use



   153.108   Change of nonconforming use



   153.109   Change of tenancy or ownership



   153.110   Acquisition of nonconforming structures



   153.111   Certificate of occupancy, nonconforming use



   153.112   Plans already filed



Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements



   153.125   Off-street parking, general



   153.126   Table of off-street parking requirements



   153.127   Off-street waiting area for drive-through facilities



   153.128   Development and standards—Off-Street Parking A



   153.129   Development and standards—business and industrial
districts



   153.130   Development and standards—residential districts



   153.131   Off-street parking layout and design



   153.132   Off-street loading requirements



Signs



   153.145   Findings



   153.146   Purpose



   153.147   Prohibited signs



   153.148   Violations and removal thereof



   153.149   Illumination



   153.150   Nonconforming signs



   153.151   Signs for nonconforming uses



   153.152   Off-site signs



   153.153   Auxiliary parking lot signs



   153.154   Public signs



   153.155   Temporary signs



   153.156   Special purpose temporary signs



   153.157   Signs in R-1 Districts



   153.158   Signs in R-1A Districts



   153.159   Signs in R-2 Districts



   153.160   Signs in R-3 Districts



   153.161   Signs in R-4 Districts



   153.162   Signs in RO-1 Districts



   153.163   Signs in B-1 Districts



   153.164   Signs in B-1A Districts



   153.165   Signs in B-2 Districts



   153.166   Signs in B-3 and RMU Districts



   153.167   Signs in M-1 Districts



   153.168   Signs in M-2 Districts



   153.169   Signs in M-3 Districts



R-1, Single-Family Residential District



   153.180   Statement of purpose



   153.181   Principal permitted uses



   153.182   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.183   Site plan review



   153.184   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



R-1A, Agricultural Residential District



   153.195   Statement of purpose



   153.196   Principal permitted uses



   153.197   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.198   Site plan review



   153.199   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



R-2, Two-Family Residential District



   153.210   Statement of purpose



   153.211   Principal permitted uses



   153.212   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.213   Site plan review



   153.214   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



R-3, Low Density Multiple Dwelling Residential District



   153.225   Statement of purpose



   153.226   Principal permitted uses



   153.227   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.228   Screening requirement



   153.229   Site plan review



   153.230   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



R-4, High Density Multiple Dwelling Residential District



   153.245   Statement of purpose



   153.246   Principal permitted uses



   153.247   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.248   Screening requirement



   153.249   Site plan review



   153.250   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



RO-1, Restricted Office District



   153.265   Statement of purpose



   153.266   Principal permitted uses



   153.267   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.268   Site plan review



   153.269   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



B-1, Local Business District



   153.280   Statement of purpose



   153.281   Principal permitted uses



   153.282   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.283   Required conditions



   153.284   Site plan review



   153.285   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



B-1A, Interchange Business District



   153.300   Statement of purpose



   153.301   Principal permitted uses



   153.302   Site plan review



   153.303   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



B-2, General Business District



   153.315   Statement of purpose



   153.316   Principal permitted uses



   153.317   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.318   Site plan review



   153.319   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



B-3, Central Business District



   153.330   Statement of purpose



   153.331   Principal permitted uses



   153.332   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.333   Site plan review



   153.334   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



M-1, Light Industrial District



   153.345   Statement of purpose



   153.346   Principal permitted uses



   153.347   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.348   Open storage



   153.349   Site plan review



   153.350   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



M-2, General Industrial District



   153.365   Statement of purpose



   153.366   Principal permitted uses



   153.367   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.368   Open storage



   153.369   Site plan review



   153.370   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



M-3, Heavy Industrial District



   153.385   Statement of purpose



   153.386   Principal permitted uses



   153.387   Permitted uses after special approval



   153.388   Site plan review



   153.389   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and
performance standards



PDD—Planned Development District



   153.400   Statement of purpose



   153.401   Development standards for planned development districts



   153.402   Application procedure and zoning approval process



   153.403   Effect of approval of petition and area plan



   153.404   Amendment of area plan



   153.405   Performance guarantees



   153.406   Violations



Riverfront Mixed Use District



   153.420   Purpose



   153.421   Character of RMU District



   153.422   Districts and regulating plan



   153.423   Building form standards



   153.424   Additional design standards



   153.425   Main Street District additional design standards



   153.426   Uses and parking standards



   153.427   Administrative provisions



   153.428   Definitions and rules of measurement



Schedule of Regulations



   153.440   Schedule and footnotes to regulations



Site Design Standards for Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses After Special
Approval



   153.455   General provisions



   153.456   Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, cabarets,
massage parlors



   153.457   Adult foster care family homes



   153.458   Adult foster care small group homes



   153.459   Adult foster care large group homes



   153.460   Automobile wash establishments



   153.461   Automobile service stations



   153.462   Boarding houses, rooming houses, lodging houses, and
tourist homes



   153.463   Breweries, distilleries, canning factories, and chemical
plants



   153.464   Building supply, solid fuel businesses, or contracting
firms with incidental storage yard on the same lot; including building and
allied craft contractors



   153.465   Cemeteries



   153.466   Churches, convents, and rectories



   153.467   Cocktail lounges, nightclubs, taverns, supper clubs,
private clubs



   153.468   Commercial greenhouses



   153.469   Convalescent and nursing homes



   153.470   Drive-in restaurants or other drive-in establishments
serving food and/or beverages



   153.471   Historic theme restaurants



   153.472   Home occupations



   153.473   Homeless shelters



   153.474   Hospitals



   153.475   Junkyards



   153.476   Mobile home parks



   153.477   Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child day care centers



   153.478   Off-Street Parking A



   153.479   Open storage yards of building and construction
contractors, lumber yards, stone, sand and gravel sales and storage



   153.480   Outdoor drive-in theaters



   153.481   Penal and correctional institutions and detention
facilities



   153.482   Pinball parlors, pool halls



   153.483   Pickle processing



   153.484   Planned development projects



   153.485   Planned mobile home park development



   153.486   Private parks, country clubs, golf courses, and golf
driving ranges



   153.487   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations,
municipal pumping stations



   153.488   Radio and television towers, freestanding



   153.489   Recreation vehicle storage yards



   153.490   Telecommunications facilities



   153.491   Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work



Floodplain District



   153.505   Statement of purpose



   153.506   Advisory and disclaimer of liability



   153.507   Floodplain district areas (overlay)



   153.508   Precedence of Federal Emergency Management Agency data



   153.509   General provisions of both the Floodway and Floodway
Fringe Areas



   153.510   Permitted uses by right in the Floodway Area of the
Floodplain District



   153.511   Uses permitted by special approval in the Floodway Area of
the Floodplain District



   153.512   Requirements for special approval for uses in the Floodway
Area of the Floodplain District



   153.513   Standards for special approval in the Floodway



   153.514   Permitted uses by right in the Floodway Fringe Area of the
Floodplain District



   153.515   Uses permitted by special approval in the Floodway Fringe
Area of the Floodplain District



   153.516   Requirements for special approval for uses in the Floodway
Fringe Area of the Floodplain District



   153.517   Standards for special approval within the Floodway Fringe



   153.518   Mobile homes and mobile home parks and subdivisions
located in floodplain areas



   153.519   Standards for variance by the Board of Appeals on Zoning
from the strict interpretation of the regulations set forth in this subchapter



   153.520   Conflict between this subchapter and the remainder of this
chapter



   153.521   Relationship of this subchapter to state and federal laws



Historic Districts



   153.535   Statement of purpose



   153.536   Boundaries of districts and location of historic
resources/landmarks



   153.537   Regulation of structures



   153.538   Historic District Commission



   153.539   Procedure for the review of plans



   153.540   Appeals



   153.541   Establishing new districts and identifying historic
resources/landmarks



   153.542   Acceptance of gift, grant, or bequest



   153.543   Action of the Commission regarding historic resources
threatened with demolition by neglect



   153.544   Work done on a resource without a permit



Administration and Enforcement



   153.555   Administrative and enforcement authority



   153.556   Duties of Chief Inspector; building permit applications



   153.557   Permits



   153.558   Certificates of occupancy



   153.559   Fees



   153.560   City Planning Commission powers and duties



   153.561   Amendments; public hearing; notice; report of City
Planning Commission; vote required



   153.562   Powers of the City Planning Commission concerning special
approvals



   153.563   Performance guarantee



Board of Appeals on Zoning



   153.575   Establishment



   153.576   Membership



   153.577   Officers



   153.578   Meetings; record keeping; subpoena power; freedom of
information



   153.579   Appeals, procedure, hearing



   153.580   Notice of hearing



   153.581   Appeals; fees



   153.582   Powers and duties generally



   153.583   Administrative review



   153.584   Special exceptions



   153.585   Interpretation of zoning district boundaries



   153.586   Variances



   153.587   Vote required to reverse decisions; limitation of power



   153.588   Standard for judging appeals and variances



   153.589   Conditions of appeals and variances



   153.590   Period of validity



   153.591   Circuit court appeal



   153.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Illustrations



      1.   Floor area terminology



      2.   Floor area ratio (FAR)



      3.   Building height requirements



      4.   Corner, interior, and double frontage lots



      5.   Nonconforming use



      6.   Yard requirements



      7.   Basement and story illustration



      8.   Basic structural terms



      9.   Lot terms



      10.   Fences



      11.   Required side yards for selected corner lots widths



      12.   Off-street parking diagram



      13.   Parking islands



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict the use of land
and buildings by dividing the city into districts; defining certain terms
used therein; imposing regulations, prohibitions, and special use
restrictions governing the erection, construction, reconstruction of
structures and buildings and lands to be used for business, industry,
residence, social, and other specified purposes; regulating and limiting the
height and bulk of buildings and other structures and regulating and limiting
lot occupancy and the size of yards and other open spaces; regulating and
limiting the density of population; establishing floor space requirements to
assure adequate light and ventilation of buildings; limiting congestion upon
the public streets by providing for the off-street parking and loading of
vehicles; providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of
land, buildings, and structures through purchase, condemnation, or otherwise;
creating a Board of Appeals on Zoning, defining and limiting the powers and
duties of said Board, and setting standards to guide actions of said Board;
providing for administration of this chapter and for amendments, supplements
or changes thereto; providing for resolution of conflicts with the State
Housing Code or other acts, ordinances, or regulations; and providing
penalties for violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.001)  (Ord. D-1418, § 101, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.002  PREAMBLE.



   In accordance with the authority and intent of M.C.L. §§ 125.581 et
seq., as amended, the city desires to provide for the orderly development of
the city, consistent with the city’s Comprehensive Plan, which is essential
to the well being of the city, and which will place no undue burden upon
developers, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to ensure that
uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and
relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and
congestions of population and transportation systems and other public
facilities; to facilitate adequate and efficient provisions for
transportation systems, sewage disposal, water energy, education, recreation
and other public service, and facility needs; and to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare within the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.002)  (Ord. D-1418, § 102, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.003  ENABLING AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.C.L. §§ 125.581 et seq. Said
Act is hereby made a part of this chapter just as if it were word for word
repeated herein.



(Prior Code, § 153.003)  (Ord. D-1418, § 103, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.004  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The prohibition of any act in this code, in any amendment
thereof, and in any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall include the
causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act.



   (B)   Any suit against the Chief Inspector or employee because of
such act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any
provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal department of the city
until final termination of the proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 153.004)  (Ord. D-1418, § 104, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.005  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Code of
the City of Saginaw”.



(Prior Code, § 153.005)  (Ord. D-1418, § 106, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.006  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, said
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or
annul any law, ordinance, rule, regulation or permit previously adopted or
issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or
which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is
it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreement between parties; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open
spaces, or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where, however, the
provisions of the State Housing Code or other ordinances or regulations of
the city impose requirements for lower heights of buildings or less
percentage of lot that may be occupied, or require wider or larger courts or
deeper yards than are required by any ordinance or regulation which may be
adopted by the city under the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
said State Housing Code or other ordinance or regulation shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 153.006)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2801, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



DEFINITIONS



§ 153.020  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter.



   (A)   The particular shall control the general.



   (B)   In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text
shall control.



   (C)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive and discretionary.



   (D)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (E)   A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.



   (F)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”,
“designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, or “occupied
for”.



   (G)   The word “person” includes an individual, firm, a
corporation, company, copartnership, partnership, an incorporated
association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, or any other similar entity,
group, or combination acting as a unit. The singular masculine pronoun shall
include the feminine, neuter, and plural; unless the intention to give a more
limited meaning is disclosed by the context.



   (H)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provision, or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, “either...or”, the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows.



      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events shall apply; and



      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions
or provisions, or events may apply singularly or in any combination.



   (I)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.



(Prior Code, § 153.020)  (Ord. D-1418, § 201, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.021  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, certain
terms and words used herein are defined as follows.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A supplementary building or a portion of a main
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and
which is located on the same lot as the main building, but such use shall not
include any building used for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping quarters for
human beings. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS include garages, garden equipment sheds,
small greenhouses, swimming pools, and kennels/pens for dogs or animals as
defined.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “anatomical areas” (as described in the definition for
“adult motion picture theater”, or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material.



   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private residence with the approved
capacity to receive not more than six adults who shall be provided foster
care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME licensee shall be a member of the household and
an occupant of the residence (Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act,
Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L. § 400.703(5)).



   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. An adult foster care facility with
the approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults who
shall be provided foster care. Beginning four years after the effective date
of the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979,
being M.C.L. §§ 400.701 et seq., an ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME
which is licensed by the department to provide foster care in each respective
category may receive only those adults in a category whose primary need for
services is based upon not more than one of the following categories:



      (1)   Aged condition; or



      (2)   Mental illness, developmental disability, or physical
handicap, or a combination of mental illness, development disability, or
physical handicap.



   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. An adult foster care facility with
the approved capacity for not more than 12 adults who shall be provided
foster care.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or open air site
used for presenting motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “anatomical areas”  or (as defined herein), for
observation by patrons therein.



      (1)   ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely or opaquely covered:



            1.   Human genitals, pubic region;



            2.   Buttock; and



            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      (2)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. (See also § 131.02).



         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
sodomy; and



         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast.



   ALLEY. A secondary thoroughfare less than 30 feet in width dedicated
for the public use of vehicles and pedestrians affording access to abutting
property.



   ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure means a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of ingress or egress;
or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height;
or the moving from one location or position to another.



   ANTENNAS. Any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic



waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services.



   APPEAL. An entreaty or demand for a hearing or review of facts and/or
actions in connection with the public enforcement of this chapter.



   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. Architectural features of a building shall
include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows,
chimneys, and decorative ornaments.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A space or building or parts of a building,
and the necessary equipment used for sale to the consumer and/or for the
installation in or upon motor vehicles, the usual operating commodities such
as motor fuels, lubricants, antifreeze, water, air, batteries, tires, light
bulbs, fan belts, windshield wipers, and other commodities and for the sale
of such services as washing, wiping, cleaning, and waxing of motor vehicles,
tire repair and battery charging, and rental of trucks and trailers. Vehicle
washing shall be confined to hand washing or comparable manually operated
high pressure washing equipment with not more than one wash stall, which
shall have only have one vehicle access door and shall not be designed or
altered to permit a drive-through operation.



   AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENT. Any building or structure or portion
thereof containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using production
line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other
mechanical washing devices; and shall also include coin and attendant
operated drive-through, automatic self-serve, track mounted units, and
similar high volume washing establishments, but shall not include hand
washing operations in an “automobile station”.



   BASEMENT. The portion of a building wholly or partly below grade, but
so constructed that the vertical distance from the average grade to the
basement floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade
to the basement ceiling. A BASEMENT shall not be included as a story for
height measurement. (See Appendix A, § 7.)



   BEDROOM. A room in a dwelling unit used for or intended to be used
primarily for sleeping purposes by human beings.



   BILLBOARD. Any construction or portion thereof upon which a sign or
advertisement is used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making
anything known to the general public, but not including bulletin boards used
to display official court or public offer notices.



   BLOCK FRONT. The property abutting one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets, crossing or terminating; or
between the nearest such street, unsubdivided acreage, or between any of the
foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development such as a
railroad right-of-way, park, or river channel.



   BOARD OF APPEALS ON ZONING. The City of Saginaw Board of Appeals on
Zoning.



   BOARDING HOUSE, TOURIST HOUSE. A building arranged or used for lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation, by more than five and not more than
20 individuals.



   BOATS. Boats, floats, and rafts, and the attached normal equipment to
transport same on the highway.



   BOUNDARY, DISTRICT. The line separating two different kinds of use
districts. Whenever the district boundary is not shown on the Zoning Map to
be on a street, alley or shoreline, lot line or any line which may be
established on the Zoning Map of the city or any recorded subdivision
thereof, or to be an extension of any of the foregoing lines, it shall be
deemed to be located 100 feet, or such distance as dimensioned, thereon, from
and parallel to the nearest street right-of-way line as established at the
time of enactment of this chapter.



   BUILDING. An independent structure erected on-site, a mobile home, a
pre-manufactured or pre-cut structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, intended and/or used for shelter or enclosure of persons or chattels.
When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other part by
division walls from the ground up, and without openings, each portion of such
building shall be deemed a separate BUILDING. This refers to both temporary
and permanent structures and includes mobile homes, tents, sheds, garages,
stables, greenhouses, or other accessory structures.



   BUILDING FRONT. The facade of a building most nearly parallel to and
nearest the front line.



   BUILDING PERMIT. The written authority issued by the Chief Inspector
permitting the construction, removal, moving, alteration, or use of a
building in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (See also
definition of PERMIT.)



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the predominant
use of the lot on which it is located.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line which pertains to and defines those
minimum (building) setback lines which are established parallel to the front
street or right-of-way line and within which setback area no part of a
building shall project or be located, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Such line when adjacent to a building is normally formed by the
junction grade or surface of the adjoining ground.



   CABARET. An establishment which features topless and/or bottomless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainers.



   CHIEF INSPECTOR. Chief Inspector of the City of Saginaw.



   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Saginaw.



   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The City of Saginaw City Planning Commission.



   CLINIC. A building or group of buildings where human patients are
admitted, but not lodged overnight, for examination and treatment by more
than one professional, such as a physician, dentist, or the like.



   CODE. The same as ORDINANCE, ZONING CODE, or ZONING ORDINANCE of the
City of Saginaw.



   COMMERCIAL USE. A commercial use related to the use of property in
connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display, or exchange of goods,
wares, merchandise, or personal services or the maintenance of offices or
recreational or amusement enterprises, or garage, basement sales, conducted
on residential premises for more than six calendar days during a given
one-year period.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Include trucks, highway tractors and trailers,
pickups, vans, wreckers, or similar vehicles any of which have or require
commercial license plates and have a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000
pounds.



   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. A home for the care of children or the
aged or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering serious bodily
disorders, wherein three or more persons are cared for. Said home shall also
conform to and qualify for license under applicable state laws (even though
state law may provide for different size regulations).



   CUL-DE-SAC. A street with only one outlet having sufficient space at
the closed end to provide vehicular turning facilities.



   DAY CARE CENTER. A daytime or nighttime group facility which gives care
for preschool children or school age children away from their homes but which
need not employ a teacher approved by the Department of Education. It
provides a program which promotes the development of the individual child and
is under the direction of a person with experience in child care. There must
be more than six children cared for in the facility for a time period of less
than 24 hours per day.



   DETENTION FACILITIES. A residential and institutional complex for the
temporary holding of criminal suspects and/or offenders whose individual
cases are being processed.



   DISTRICT. A portion of the city within which certain uses of land
and/or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter.



   DISTRICT AND USE, MORE RESTRICTED AND LESS RESTRICTED. In the list
given below, each district shall be deemed to be more restricted than any
following district, and each district shall be deemed to be less restricted
than any foregoing district: R-1; R-1A; R-2; R-3; R-4; RO-1; B-1; B-1A; B-2;
B-3; M-1; M-2; and M-3.



   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that its
principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway
approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while
in, or momentarily stepped away from, their motor vehicles (such as banks,
laundry or dry cleaning pickup establishments).



      (1)   CARRY-OUT RESTAURANTS. Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation includes
both of the following characteristics:



         (a)   Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually
served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic, or other disposable
containers; and



         (b)   The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or
beverages within the restaurant building, within a motor vehicle parked upon
the premises, or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant
building, is posted as being prohibited and such prohibition is strictly
enforced by the restauranteur.



      (2)   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design, method of operation, or any
portion of whose business includes one or both of the following
characteristics:



         (a)   Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are served
directly to the customer in a motor vehicle either by a car-hop or by other
means which eliminates the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle;
and



         (b)   The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or
beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at other
facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is allowed,
encouraged, or permitted.



      (3)   FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT. Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state for consumption off the premises, and whose
design or principal method of operation includes both the following
characteristics:



         (a)   Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually
served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic, or other disposable
containers; and



         (b)   The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or
beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at other
facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is posted as
being prohibited and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the
restauranteur.



      (4)   STANDARD RESTAURANT (FOR COMPARISON). Any establishment
whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages
to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal
method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:



         (a)   Customers, normally provided with an individual
menu, are served their goods, frozen desserts, or beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed; and



         (b)   A cafeteria-type operation where foods, frozen
desserts, or beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.



   DWELLING. A house or building, or portion thereof, which is occupied
wholly as the home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more human beings,
either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall an automobile
chassis, basement, accessory building, temporary building, tent, or portable
building, motel, or automobile court, rooming or boarding house, hotel, or
hospital be considered as a DWELLING, so long as these are used for the
purposes described in this chapter. In case of mixed occupancy where a
building is occupied in part as a DWELLING, the part so occupied shall be
deemed a DWELLING for the purpose of this chapter and shall comply with the
provisions hereof relative to DWELLINGS. Garage space, whether in an attached
or detached garage, shall not be deemed as part of a DWELLING for area
requirements.



      (1)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or portion thereof used
for and as a residence for three or more families living independently of
each other and each having their own cooking facilities therein, including
apartment houses, townhouses, and apartment hotels, but not including
boarding houses or tourist houses. Such dwellings shall conform in all other
respects to the standards set forth in division (2) below of this definition,
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.



         (a)   DWELLING, TERRACE, ROW, OR TOWNHOUSE. A
freestanding building of not less than four dwelling units arranged
laterally, each with individual outside entrances and not more than three
stories in height. A dwelling unit, complete with utilities and sleeping
quarters may occupy one or two floors. Each dwelling unit, or units when
arranged vertically, shall comprise a section, and there shall be, as a
minimum, a fireproof wall as provided in the building regulations without
doors, windows or other openings separating any two sections from any other
section or sections.



         (b)   HIGH RISE APARTMENT. A building used as a multiple
dwelling, being four stories or more in height, and containing 18 or more
dwelling units, with all stories served by a passenger elevator or other
mechanical lifting device.



         (c)   LOW RISE APARTMENT. A building used as a multiple
dwelling, being less than four stories in height, and containing not less
than three dwelling units.



      (2)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building occupied by
one family and so designed and arranged as to provide living, cooking, and
kitchen accommodations for one family only. Also known as a ONE-FAMILY
DWELLING. A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING shall comply with the following standards.



         (a)   It complies with the minimum floor area
requirements of this code for the zone in which it is located.



         (b)   It has a minimum dimension across every front,
side, and rear elevation of 26 feet and complies in all respects with the
city building regulations, including minimum heights for habitable rooms.
Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state
standards or regulations for construction which are different than those
imposed by the city building regulations, then and in that event such federal
or state standard or regulations shall apply.



         (c)   It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation
constructed on the site in accordance with the city building regulations and
shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and
constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building
regulations for single-family dwellings. In the event that the dwelling is a
mobile home, as defined herein, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to
the manufacturer’s setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises
by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of
the Michigan Mobile Home Commission and shall have a perimeter wall as
required above.



         (d)   In the event that a dwelling is a mobile home, as
defined herein, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed.
Additionally no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism,
undercarriage, or chassis.



         (e)   The dwelling is connected to the public sewer and
water supply when required by §§ 94.080 through 94.083, or to such private
facilities approved by the local health department.



         (f)   The dwelling contains a storage capability area in
a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or
in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better
quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10%
of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be
less.



         (g)   The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design
and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof
over-hang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with
window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at
collection points along the sides of the dwelling; and contains steps
connected to said exterior door areas or to porches connected to said door
areas where a difference in elevation requires the same. The compatibility of
design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the Chief
Inspector upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling
subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Appeals within
a period of 15 days from the receipt of notice of said Zoning Inspector’s
decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the
standards set forth in this definition of “dwelling”, as well as the
character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings
located outside of mobile home parks within the neighborhood of the subject
dwelling. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design
concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour,
or relief from the common or standard designed home.



         (h)   The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or
other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the
original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure
and construction of a foundation as required herein.



         (i)   The dwelling complies with all pertinent building
and fire regulations; and all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable
roof snow load and strength requirements. In the case of a mobile home, all
construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and
connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to
the Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards as promulgated by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 C.F.R.
Part 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended.



         (j)   The foregoing standards shall not apply to a
mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent
required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the
ordinances of the city pertaining to such parks.



         (k)   All construction required herein shall be
commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with
the applicable city building regulations and requirements.



      (3)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached family dwelling is that
occupied by two families, each provided with separate facilities for each
family for living accommodations. Also, known as a DUPLEX DWELLING. Such
dwellings shall conform in all other respects to the standards set forth in
division (2) above of this definition, DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.



      (4)   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof having
cooking facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence, or
sleeping place of one family, either permanently or transiently, but in no
case shall a travel trailer, mobile home, motor home automobile chassis,
tent, or other portable building be considered a dwelling in a single-family,
two-family, or multiple-family residential area. In cases of mixed occupancy
where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied
shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purpose of this chapter and shall
comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings.



      (5)   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one room,
exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly
off the principal room containing not less than 350 square feet of floor area.



      (6)   HIGH RISE APARTMENT FOR ELDERLY PERSONS. A building used
as a multiple dwelling for persons where one member of the family is 62 years
of age or over, and where the maximum living space per unit does not exceed
450 square feet for an efficiency unit, 525 square feet for a one bedroom
unit, and 750 square feet for a two bedroom unit, except for necessary
management staff living on the premises; being four stories or more in height
and containing 18 or more dwelling units, with all stories served by a
passenger elevator or other mechanical lifting device. (See also § 153.440.)



   ERECTED. Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any
physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations,
fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or public authorities, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution
systems, collections, communication, supply, or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, towers, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrant, or other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, not including buildings,
as shall be reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
public utilities, or public authorities, or for the public health, safety, or
general welfare, but it shall not be deemed to include buildings, public
lines supported by towers or frameworks consisting of two or more supporting
poles carrying such lines.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   Includes the following:



         (a)   One or more persons living together and
interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or legal adoption, and
occupying the whole or part of a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit.
A FAMILY shall be deemed to include domestic servants, gratuitous guests, and
not more than four foster or boarded children who are sponsored or whose room
and board is paid by a recognized child care agency or organization. A FAMILY
shall also be deemed to include not more than six persons occupying the
dwelling unit and living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, if
said occupants are handicapped persons as defined in Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Act of 1988, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.



         (b)   A group of not more than three persons, who need
not be related by bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or legal adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from individuals
occupying a hotel, club, boarding house, rooming house, fraternity, or
sorority house. The group living in the dwelling unit must occupy such
dwelling unit in the same manner as a dwelling occupied by a FAMILY defined
in division (a) above of this definition.



      (2)   An affirmative finding that any one or more of the
following criteria exists shall create a rebuttable presumption that the
group occupying the dwelling unit is not a FAMILY:



         (a)   Bedroom doors that can be locked on the exterior
and interior sides of the door;



         (b)   More than one mailbox provided per group; or



         (c)   Bedroom doors designated by number or letter.



   FENCE. A permanent or temporary barrier enclosing or bordering a plot
of land or portion thereof composed of suitable human-made materials for the
purpose of preventing or controlling entrance or to confine within or to make
a boundary. A wall would also be considered a FENCE for purposes of this
chapter.



      (1)   CLOSED CONSTRUCTION FENCE. A fence in which the ratio of
the closed portion to the open portion is more than one to one (1:1) per foot.



      (2)   HEDGE. A series of bushes, shrubs, or evergreen trees
planted or grown in a compact and continuous line.



      (3)   OPEN CONSTRUCTION FENCE. A fence in which the ratio of
the open portion to the closed portion is at least one to one (1:1) per foot.



   FLOOD-INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL. A flood having a 1% chance of occurring in
any given year.



   FLOOR AREA.



      (1)   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The
FLOOR AREA of a building, which is what this normally is referred to as,
shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement
height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever
is higher. (See BASEMENT definition.) Any space devoted to off-street parking
or loading shall not be included in FLOOR AREA. Areas of basements, utility
rooms, breezeways, unfinished attics, porches (enclosed or unenclosed), or
attached garages are not included.



      (2)   FLOOR AREA, USABLE. The measurement of USABLE FLOOR AREA
shall include that portion of the floor area, measured from the interior face
of the exterior walls, used for or intended to be used for services to the
public or customers, patrons, clients, or patients; including areas occupied
by fixtures or equipment used for display or sale of goods or merchandise,
but not including areas used or intended to be used for storage of
merchandise, utility, or mechanical equipment rooms, or sanitary facilities.
In the case of a half story, the usable floor area shall be considered to be
only that portion having a clear height above it of four feet or more. (See
Appendix, § 1, entitled “Floor Area Terminology”.)



      (3)   GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA). The total floor area designed
for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and
upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the
centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. It is all the
floor area on which tenants pay rent.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).



      (1)   The ratio between the maximum allowable amount of floor
space on all floors in a building and the total area of the lot on which the
building is located. Floor area shall include all the floor areas of all the
floors of a building or buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls or from the centerlines of party walls and shall
include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, interior balconies, and
mezzanines, and enclosed porches, but need not include the following areas:



         (a)   Areas below the first story or ground floor not
used for living room, dining room, kitchen, or sleeping accommodations;



         (b)   Attic space providing structural headroom of less
than seven feet, six inches;



         (c)   Unenclosed steps;



         (d)   Any floor area devoted exclusively and permanently
to noncommercial recreational use, but not to exceed 15% of the entire floor
area of the building;



         (e)   Any floor area, on or above the first or ground
floor, devoted exclusively and permanently to the housing of building service
equipment, including heating, air conditioning, mechanical, electrical, or
similar equipment;



         (f)   Exterior terraces, balconies, and mezzanines,
breezeways, and open porches;



         (g)   Any space devoted exclusively to off-street
parking or loading when said space is an integral part of a principal
building unless said building is a parking structure; and



         (h)   Floor spaces which are not more than 20 feet above
established grade and in accessory parking structures.



      (2)   Example: a FAR of 2.0 would allow floor space of twice
the lot area, or a four-story building covering one-half of the lot. An FAR
of 0.5 would allow floor space of one-half the lot area, or a two-story
building covering one-quarter of the lot. (See Appendix A, § 2, entitled
“Floor Area Ratio (FAR)”.)



   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A canvas folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use.



   FOOD. When used in connection with restaurant facilities shall include
frozen desserts and non-alcoholic beverages.



   FRONTAGE. The distance along the front lot line.



   GARAGE.



      (1)   GARAGE, COMMUNITY. A one-story building or structure
used for the storage of three or more automobiles of two or more occupants of
property in the vicinity and containing no public repair or service
facilities.



      (2)   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or structure or a
part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles and
containing no public repair or service facilities.



      (3)   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or part thereof used for the
repairing of motor vehicles or parts thereof.



      (4)   GARAGE, STORAGE. A building or structure, one or more
stories in height, used for the storage of motor vehicles and in which such
services may be conducted as are permitted for an automobile service station,
except where such services conflict with other laws.



   GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.



   GREENBELT. An area of land used as a buffer to screen or separate uses
or lessen noise levels, which is planted and maintained in accordance with §
153.081 of this chapter.



   HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from the established sidewalk
grade at the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof surface for a flat roof, to the deck line for mansard roofs and to the
mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gabled, hip, or gambrel
roofs. For buildings set back from the street line, the HEIGHT of the
building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade
along the front of the building, provided such average elevation shall not
exceed the established sidewalk grade at the center of the front of the
building by more than one inch for each foot the building sets back from the
front lot line. When a building faces more than one street, the HEIGHT shall
be measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street
front. (See Appendix A, § 3, entitled “Building Height Requirements”.)



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.



      (1)   ALTERATION. Work that changes the detail of a resource
but does not change its basic size or shape.



      (2)   CENTER. The Michigan Historical Center, formerly the
Michigan Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State.



      (3)   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The written approval of
a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely
affect a resource.



      (4)   COMMISSION. A historic district commission created by
the City Council pursuant to the Local Historic Districts Act, Public Act 169
of 1970, being M.C.L. §§ 399.201 et seq.



      (5)   COMMITTEE. A historic district study committee appointed
by the City Council pursuant to the Local Historic Districts Act, Public Act
169 of 1970, being M.C.L. §§ 399.201 et seq.



      (6)   DEMOLITION. The razing or destruction, whether entirely
or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by
neglect.



      (7)   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Neglect in maintaining,
repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an
exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the
resource.



      (8)   DENIAL. The written rejection of a permit application
for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.



      (9)   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas not
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or group
of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.



      (10)   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The identification, evaluation,
establishment, and protection of resources significant in history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.



      (11)   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A publicly or privately owned
building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant
in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this
state, or the city, or of the United States.



      (12)   NOTICE TO PROCEED. The written permission to issue a
permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource,
pursuant to a finding under § 153.538(D).



      (13)   OPEN SPACE. Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped
area, or a formal or human-made landscaped area that provides a connective
link or a buffer between other resources.



      (14)   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. For the purposes of this chapter,
keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor
intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external appearance of the resource
except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of
weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute work for purposes of the
Local Historic Districts Act, Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L. §§
399.201 et seq., as amended.



      (15)   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area or group of areas
not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries
and is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of
making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic
district or added to an established historic district.



      (16)   REPAIR. For the purposes of this chapter, to restore a
decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A
REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work
for purposes of the Local Historic Districts Act, Public Act 169 of 1970,
being M.C.L. §§ 399.201 et seq., as amended.



      (17)   RESOURCE. One or more publicly- or privately-owned
historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or
open spaces located within a historic district.



      (18)   STANDING COMMITTEE. A permanent body established by the
City Council pursuant to the Local Historic Districts Act, Public Act 169 of
1970, being M.C.L. §§ 399.201 et seq., as amended, to conduct activities of
a historic study committee on a continuing basis.



      (19)   WORK. Construction, addition, alteration, repair,
moving, excavation, or demolition.



   HOME, TOURIST. A dwelling which offers sleeping accommodations in less
than ten rooms to transient guests for compensation. See definition of
BOARDING HOUSE, TOURIST HOUSE.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within the
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, not involving employees
other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises, which
use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, does not change the character thereof, and which does not
endanger the health, safety, and welfare of any other persons residing in
that area by reason of noise, noxious odors, unsanitary or unsightly
conditions, fire hazards, and the like, involved in or resulting from such
occupation, professions, or hobby. Provided further, that no article or
service is sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is
produced by such occupations; that such occupation shall not require internal
or external alterations or construction features, equipment, machinery,
outdoor storage, or signs not customarily in residential areas. Clinics,
hospitals, barber shops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, tourist homes, animal
hospitals, kennels, millinery shops, restaurants, and child care day
nurseries, among others, shall not be deemed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   HOMELESS SHELTER. A building with sleeping and bath facilities used for
temporary occupancy by persons without an identified place of residence.



   HOSPITAL. A building, structure, or institution in which sick or
injured persons, primarily inpatients, are given medical or surgical
treatment and operating under license by the Department of Public Health,
State of Michigan.



   HOTEL. A facility containing ten or more guest rooms and offering
transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and
providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and
recreational facilities.



   KENNEL, DOG. Any lot or premises on which dogs are kept for any
commercial purpose, including, but not limited to, boarding, breeding, and
training.



   KENNEL/PEN FOR DOG OR ANIMAL. An enclosed area or pen, which may or may
not include a structure, where dogs or other domesticated animals are
confined when outdoors. Said enclosed area or pen shall be constructed to
mean a fence surrounding a yard.



   JUNK. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products, or
merchandise with parts missing or scrap metals or other scrap materials that
are damaged, deteriorated, or are in a condition which cannot be used for the
purpose for which the product was manufactured.



   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and having direct and
unobstructed access to a public street or alley.



   LOT. A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots of record occupied
or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory
buildings or by any other use or activity permitted thereon and including the
open spaces and yards required under this chapter, and having its frontage
upon a public street or road either dedicated to the public or designated on
a recorded subdivision. Provided that the owner of any number of contiguous
lots may have as many of said contiguous lots considered as a single lot for
the purpose of this chapter as he or she so elects and in such case the
outside perimeter of said group of lots shall constitute the front, rear, and
side lot lines thereof. This latter parcel is then often referred to as a
ZONING LOT.



      (1)   LOT, CORNER. A lot where the interior angle of two
adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A
lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a CORNER LOT
for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet
and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the
curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less
than 135 degrees. (See Appendix A, § 4, entitled, “Corner, Interior, and
Double Frontage Lots”.)



      (2)   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot other than a corner lot
having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS, one street will be designated as the front street for
all lots in the plat and in the request for a certificate of occupancy
permit. If there are existing buildings in the same block fronting on one or
both of the streets, the required minimum front yard setback shall be
observed on those streets where the majority of the buildings presently front.



      (3)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot with only
one lot line fronting on a street.



      (4)   LOT, SUB. A portion of a platted lot on which a dwelling
with common party walls may be constructed and separately conveyed subject to
compliance with §§ 153.400 through 153.406, PDD - Planned Development
District, of this chapter.



   LOT AREA, GROSS. The net lot area plus one-half the area of that
right-of-way directly adjacent to or abutting any side of the lot, except
street frontage, plus any portion of adjoining public lands deemed proper to
be included by the City Planning Commission.



   LOT AREA, NET. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.



   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures, and swimming pools.



   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance from the center of the front
street line to the center of the rear lot line.



   LOT LINES. Any line dividing one lot from another or from a street
right-of-way or any public place.



      (1)   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot abutting
on one public or private street, the line separating the lot from such street
right-of-way. In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, the FRONT LOT
LINE shall be that line separating said lot from that street which is
designated as the front street in the plat and/or in the request for a
certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot boundary line which is opposite
and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot with side lot
lines diverging or converging toward the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be a
line drawn parallel to the front lot line not less than 20 feet long lying
farthest from the front lot line but wholly within the lot and so located
that a perpendicular can be drawn from it to some point on the principal
building.



      (3)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front lot
line or a rear lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a
side street lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or
lots is an interior lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot the dimension and configuration of which are shown
on a map recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for the county, or a
lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is
attested to by a professional engineer or land surveyor (so registered and
licensed in the state) and likewise so recorded and on a file with the county.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the building line, or setback line, intersects the
side lot lines.



   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and projecting over public property.



   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place or establishment where a massage is made
available. A massage is any method of treating the superficial parts of a
patron for medical, hygienic, exercise, or relaxation purposes by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the
hands or any instrument, or by the application of air, liquid, or vapor baths
of any kind whatever.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in
the structure. MOBILE HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. (See
M.C.L. §§ 125.2301 et seq.)



   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a
person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual
nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose
regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building,
structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use
incidental to the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for
use as a temporary trailer park. (See M.C.L. §§ 125.2301 et seq.)



   MODULAR HOME OTHER THAN MOBILE HOME. A unit which requires being
transported to the site separately in two or more sections, and to which such
major elements as the heating system or a substantial portion of the siding
are installed after transport, and shall not be considered a mobile home.



   MONOPOLE TOWER. A telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole,
constructed with guy wires or ground anchors.



   MOTELS or MOTOR COURTS. A building containing ten or more guest rooms,
each of which maintains a separate outside entrance, designed or used
primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and
having a parking space adjacent to each sleeping room.



   MOTOR HOME. A self-propelled motorized vehicular unit primarily
designed for travel and/or recreational usage, which also contains facilities
for cooking and for overnight lodging. This term does not apply to mobile
homes.



   MUNICIPAL PARK. A parcel of land that is used as a park and is operated
under the supervision of the city.



   NONCONFORMING USE OR BUILDING.



      (1)   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof
lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions (e.g., setbacks,
height, lot coverage, parking) of this chapter in the zoning district in
which it is located. (See Appendix A, § 5, entitled “Nonconforming Use”.)



      (2)   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupied a
building or land at the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto,
and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located. (See Appendix A, § 5, entitled “Nonconforming Use”.)



   NURSERY SCHOOL, DAY NURSERY, or CHILD CARE CENTER. An establishment
wherein three or more children, not related by bonds of consanguinity or
fostership to the family living on the premises, are for remuneration cared
for. Such schools or centers need not have a resident family on the premises.



   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used
or intended to be used.



   OCCUPANCY LOAD. The number of individuals normally occupying the
building or part thereof, or for which the existing facilities have been
designed.



   OCCUPIED. Arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented,
leased, or intended to be inhabited, not necessarily for dwelling purposes.



   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A structure providing vehicular parking spaces
along with adequate drives and aisles. Adequate maneuvering space shall be
provided which allows unrestricted access and egress plus on-site storage
space for at least two vehicles.



   OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES. Includes the following business uses:



      (1)   Retail sales of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed,
topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment,
and other home garden supplies and equipment;



      (2)   Retail sale of fruit and vegetables;



      (3)   Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe
courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children’s amusement park,
and/or similar recreation uses;



      (4)   Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicles, boats
or home equipment sales, or rental or repair services; and



      (5)   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools,
motor homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements, and similar products.



   ORDINANCE. The same as the term “code”, “zoning code”, or
“zoning ordinance” of the city as used herein.



   OUTLOT. A parcel of land which must be designated on a recorded plat as
an OUTLOT before it may be legally considered as such.



   OWNERSHIP, SINGLE AND SEPARATE. Ownership by a person or by two or more
members of the same family of a lot parcel of land which is completely
isolated from any other property held by the same person or persons.



   PARKING SPACE. An area for each automobile or motor vehicle, such space
being exclusive of necessary drives, aisles, entrances, or exits, and being
fully accessible from a street or alley for the storage or parking of
self-propelled vehicles.



   PENAL AND CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS. Prisons, jails, and associated
correctional institutions and facilities in which varying degrees of security
are required for the incarceration and confinement of convicted prisoners.



   PERMIT. The written authority issued by the Chief Inspector permitting
the construction, removal, moving, alteration, use, change of use or
otherwise involving a building and/or parcel of land. (See also definition of
BUILDING PERMIT.)



   PICKUP CAMPER. A recreational unit designed to be mounted on a pickup
or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render suitable for use as
temporary lodging for travel, recreation and vacation uses.



   PLAZA. An open area accessible to the public, which is either an open
area along the front lot line not less than five feet deep, measured
perpendicular to the front lot line, or an open area on a through lot,
extending from the street and not less than 40 feet wide. A PLAZA shall not
at any point be more than five feet above the curb level of the nearest
adjoining street and shall be unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky.



   PORCH, ENCLOSED. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is
totally enclosed, and projects out from the main wall of said building or
structure and has a separate roof or an integral room with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.



   PORCH, OPEN. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is
unenclosed except for columns supporting the porch roof, and projects out
from the main wall of said building or structure and has a separate roof or
an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is
attached.



   PUBLIC NOTICE. A notice of the time, place, and purpose of a public
hearing, which notice, except where otherwise expressly provided herein,
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or
board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under municipal or state
regulation to the public transportation, including railroad trackage, water,
gas, electricity, telephone, steam, telegraph, cable television, or sewage
disposal.



   PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION. Any building or structure, not located
within a street or alley, essential to the distribution of service and
operation of the above-described public utilities which is not located on the
same site as the principal utility.



   RECREATIONAL SPACE.



      (1)   For use in determining recreation space ratio
compliance, the minimum required RECREATIONAL SPACE shall include only that
part of the ground area of a lot which:



         (a)   Is devoted to outdoor recreational space, outdoor
swimming pools, greenery, or service space for household activities which are
normally carried on outdoors;



         (b)   Is not devoted to private roadways open to
vehicular transportation, access drives, accessory off-street parking space
or aisles, or accessory off-street loading berths;



         (c)   Contains no structures on the ground except:



            1.   Open porches;



            2.   Terraces;



            3.   Recreational or drying yard equipment;



            4.   Arbors, trellises, walls or fences, bird
baths, ornamental features, window boxes, or other planting boxes; and



            5.   Flagpoles.



         (d)   Is accessible to the occupants of all dwelling
units within the structure;



         (e)   Is located in a side or rear yard and has a
minimum dimension of 18 feet if the development it is serving has nine or
fewer dwelling or rooming units, or is so located and has a minimum dimension
of 25 feet if the development it is serving has ten or more dwelling or
rooming units. All required RECREATIONAL SPACES shall comply with the minimum
dimension described above and said dimension shall be measured along a
perpendicular drawn from any point on one side of the recreational space to
the opposite side; and



         (f)   Is unobstructed between the ground and the sky,
except that not more than 25% of the total RECREATIONAL SPACE provided on any
lot may be roofed, and in such case not more than 50% of the perimeter of the
roofed section shall be enclosed. The City Planning Commission may modify the
provisions of this division (1)(f) when said modification may be accomplished
without substantially deviating from the spirit, intent, and purpose of this
chapter.



      (2)   RECREATIONAL SPACE on a roof, or private balcony,
private patio, or similar private area may be substituted for ground
recreational space in accordance with the following.



         (a)   Substitution of roof space. Each square foot of
RECREATIONAL SPACE on a roof may be substituted for one square foot of ground
of recreational space provided the following conditions are met.



            1.   Minimum dimension. Such RECREATIONAL SPACE on
a roof shall have a minimum dimension of 15 feet, measured from inside of
parapet or railing to inside of parapet or railing, or to the exterior face
of any wall or other obstruction projecting above roof level.



            2.   No obstructions. Such RECREATIONAL SPACE on a
roof shall be free of all obstructions, except for arbors, trellises,
flagpoles, plumbing or air vents, or recreational or clothes drying equipment.



            3.   Design and safety precautions. Such
RECREATIONAL SPACE on a roof shall be suitably surfaced and shall be
protected by a parapet or railing in accordance with the safety regulations
of the building regulations.



            4.   Accessibility. Such RECREATIONAL SPACE shall
be accessible to the occupants of all dwelling units within the structure.



         (b)   Substitution of private balcony, private patio, or
similar private area. Each square foot of RECREATIONAL SPACE on a private
balcony, private patio, or similar private area, as determined by the Chief
Inspector, may be substituted for one square foot of ground or roof
recreational space provided the following conditions are met



            1.   Minimum dimension and area. Such areas shall
have a minimum dimension of four feet six inches, measured perpendicularly
from one side to the other side, and a minimum net area of 22.5 square feet.



            2.   No obstructions. Such areas shall be free of
all obstructions, except arbors, trellises, window boxes, or other planting
boxes, awnings or canopies, and recreational or clothes drying equipment.



            3.   Safety precautions. Such areas shall be
protected in accordance with the safety regulations of the building
regulations.



      (3)   Provided, that at least 50% of the total required
RECREATIONAL SPACE shall be accessible to all residents and shall be provided
on the ground or roof, and further provided, that when a portion of the
recreational space is provided on a private balcony or similar area, the
minimum dimension of the required ground or roof space may be adjusted by the
City Planning Commission when this can be accomplished without deviating from
the spirit, intent, and the purpose of this chapter. In no instance, however,
shall the minimum ground of roof dimension be less than 12 feet.



   RECREATIONAL SPACE RATIO (RSR). The ratio between the minimum allowable
amount of recreation space on a lot in relation to the gross floor area of
all existing and proposed structures on said lot. Example: An RSR of .085
would require, for a multiple residential structure having 50,000 square feet
of gross floor area, a total of 4,250 square feet of recreation space on the
same lot.



   RESTAURANT. See DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT above.



   RETAINING WALL. A permanent solid barrier of brick, stone, wood, or
other opaque material approved by the Chief Inspector intended to enclose an
area. For the purpose of this chapter, all supporting members, posts,
stringers, braces, pilasters, or other construction features of a RETAINING
WALL shall be located and placed on the inside of the wall away from public
view. All RETAINING WALLS, moreover, shall be constructed and/or painted,
tinted, or colored in one color only for their exterior surface, and no sign
or advertising shall be placed, affixed, painted, or designed thereon.



   ROOMING HOUSE. Any building containing more than two and less than ten
rooms that are occupied for sleeping purposes for compensation, whether the
compensation be paid directly or indirectly. The term ROOMING HOUSE shall
include lodging house and boarding house, but not tourist home, automobile
court, hotel, motel, or dwelling.



   SALE, RUMMAGE, INCLUDING GARAGE SALE, YARD SALE, BASEMENT SALE. A
temporary sale of used personal items.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance required to exist between the
front line of the building, excluding steps or unenclosed porches and the
front street or right-of-way line. The required SETBACK area is that area
encompassed by the respective lot lines and setback lines. (See Appendix A,
§ 6, entitled “Yard Requirements”.)



   SIGN. Any interior or exterior device, structure, or part of a building
or structure which directs attention to an object, product, place, service,
activity, person, institution, organization, or business which, except as
otherwise provided, is visible from any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, alley,
or public property. The definition does not include, unless otherwise
indicated, signs primarily directed at persons within the premises of the
sign owner. Neither does it include signs the total area of which is less
than one square foot. The term SIGN shall include, but not be limited to, any
printed or written text, pictorial representation, numeral, emblem, banner,
or pennant.



   SIGN AREA. This term or other reference to square measure is the entire
area within one or more circles, triangles, or quadrilaterals or combination
thereof enclosing the extreme limits of the sign together with any frame,
other material, or other color forming an integral part of the display or
used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed. The
definition does not include the supporting structure necessary for the
erection or attachment of the sign. Where a sign has two or more faces, the
area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign.
However, where two sign faces are erected back to back only the larger of the
two faces shall be included in determining the SIGN AREA.



   SIGN FACE. Surface of a sign exposed to the view of the public carrying
a sign message.



   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign limited to carrying any or all of the
following: name; address; major enterprise; or principal product or service
offered.



   SIGN, OFF-SITE. A sign other than an on-site sign.



   SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign indicating the name, occupation, nature of
activities conducted, services or goods offered, or the products manufactured
on the premises where the sign is located.



   SIGN, PUBLIC. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest erected by or on the order of a public officer or body in the
performance of the public duty. The definition includes, but is not limited
to, a governmental building identification sign, safety sign, danger sign,
trespassing sign, traffic sign, memorial plaque, or a historical interest
sign.



   SIGN, SPECIAL PURPOSE TEMPORARY. A temporary sign other than those
described in § 153.155(A) through (G).



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A display, informational sign, banner, or other
advertising device not constructed for long term use and intended for a
limited period of display, including any sign which can be physically lifted,
pulled, or wheeled from one location to another.



   SOLAR COLLECTION. A device, or combination of devices, structure, or
part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes significantly to
a structure’s energy supply.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A complete design or assembly consisting of a
solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and
components for the distribution of transformed energy (to the extent they
cannot be used jointly with a conventional energy system). PASSIVE SOLAR
ENERGY SYSTEMS are included in this definition but not to the extent that
they fulfill other functions such as structural and recreational.



   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a mezzanine, included
between the surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor next above,
or if there be no floor above, then the space between the floor and the top
of the ceiling joists, or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the
roof rafters. (See Appendix A, § 7, entitled “Basement and Story
Illustration”.)



      (1)   BASEMENT. Counted as a story if over 50% of its height
is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or, if
it is used for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor or domestic servants
employed in the same building, including the family of the same. (See the
definition of BASEMENT and Appendix A, § 7, entitled “Basement and Story
Illustration”.)



      (2)   HALF. The part of a building between a pitched roof and
the uppermost full story, said part having a floor area which does not exceed
one-half of the floor area of said full story, provided the area contains at
least 200 square feet with a clear height of at least seven feet and six
inches. (See Appendix A, § 8, entitled “Basic Structural Terms”.)



      (3)   MEZZANINE. A MEZZANINE FLOOR may be used in the
definition of a full story when it covers more than 50% of the area of the
story underneath said MEZZANINE, or, if the vertical distance from the floor
next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.



   STREET. A thoroughfare or way having 30 feet or more of right-of-way or
easement width, other than an alley, for the use of the public and/or open to
public travel. A PUBLIC STREET is a street accepted by dedication or
otherwise by the city. A PRIVATE STREET or PRIVATE DRIVE is a street not so
accepted, or any street designated as a private street upon a recorded plat.



   STRUCTURE. Anything erected or constructed, such as a building,
edifice, or structural formation of any kind, including improved parking
lots, which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having such location, and which is artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.



   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure or container whether located above or
below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than 24 inches,
intended for swimming or bathing. A SWIMMING POOL shall be considered as an
accessory building for the purpose of determining required yard spaces and
maximum lot coverage.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Refers to antennas and towers, either
individually or together.



   TENT. A shelter of canvas or the like supported by poles and fastened
by cords or pegs driven into the ground and shall not include those types of
tents used solely for children’s recreational purposes.



   TOWER. A structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole
tower constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a
building, other permanent structure, or equipment on which is located one or
more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital,
microwave, cellular telephone, personal wireless service, or similar forms of
electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier
towers, and cellular telephone towers.



   TRAFFICWAYS PLAN. Any maps, charts, plans, or regulation governing the
location, width and other features of major and secondary trafficways.



   TRAILER COACH. See definition of MOBILE HOME.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable, non-motorized vehicular unit primarily
designed for travel and/or recreational usage, also containing facilities for
overnight lodging. This term also includes “fifth wheels”, but not mobile
homes.



   USE. The purpose for which land or premises of a building thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let,
or leased.



      (1)   ACCESSORY. A use naturally and normally incidental to,
subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises.



      (2)   ILLEGAL NONCONFORMING. An existing use of land and
structures as of the effective date of this chapter construed as a nuisance
or damaging to abutting property or hazardous to persons; such uses to be
discontinued and abated. (See Appendix A, § 5, entitled “Nonconforming
Use”.)



      (3)   LEGAL NONCONFORMING. An existing use of land and/or
structures as of the effective date of this chapter which does not conform to
the uses specified as permitted in a district, but which is not construed by
this chapter as a nuisance, or damaging to abutting property, or hazardous to
persons.



      (4)   PUBLIC. Any use financed by public funds and operated as
part of the governmental function, including any proprietary activities
operated by the city.



      (5)   QUASI-PUBLIC. Any use operated by a private individual
or group for public purpose, but having only limited public control or
accessibility. The term QUASI-PUBLIC shall not include hospitals or any
institution for the care of mental disorders or the treatment of alcoholics
or drug addicts.



   UTILITY ROOM. A room in a dwelling, not located in the basement, the
use of which is primarily for storage or for a housing heating unit, or for
laundry purposes.



   VARIANCE. A VARIANCE granted by the Board of Appeals on Zoning is a
modification of the literal provisions of this chapter which is granted when
strict enforcement would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique
to the individual property on which the VARIANCE is granted. Hardships based
solely on economic considerations are not grounds for a VARIANCE.



   VETERINARY CLINIC. An enclosed building wherein small animals such as
dogs, birds, cats, or other household pets are given medical or surgical
treatment, and use as a boarding kennel is limited to short-time boarding
incidental to clinic use. Such clinics are only those under the direction of
a licensed veterinarian registered with the county and constructed in such a
manner that noise and odor outside of the building are completely eliminated.



   YARD, REQUIRED SIDE-REAR-FRONT. An open space of prescribed width or
depth, adjacent to a lot or property line, on the same land with a building
or group of buildings, which open space lies in the area between the building
or group of buildings, and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided herein.
(See Appendix A, § 9, entitled “Lot Terms”, and § 6, entitled “Yard
Requirements”.)



      (1)   FRONT. An open space extending the full width of a lot
and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the front property
line, lot line, or right-of-way line.



      (2)   REAR. An open space extending the full width of a lot
and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the rear property
line, lot line, or right-of-way line, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.



      (3)   SIDE. An open space extending on each side of the lot
from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and of a width
measured horizontally at right angles to the respective side property line,
lot line, or right-of-way line.



   YARD, SIDE-REAR-FRONT. A general term applied to the space on a lot or
parcel containing a building or group of buildings, lying between the
building or group of buildings and the nearest respective lot or property
line facing each building. (See Appendix A, § 9, entitled “Lot Terms”.)



(Prior Code, § 153.021)  (Ord. D-1418, §§ 203 through 299.25, passed
11-22-1982, effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1439, passed 10-17-1983, effective
10-27-1983; Ord. D-1621, passed 10-1-1990, effective 10-11-1990; Ord. D-1645,
passed 10-7-1991, effective 10-17-1991; Ord. D-1654, passed 4-27-1992,
effective 5-7-1992; Ord. D-1656, passed 5-4-1992, effective 5-14-1992; Ord.
D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992; Ord. D-1880, passed
11-20-2000, effective 11-30-2000; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective
1-10-2002; Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003)



ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS



§ 153.035  DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into 14 district
classifications known as follows: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1, B-1, B-1A,
B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, M-3, and PDD.



(Prior Code, § 153.030)  (Ord. D-1418, § 301, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.036  MAP.



   (A)   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map
attached to Ord. D-1418 and hereby made a part of this chapter by reference,
which map is designated as the “Zoning Map of the City of Saginaw”. The
Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the city, and
all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of
this chapter and have the same force and effect as if said Zoning Map and all
such notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully
set forth or described herein.



   (B)   District boundary lines follow:



      (1)   Streets, alleys, shorelines, lot lines, or any line
which may be established on the Zoning Map, Official Map of the city, or any
recorded subdivision thereof;



      (2)   An extension of any of the foregoing lines; or



      (3)   A line located 100 feet or such distance as dimensioned
on the Zoning Map, from and parallel to the nearest street right-of-way line
as established at the time of enactment of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.031)  (Ord. D-1418, § 302, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.037  DISTRICT BOUNDARY EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Where a district boundary line, as established in this section
or as shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot which was in single ownership
and of record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the following
requirements apply.



      (1)   The use authorized thereon and the other district
requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot under this
chapter shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, provided that the
more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 25 feet of said
dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall thereafter be
deemed to be conforming.



      (2)   (a)   Any part of a less restricted use extended
beyond a district boundary under the terms of this section shall be housed
entirely within an enclosed building.



         (b)   Such building shall conform to any applicable yard
and area requirements in the more restricted district.



      (3)   Any portion of such lot lying in the more restricted
district and having adequate area and street frontage to meet minimum zoning
requirements shall be developed only for a use permitted in such more
restricted districts.



   (B)   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary
lines shall be determined by the Board of Appeals on Zoning according to
rules and regulations which may be adopted by it.



(Prior Code, § 153.032)  (Ord. D-1418, § 303, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS



§ 153.050  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall govern. Similarly, when any other law or ordinance imposes
more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than
are imposed or required by the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
said law or ordinance shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 153.040)  (Ord. D-1418, § 401, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.051  SCOPE.



   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or
change shall be made, used or maintained of any building, structure, or land,
or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.041)  (Ord. D-1418, § 402, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.052  STREET AND ALLEY RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   All street and alley rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting upon such street and alley rights-of-way. Where the
centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of
such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.



(Prior Code, § 153.042)  (Ord. D-1418, § 403, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.053  PERMITTED USES.



   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, designed, or
arranged, for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which
the building or land is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.043)  (Ord. D-1418, § 404, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.054  PERMITTED AREA.



   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, except in conformity with the area regulations of the
district in which the building is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.044)  (Ord. D-1418, § 405, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.055  PERMITTED HEIGHT; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter
established for the district in which the building is located, except that
roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and
fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television
aerials and wireless masts, water tanks, solar collectors, or similar
structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. No such
structure may be erected to exceed by more than 15 feet the height limits of
the district in which it is located; nor shall such structure have a total
area greater than 25% of the roof area of the building, nor shall such
structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial purpose other
than a use incidental to the main use of the building. Freestanding
monuments, transmission towers, radio or television antennas or towers,
chimneys, flagpoles, water towers, and similar structures may be erected on a
lot to a greater height than the limit established for the district in which
the lot is located, subject to the following limitations.



      (1)   The total height of the structure shall be 150 feet or
less from the ground.



      (2)   The use of the exception must be one that is normally
incidental to the permitted use of the principal building or use of the lot.



      (3)   The exception may not cover, at any level, more than 5%
of the area of the lot.



   (B)   In any R-1, R-1A, or R-2 District, public and quasi-public
buildings, except hospitals, permitted in such district may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet, provided any required front, rear, or side yard
shall be increased one foot for each foot by which such building exceeds the
height limits established in § 153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.045)  (Ord. D-1418, § 406, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.056  ZONING LOT.



   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide
dwelling units shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case
shall there be more than one such building on one lot unless otherwise
provided in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.046)  (Ord. D-1418, § 407, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.057  LOTS, YARDS AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   No space which for the purpose of building or dwelling group
has been counted or calculated as part of a minimum side yard, rear yard,
front yard, or other open space required by this chapter may by reason of
change in ownership or otherwise be counted or calculated to satisfy or
comply with a minimum yard, court, or other open space requirement of or for
any other building. In any residential district, the front and rear yard
requirements of a double frontage lot shall be the same as prescribed for any
single lot in the zone wherein the double frontage lot is located.



   (B)   In determining whether the minimum open space requirements of
this chapter have been met, the Chief Inspector shall consider and count any
area of land owned by the developer adjacent to the property for which plans
for the development of a building have been submitted to the Chief Inspector
which lies between the outside edge of an easement for a county drain and the
centerline of the drain proper. In the event that the parcel to be so
developed is divided by any such drain, the Chief Inspector shall consider
and count the entire area affected by the easement of the drain; provided,
however, that such surface area afore-described shall not be utilized for
permanent structures or any other improvements of the drain; provided,
further, that in no event shall the area lying within any such drain easement
be considered or counted for more than 20% of the total minimum open space
requirement of this chapter. (See also §§ 153.505 through 153.521,
Floodplain District.)



(Prior Code, § 153.047)  (Ord. D-1418, § 408, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.058  PROJECTIONS, YARD ENCROACHMENTS.



   Projections, such as outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers,
porches, platforms, balconies, boiler flues, solar energy systems, and other
similar projections, extending beyond the main wall of a building and
attached thereto shall be considered as part of the building and such
projections shall not occupy any of the minimum required yards or open spaces
except as follows:



   (A)   Fences in accordance with the provisions of § 153.086;



   (B)   Chimneys, flues, cornices, belt courses, leaders, sills,
pilasters, lintels, eaves, gutters, and ornamental features may project not
more than 18 inches into any required yard or court. Apparatus needed for the
operation of active and passive solar energy systems, including, but not
limited to, overhangs, movable insulating walls and roofs, detached solar
collectors, reflectors, and piping, may project a distance not to exceed four
feet into any required front or rear yard, and 40% into any required side
yard to a maximum of four feet;



   (C)   Uncovered porches, platforms, terraces, steps, and similar
structures not extending above the ground floor level may extend into minimum
required yard areas not nearer than three feet to an interior side lot line,
nor nearer than five feet to any other lot line. Nothing in this division (C)
shall prevent subgrade structures or uses; and



   (D)   The minimum yard spaces, including lot area per family and
maximum lot coverage required by this chapter for each and every building
existing at the time of the passage of this chapter or for any building
hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open
space requirements for any other building.



(Prior Code, § 153.048)  (Ord. D-1418, § 409, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1621, passed 10-1-1990, effective 10-11-1990)



§ 153.059  EXISTING PORCHES.



   (A)   All covered porches existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter may be enclosed with screens, including an opaque railing enclosure
not to exceed 30 inches in height from the floor. In any R District, any
covered porch existing at the time of adoption of this chapter which
encroaches on the required minimum front yard may be enclosed with removable
storm windows, including an opaque railing enclosure not to exceed 30 inches
in height from floor, provided said enclosed porch will not extend toward the
street line beyond the enclosed portion of any adjacent dwelling by more than
one-third of the distance separating the two buildings. In no case shall such
enclosed porch be less than ten feet from the street line.



   (B)   In an R District, covered porches existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter and extending into required front yard area may be
replaced with a vestibule or enclosed entryway, provided such vestibule or
enclosed entryway is not greater than eight feet wide, does not extend more
than four feet from the main wall of the building involved, or any nearer
than ten feet to the front property line.



(Prior Code, § 153.049)  (Ord. D-1418, § 410, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.060  NEW BASEMENTS UNDER EXISTING DWELLINGS.



   All dwellings lacking a full basement and which extend into the minimum
front, side, or rear yards may have a basement or cellar constructed under
the entire structure in its present location, provided that at the time of
construction the dwelling was properly located on the lot.



(Prior Code, § 153.050)  (Ord. D-1418, § 411, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.061  GENERAL YARD EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the following uses
or structures in minimum required yard space:



   (A)   Gardens, garden ornaments, and usual landscape features;



   (B)   Fences in accordance with the provisions of § 153.086;



   (C)   Off-street parking for motor vehicles except as regulated
under§ 153.125(B)(4);



   (D)   Retaining walls; and



   (E)   Public playgrounds.



(Prior Code, § 153.051)  (Ord. D-1418, § 412, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.062  FRONT AND REAR YARD EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In any residential district where the front yards of existing
principal buildings in a block-front are either greater or less than the
minimum required front yard for such district, the required front yard depth
shall be disregarded, subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   Any principal building hereafter erected on an interior
lot on such blockfront shall provide a minimum front yard at least equal to
the average setback of the principal buildings on the lots abutting said
front yard. If no such principal building exists on an abutting lot, the
minimum setback for the district shall be used in computing said average
setback. In the case of a corner lot having no principal building, the
minimum setback shall be assumed to be three-fourths of the minimum required
front yard for the district, and this distance shall be used in computing
said average setback. In computing the minimum front yard requirements,
setbacks in excess of 35 feet in R-1 and R-1A Districts shall be considered
to be 35 feet and setbacks in excess of 25 feet in R-2 and R-3 Districts
shall be considered to be 25 feet, and in R-4 Districts shall be considered
to be 20 feet.



      (2)   No new principal building shall project into the
required front yard for said district more than one-third of the distance
separating the subject building from the nearest principal building on the
abutting lot.



      (3)   The provisions of this division (A) shall never require
greater front yard depth than 35 feet in R-1 or R-1A Districts, 25 feet in
R-2 and R-3 Districts, or 20 feet in R-4 Districts.



   (B)   In cases where less than the full required future right-of-way
width of a street has been deeded or dedicated, the building setback on any
properties abutting thereon which have not provided for sufficient street
area by deed or dedication shall be measured from the future required
right-of-way line. This required street width shall be determined for minor
residential streets by the standards set forth in the platting regulations
and for any other street by the Trafficways Plan or any amendment thereto.



   (C)   The depth of any rear yard abutting upon a street shall be not
less than the depth of front yards required for a conforming building of
similar height on an adjoining lot fronting on such street.



   (D)   Whenever there is a public alley at the rear of a lot upon
which the lot abuts for its full width, measurement of the depth of any
abutting rear yard required for a principal building under this chapter may
be made to the centerline of such alley.



(Prior Code, § 153.052)  (Ord. D-1418, § 413, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.063  OUTSIDE STORAGE AND PARKING ON RESIDENTIALLY ZONED AND/OR USED
LOTS.



   (A)   For motor homes, travel trailers, folding-type trailers,
pick-up campers, snowmobiles on trailers, boats, and similar and related type
units, the regulations of outside storage on all lots zoned and used for
residential purposes are as follows.



      (1)   A total of three but not more than one of each of the
above units may be stored or parked outside on a lot which is zoned and used
for residential purposes, except that in regard to snowmobiles up to four
such units may be stored or parked outside on a lot. The ownership of such
units shall be in the name of a member of the immediate family of the lot’s
owner, tenant, or lessee.



      (2)   The above units, when stored outside, shall be located a
minimum of five feet to the rear of the front building line, except as
provided in the case of vacant lots under division (C) following.



      (3)   The combined area covered by the dwelling, accessory
buildings, other above-grade structures, swimming pool, and the area covered
by the outside storage of the above units may not exceed 40% of the total
area of the lot; provided, however, that not more than three such units may
be stored or parked outside on any lot regardless of the restrictions of this
subdivision.



      (4)   All of the above-described units shall be locked or
secured at all times while stored or parked so as to prevent injury to any
person or property.



      (5)   None of the above units or any recreational equipment
parked or stored outside shall be connected to electricity, water, gas, or
sanitary facilities for living, lodging, or housekeeping purposes and none of
the same shall be used for living, lodging, or housekeeping purposes.



      (6)   All recreation equipment and vehicles shall be
maintained in good condition, shall be operable, and shall have a current
license or registration.



   (B)   The parking or storage of buses and converted buses in excess
of 18 feet in length, and boats in excess of 22 feet in length, on
residentially zoned lots, is prohibited. A suitable covering shall be placed
over all boats whenever stored outside.



   (C)   Not more than one recreational unit, motor home, travel
trailer, pick-up camper, folding-type trailer, boat, or similar and related
type units may be parked or stored on vacant residentially zoned lots. When
stored on vacant lots, said units shall be located only on the rear half of
said lots.



   (D)   Commercial vehicles, as defined in § 153.021, shall not be
parked or stored at any time on property used or zoned residentially.



(Prior Code, § 153.053)  (Ord. D-1418, § 414, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.064  STREET ACCESS.



   No dwelling shall be built, moved, or converted upon a lot having a
frontage of less than 20 feet upon a public street, or upon a private street
or other permanent easement giving access to a public street. No building
permit shall be issued for any construction located on any lot or parcel of
land in the city that does not abut on a public street or highway; provided,
that this chapter shall not be the basis for preventing the issuance of a
building permit for ordinary repair or maintenance of any building that is
already erected on the date of the adoption of this chapter upon a lot or
parcel of land that does not so abut such a street or highway.



(Prior Code, § 153.054)  (Ord. D-1418, § 415, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.065  VISIBILITY.



   No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery, or trees shall be erected,
maintained, or planted on any lot which will obstruct the view of the driver
of a vehicle approaching an intersection. (See specific standards under §
94.008.)



(Prior Code, § 153.055)  (Ord. D-1418, § 416, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.066  DWELLINGS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   No dwelling unit shall be erected in a M-1, M-2, or M-3 District.
However, the sleeping quarter of a watchman or a caretaker may be permitted
in said districts in conformance with the specific requirements of the
particular district.



(Prior Code, § 153.056)  (Ord. D-1418, § 417, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.067  DWELLINGS IN OTHER THAN MAIN STRUCTURES IN R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS.



   No residential structure shall be erected upon the rear of a lot or
upon a lot with another dwelling.



(Prior Code, § 153.057)  (Ord. D-1418, § 418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.068  NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON LOT; RESTRICTION.



   Each dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot and, except in the case of a multiple dwelling residential
development, there shall be not more than one main building, one garage, and
one additional accessory building on any single lot. In order to permit the
assembly of two or more adjoining lots by the owner of said lots, there shall
be required a declaration of restrictions running with the land executed by
the owner and recorded with the County Register of Deeds, consolidating the
lots into one single parcel which shall henceforth be deemed by the Chief
Inspector as a single lot and subject to all of the provisions contained in
this section. The location of said dwelling and its accessory buildings on
said lot shall conform with the general plan and scheme of the subdivision in
which the lot is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.058)  (Ord. D-1418, § 419, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.069  USE EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the following
accessory or incidental uses:



   (A)   The renting of rooms to not more than two non-transient
persons in a dwelling unit which is otherwise occupied in a manner permitted
in the district in which it is located;



   (B)   Customary refreshment and service uses and buildings in any
public park or recreational area incidental to the recreational use of such
area;



   (C)   Essential services as defined in § 153.021;



   (D)   Home occupations as defined in § 153.021, provided further
that:



      (1)   No evidence of such use is visible from the street or
from neighboring properties;



      (2)   No signs except as provided in §§ 153.145 through
153.169 are displayed in connection with such use;



      (3)   Any mechanical equipment used at any time in connection
with such use is the same or similar to such equipment as is usual and
permissible for household purposes or hobbies;



      (4)   Any mechanical equipment used in connection with such
use is so designed and constructed that the operation thereof does not
adversely affect insurance rates or the use of radio and television on other
properties; and



      (5)   At least one standard off-street parking space is
provided, in addition to that required for the residential use, with a
maximum of three spaces for both uses.



   (E)   Rummage sales, provided that:



      (1)   The sale is confined to the property;



      (2)   The sale is only for three days or less of duration;



      (3)   Only one rummage sale per property per year is
permitted; and



      (4)   No signs except as provided in §§ 153.145 through
153.169 shall be displayed.



(Prior Code, § 153.059)  (Ord. D-1418, § 420, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.070  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this section,
shall be subject to the following regulations.



   (A)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a
main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of
this chapter applicable to main or principal buildings.



   (B)   An accessory building may be located in a side or rear yard
where there is compliance with all applicable yard spaces.



   (C)   Not more than two garage/accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot, subject to setback, lot coverage and other standards of this
chapter. The total area of all accessory buildings on a lot may not exceed
the ground floor area of the main building or 864 square feet, whichever
allows the larger square footage. Accessory buildings shall not be erected in
any required yard except a rear yard, providing that in no instance shall
such a building be nearer than two feet to any adjoining lot line except that
on a corner lot the entrance to a garage shall not be less than eight feet
from the lot line adjacent to the side street, and except as provided in
divisions (G) and (H) below.



   (D)   An accessory building may occupy not more than 30% of a
required rear yard, plus 40% of any non-required rear yard.



   (E)   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than
seven feet to any main or principal building.



   (F)   A garage accessory building may not exceed one story or 15
feet in height; all other accessory buildings may not exceed ten feet in
height.



   (G)   In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall
observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are
any principal buildings fronting on said street in the same block or adjacent
blocks.



   (H)   When an accessory building is located in the rear yard area on
a corner lot, the side lot line which is substantially a continuation of the
required front yard setback of the lot to its rear, said accessory building
shall be set back from the street side at least as far as the required front
yard setback of the lot at the rear of the subject corner lot.



   (I)   In any residence zone, no garage in the side yard of a
dwelling shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the permitted
distance for the dwelling. For the garage located behind the dwelling, the
garage may be erected two feet from any interior side or rear lot line. No
garage or portion thereof shall extend into the required front yard area.
Attached garages of fireproof construction may be erected to extend beyond
the front line of the house in those areas which are being developed
according to a common plan that includes the construction of attached garages
extending beyond the front line of the house, except that such garage shall
not encroach in or upon the minimum front yard area as required by this
chapter. (See also requirements of § 153.062(A)(1).)



   (J)   No garage, utility, or accessory building shall be constructed
upon or moved to any parcel of property until the principal building on, or
intended to be placed thereon, is at least two-thirds completed, except that
construction of an attached garage may proceed with the construction of the
dwelling.



   (K)   No accessory building may be closer than four feet to any
other accessory building.



   (L)   No accessory building shall be used in any part for dwelling
purposes.



(Prior Code, § 153.060)  (Ord. D-1418, § 421, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1656, passed 5-4-1992, effective 5-14-1992; Ord. D-1822,
passed 7-13-1998, effective 7-27-1998)



§ 153.071  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS AND PUBLIC GARAGES.



   (A)   Purpose-effect. In order to regulate and control the problems
of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibration, dust, danger of fire and explosion,
and traffic congestion which result from the unrestricted and unregulated
construction and operation of automobile service stations, and to regulate
and control the adverse effects which these and other problems incidental to
the automobile service station may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding
areas, the following regulations and requirements are provided for automobile
service stations located in any zone. All automobile service stations erected
after the effective date of the chapter in districts permitting such use
shall comply with all requirements of this section as well as with §§
114.15 through 114.21 of this code of ordinances. No automobile service
station existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be structurally
altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of
this section than existed on the effective date of the chapter.



   (B)   Minimum area and frontage. An automobile service station shall
be located on a lot having a frontage along the principal street of not less
than 120 feet, and having a minimum area of not less than 14,400 square feet.



   (C)   Setbacks. An automobile service station building housing an
office and/or facilities for servicing, greasing, and/or washing motor
vehicles shall be located not less than 40 feet from any street lot line, and
not less than 25 feet from any side or rear lot line adjoining a
residentially zoned district.



   (D)   Driveways and curbs.



      (1)   All driveways providing ingress to or egress from an
automobile service station shall be not more than 30 feet wide at the
property line. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50
feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or
curb opening shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any corner or exterior
lot line, as measured along the property line. No driveway shall be located
nearer than 30 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other
driveway giving access to or from the same automobile service station.



      (2)   A raised curb six inches in height shall be erected
along all street lot lines, except for driveway openings.



   (E)   Paved areas. The entire parking area shall be paved with a
permanent surface of concrete or asphaltic concrete and shall be graded and
drained in accordance with the requirements of § 153.125(B)(5). Any unpaved
area of the site shall be landscaped with lawn or other horticultural
materials, maintained in a neat and orderly fashion at all times, and
separated from the paved area by a raised curb or other equivalent barrier.



   (F)   Equipment location. All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle
washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely
within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet
from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be
supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any
public sidewalk, street, or right-of-way.



   (G)   Number of pumps. An automobile service station located on a
lot having an area of 14,400 square feet shall include not more than four
double gasoline pumps or eight single gasoline pumps and two enclosed stalls
for servicing, lubricating, greasing, and/or washing motor vehicles. An
additional two gasoline pumps and/or one enclosed stall may be included with
the provision of each additional 2,000 square feet of lot area.



   (H)   Walls. Where an automobile service station adjoins property
located in any residential zone, a solid masonry wall five feet in height
shall be erected and maintained along the interior lot line or if separated
from the residential zone by an alley, then along the alley lot line. In
addition, all trash areas for used tires, auto parts and other items shall be
enclosed on all sides by the five-foot masonry wall except for access gates
or doors. All masonry walls shall be protected by a fixed curb or barrier to
prevent vehicles from contacting the wall. The masonry wall may be required
by the Chief Inspector where the service station adjoins a nonresidential use
such as a professional office building, clinic, day nursery, or landscaped
area of other nonresidential uses. Walls may be gradually reduced in height
(e.g., stepped down) within 25 feet of any street right-of-way line. No wall
may exceed four feet in height in any yard abutting a street.



   (I)   Lighting. All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs,
shall be erected and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from
adjacent and neighboring property.



   (J)   Location near certain premises prohibited. No automobile
service station or public garage shall be located nearer than 100 feet as
measured from any point on the property line to any school, playground,
church, hospital, or other such uses where large numbers of people congregate.



   (K)   Outdoor storage and vehicle rentals. Outdoor storage or
parking of vehicles or trailers other than private passenger automobiles
shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except
that equipment rental operations shall be permitted if incidental to the
automobile service station and if restricted to travel trailers or campers of
under 21 feet overall length, car-top carriers, and similar auto accessories
and are within fenced enclosures observing the same setbacks as required for
buildings in the zoning district wherein the automobile service station is
located, and their storage area does not exceed 20% of the area of the
service station site. Rentals shall be limited to trucks not exceeding 30
feet in length and trailers not larger than tandem axle utility trailers not
intended to carry heavy construction equipment.



   (L)   Signs. There shall be compliance with §§ 153.145 through
153.169



(Prior Code, § 153.061)  (Ord. D-1418, § 422, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.072  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.



   (A)   When a drive-in establishment adjoins property located in any
residential district, a masonry wall, ornamental on both sides, and five feet
in height, shall be erected and maintained along the interior line, or if
separated from the residential zone by an alley, then along the alley lot
line. In addition, all outside trash areas shall be enclosed by said
five-foot masonry wall. Said wall shall be protected from possible damage
inflicted by vehicles using the parking area by means of pre-cast concrete
wheel stops at least six inches in height, or by firmly implanted bumper
guards not attached to the wall, or by other suitable barriers. No wall may
exceed four feet in height in any yard abutting a street.



   (B)   The entire parking area shall be paved with a permanent
surface of concrete or asphaltic concrete and shall be graded and drained in
accordance with the requirements of § 153.125(B)(5). Any unpaved area of the
site shall be landscaped with lawn or other horticulture materials maintained
in a neat and orderly fashion at all times, and separated from the paved area
by a raised curb or other equivalent barrier.



   (C)   Lights shall be installed in a manner which will not create a
driving hazard on abutting streets or which will not cause direct
illumination on adjacent residential properties.



   (D)   Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided.



   (E)   Before approval is given for any use, a site plan shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for a written report before submittal to the
City Planning Commission for review, pursuant to § 153.083, as to
suitability of location of entrances and exits to the site, parking area,
screening, lighting, and other design features.



(Prior Code, § 153.062)  (Ord. D-1418, § 423, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.073  GRADE REQUIREMENTS.



   A minimum sloping grade sufficient for drainage to the sidewalk
elevation shall be established for front yards by the Chief Inspector. In
instances where there are existing structures on adjoining lots the Chief
Inspector shall be guided by the existing grades on the adjoining developed
properties to achieve a reasonably uniform transition grade between the lots
involved. All rear yards shall be graded so as to provide a gradual sloping
grade from the rear wall of the building to the rear lot line. The grade at
the rear lot line may be established by the Chief Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 153.063)  (Ord. D-1418, § 424, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.074  BUILDING TO BE MOVED.



   (A)   Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially
erected on any premises located within the city shall not be moved to and be
placed upon any other premises in the city until a building permit for such
removal shall have been secured under § 153.557. Any such building or
structure shall fully conform to all the provisions of this chapter in the
same manner as a new building or structure. No building or structure shall be
moved into the city from outside the city limits.



   (B)   Before a permit may be issued for moving a building or
structure, the Chief Inspector shall inspect same and shall determine if it
is in a safe condition to be moved, whether it may be reconditioned to comply
with the Building Code and other city requirements for the use and occupancy
for which it is to be used, and whether it will be of similar character with
the buildings in the area where it is to be moved. Also, clearances will be
obtained from all utility companies ensuring that utilities are discontinued
and all facilities accounted for. Providing these conditions can be compiled
with, a building permit shall be issued for the moving of said building or
structure, this permit to carry the verification of the Chief Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 153.064)  (Ord. D-1418, § 425, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.075  EXCAVATIONS OR HOLES.



   The construction, maintenance, or existence within the city of any
unprotected, unbarricaded, open, or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or
wells, or of any excavations, holes, or pits which constitute or are
reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to public health, safety,
or welfare, are hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not
prevent any excavation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the
building regulations, where such excavations are properly protected and
warning signs posted in such manner as may be approved by the Chief Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 153.065)  (Ord. D-1418, § 426, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.076  EXCAVATION, REMOVAL AND FILLING OF LAND.



   The use of land for the excavation, removal, filling, or depositing of
any type of earth material, topsoil, gravel, rock, garbage, rubbish, or other
wastes or by-products is not permitted in any zoning district except under a
certificate from, and under the supervision of, the Chief Inspector in
accordance with a topographic plan, approved by the Department of Public
Services and Engineering, submitted by the feeholder owner of the property
concerned. The topographic plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 50
feet equals one inch (50 feet = one inch) and shall show existing and
proposed grades and topographic features and such other data as may from time
to time be required by the Chief Inspector. Such certificate may be issued in
appropriate cases upon the filing with the application of a cash bond or
surety bond by a surety company authorized to do business in the state
running to the city in an amount as established by the Chief Inspector which
will be sufficient in amount to rehabilitate the property upon default of the
operator or such other reasonable expenses. This regulation does not apply to
normal soil removal for basement or foundation work when a building permit
has previously been duly issued by the Chief Inspector, or to minor grade
adjustments incidental to uses which do not alter natural drainage patterns
or cause or increase runoff onto adjacent properties.



(Prior Code, § 153.066)  (Ord. D-1418, § 427, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.077  RESTORING UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by
the Chief Inspector or the required compliance with his or her lawful order.



(Prior Code, § 153.067)  (Ord. D-1418, § 428, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.078  CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction, or designed use of any building upon which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter, and
upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on, and
provided further, that such building shall be completed within one year from
the date of passage of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.068)  (Ord. D-1418, § 429, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.079  VOTING PLACES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to
interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a municipal or other public election.



(Prior Code, § 153.069)  (Ord. D-1418, § 430, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.080  PLAT APPROVAL.



   No proposed plat of a new subdivision shall hereafter be approved by
the City Council unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum
size and width requirements set forth in the various districts of this
chapter, and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the state
and the city code.



(Prior Code, § 153.070)  (Ord. D-1418, § 431, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.081  GREENBELTS.



   (A)   Whenever a greenbelt is required in this chapter, it shall be
completed prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy and shall
thereafter be maintained with permanent plant materials to provide a screen
to abutting properties. Such greenbelts shall be planted and maintained with
suitable materials equal in characteristics to the plant materials listed
below:



 

Evergreen Trees


   Douglas fir


   Hemlock


   Juniper


   Pine


   Spruce


   White fir



 



 

Narrow Evergreens


   Arborvitae


   Blue columnar Chinese juniper


   Column hinoke cypress


   Irish yew


   Pyramidal red cedar


   Swiss stone pine



 



 

Large Deciduous Trees




   Beech


   Birch


   Ginkgo


   Hackberry


   Hard maple


   Honeylocust


   Hop hornbeam


   Linden


   Oak


   Planetree (sycamore)


   Sweet-gum




 



 

Small Trees




   Dogwood


   Flowering crab


   Hawthorn


   Hornbeam


   Magnolia


   Mountain ash


   Redbud


   Russian olive




 



 

Large Deciduous Shrubs




   Buckthorn


   Cotoneaster


   Euonymus


   Forsythia


   Hazelnut


   Honeysuckle


   Lilac


   Mock-orange


   Ninebark


   Privet


   Rose of Sharon


   Sumac


   Viburnum




 



   (B)   Design and specifications for fences, walls, and other
protective barriers, where required, will be indicated on the greenbelt plan.



(Prior Code, § 153.071)  (Ord. D-1418, § 432, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.082  PROTECTIVE SCREENING OF NONRESIDENTIAL AREAS FROM RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.



   In order to provide adequate protective screening for residential areas
adjacent to or near nonresidential areas, the following regulations shall
apply.



   (A)   (1)   Where a B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, RMU, M-1, M-2, or M-3
District abuts directly upon an R District, a landscaped greenbelt shall be
provided and maintained along its entire length by the users of the business
and industrial zoned property. In addition, those districts shall be screened
from such contiguous, residentially zoned district by either a building
housing a permitted use or else by a solid, ornamental masonry wall five feet
in height above grade between the required greenbelt and the commercial or
industrial use. Such greenbelt shall be a strip of land not less than 15 feet
in width which is planted and maintained in accordance with § 153.081, so as
to create a permanent buffer within one year following approval of the
development by the city. If in the opinion of the Board of Appeals on Zoning
the greenbelt would serve no good purpose, the Board may waive such
requirement and provide only the wall between the residential use and the
business or industrial use. The remainder of the landscaped area which is not
planted in accordance with § 153.081 as provided above shall be in well kept
lawn. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition,
neat and orderly in appearance.



      (2)   When vehicles or open air displays generally exceed a
five-foot height, the wall shall be increased to a height not exceeding ten
feet. All such walls shall be of uniform height around the premises and the
design of such wall approved by the City Planning Commission.



   (B)   Where required walls are provided on the business side of
public alleys, wall requirements may be waived to provide necessary entrance
to or exit from required off-street parking and loading areas; provided, that
approval is secured from the Chief Inspector as to the suitability of the
width and the location of such openings in the wall.



(Prior Code, § 153.072)  (Ord. D-1418, § 433, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1920, passed 6-3-2002, effective 6-13-2002)



§ 153.083  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   The purpose of site plan review is to determine compliance with the
provisions set forth herein and to promote the orderly development of the
city, the stability of land values and investments and the general welfare,
and to help prevent the impairment or depreciation land values and
development by the erection of structures or additions or alterations thereto
without proper attention to siting and appearance. Prior to the erection of
any building or structure, or change in use, in any zoning district in the
city and any land use requiring special approval or any planned unit
development, a site plan shall be submitted for review and approval. This
review and approval shall be performed by the Chief Inspector or by the City
Planning Commission as follows.



   (A)   Site plan review by the Chief Inspector.



      (1)   The Chief Inspector shall perform a site plan review for:



         (a)   A residential structure having four or fewer
dwelling units therein and accessory buildings, structures, and uses thereto;



         (b)   A change in the use of a structure or land which
does not require additional parking and does not involve exterior structural
alterations;



         (c)   An accessory building containing 1,000 square feet
or less; and



         (d)   An addition to an existing structure if such
addition totals 25% or less of the floor area of the existing structure.



      (2)   In order to perform this review, the Chief Inspector may
require the submission of information set forth in division (B)(2) below.



      (3)   The Chief Inspector shall transmit copies of the site
plan to the Department of Public Services and Engineering, the City Engineer,
and other city departments or divisions as appropriate, for review. Upon
receiving recommendations from the responding departments or divisions, the
Chief Inspector shall transmit the recommendations to the applicant, and if
the applicant concurs with the staff recommendations, the site plan will be
approved along with all recommendations agreed to by the applicant.



      (4)   In instances where the applicant does not concur with
recommendations suggested during the administrative site plan review, the
applicant may request the site plan be transmitted to the City Planning
Commission to resolve the disagreement. A fee for site plan review by the
Chief Inspector shall be paid for accessory buildings containing 1,000 square
feet or less; and, for additions to existing buildings which are 25% or less
of the floor area of the structure, and shall be the same as the Planning
Commission site plan review fee.



      (5)   Site plans for additions to existing structures which
are 25% or less of the floor area of the existing structure shall be approved
administratively only if the exterior of the addition will be surfaced with
material or materials which do not differ from material or materials on the
existing structure.



   (B)   Site plan review by the City Planning Commission. All other
structures and uses of land or buildings shall be reviewed by the City
Planning Commission, and the following site plan review procedures shall be
followed.



      (1)   Ten copies of the site plan, at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 50 feet (one inch = 50 feet), including all relevant items
herein required, shall be submitted to the Chief Inspector not less than 15
days prior to the next regular or special City Planning Commission meeting.



      (2)   The following information shall accompany all plans
submitted for review by the City Planning Commission:



         (a)   A legal description of the property under
consideration;



         (b)   A map indicating the gross land area of the
development, the present zoning classification thereof, and the zoning
classification and land use of the abutting properties surrounding the
proposed development, including the location of structures and other
improvements;



         (c)   A fully dimensioned drawing of the site. Existing
topographic information shall be shown at a contour interval of two feet or
less if requested by the Chief Inspector;



         (d)   A vicinity map showing the location of the area in
relation to surrounding properties, streets, freeways, schools, school sites,
and other significant features of the city where appropriate;



         (e)   A drawing of the site showing the general
development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and
dimensioned:



            1.   Location of each existing and each proposed
structure in the development area, the use or uses to be contained therein,
the number of stories, gross building areas, distances between



structures and lot lines, setback lines, and approximate location of
vehicular ingress, egress, and loading points;



            2.   All streets, driveways, easements, service
aisles, and parking areas, including general layout and design of parking lot
spaces;



            3.   All pedestrian walks, malls, and open areas
for parks, recreation, light, and air to be dedicated to the public and which
are to be retained by the developer, manager, or property owners association;



            4.   Location and height of all walls, fences, and
screen planting, including a general plan for the landscaping of the
development and the method by which landscaping is to be accomplished and be
maintained together with a brief narrative description of the landscaping
plan;



            5.   Types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing,
or gravel to be used at the various locations;



            6.   A grading plan of the area, including
necessary data relating to grade and soil erosion control; and



            7.   Existing and proposed utilities.



         (f)   Plans and elevations of one or more structures,
indicating proposed architecture;



         (g)   Proposed restrictive covenants if property is to
be subdivided or if requested by the Chief Inspector;



         (h)   Such other information as may be required by the
city to assist in the consideration of the proposed development;



         (i)   In order that buildings, open space, and
landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the
area, and to assure that no undesirable health, safety, noise, and traffic
conditions will result from the development, the City Planning Commission
shall determine whether the site plan meets the following criteria, unless
the City Planning Commission determines that one or more of such criteria are
inapplicable:



            1.   The vehicular transportation system shall
provide for circulation throughout the site and for efficient ingress and
egress to all parts of the site by fire and safety equipment;



            2.   Pedestrian walkways shall be provided as
deemed necessary by the City Planning Commission for separating pedestrian
and vehicular traffic;



            3.   Recreation and open space areas shall be
provided in all multiple-family residential developments;



            4.   The site plan shall comply with the district
requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard
space, density, and all other requirements as set forth in § 153.440;



            5.   The requirements for greenbelts, fencing,
walls, and other protective barriers shall be complied with as provided in
this chapter;



            6.   The site plan shall provide for adequate
storage space for the use therein, including, where necessary, storage space
for recreational vehicles; and



            7.   The site plan shall comply with all
requirements of the applicable zoning district, unless otherwise provided in
this chapter.



         (j)   The site plan shall be reviewed by the City
Planning Commission and shall be approved, disapproved, or approved with
specific conditions as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of
this chapter and other codes and regulations of the city. If the City
Planning Commission finds a site plan not in conformance with the provisions
set forth in this section, it may, at its discretion, return the site plan to
the applicant with a written statement of the modifications necessary to
obtain approval. Upon resubmission of the modified site plan, the City
Planning Commission shall review the plan and approve, disapprove, or approve
with specific conditions as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose
of this chapter and other codes and regulations of the city;



         (k)   Following approval of the site plan by the City
Planning Commission, the Chief Inspector shall issue a building permit upon
submission of proper construction plans, and shall ensure that the
development is undertaken and completed in accordance with the approved
plans. For any approved site plan, building permits must be obtained
encompassing a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area shown on the site plan
approval or the site plan shall be deemed null and void without any further
action by the city;



         (l)   The building permit may be revoked by the Chief
Inspector in any case where the conditions of the site plan as approved by
the City Planning Commission or Chief Inspector have not been complied with;



         (m)   The site plan, if approved, shall become part of
the record of approval, and subsequent actions relating to the activity
authorized shall be consistent with the approved site plan unless a change or
addition conforming to this chapter receives the mutual agreement of the
landowner and the City Planning Commission or Chief Inspector as appropriate.
Incidental and minor variations of the approved site plan with written
approval of the Chief Inspector shall not invalidate prior site plan
approval; and



         (n)   In instances where specific dimensional or area
requirement of this chapter are not satisfied on the site plan, requests for
variance(s) may be initiated by the applicant to the Board of Appeals on
Zoning or City Planning Commission as appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 153.073)  (Ord. D-1418, § 434, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1579, passed 10-17-1988, effective 10-27-1988)



§ 153.084  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   Any use permitted in any zoning district must also comply with all
applicable federal, state, county, and city health and pollution laws and
regulations with respect to noise, smoke, and particulate matter, vibration,
noxious and odorous matter, glare and heat, fire and explosive hazards,
gases, electromagnetic radiation, and drifting airborne matter. Every use
hereafter established shall not exceed the limits prescribed within the
appropriate respective regulation referenced to above. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property, where violations of these
regulations are suspected, to provide competent written documentation by a
registered professional engineer or similar expert to show that the suspected
violations do not exist, and the city may elect to so measure a particular
emission or environmental impact.



(Prior Code, § 153.074)  (Ord. D-1418, § 435, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.085  AREAS ADDED TO THE CITY.



   (A)   Any area annexed to the city from a territory which has no
zoning regulations shall be automatically classified as part of the most
restricted adjoining city zoning district. The newly annexed area shall
remain so classified until the Planning Commission shall have completed a
land use plan for it, and the City Council shall have amended the Zoning Map
to show its permanent zoning classification.



   (B)   Any area having zoning regulations in effect at the time of
its annexation to the city shall retain such zoning regulations for a period
of one year after its annexation unless the City Council shall during said
period adopt other zoning regulations for it.



(Prior Code, § 153.075)  (Ord. D-1418, § 436, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.086  FENCES.



   (A)   Residential and restricted office districts. Fences shall be
permitted in residential and restricted office districts, subject to the
following conditions.



      (1)   Fences in front yard areas. Fences which are located in
the front yard area between the front of the dwelling and the front property
line shall not exceed a height of four feet and shall be of open construction.



      (2)   Fences in rear yard areas. Fences which are located in
the rear yard shall not exceed a height of six feet and may be of open or
closed construction.



      (3)   Fences on corner lots.



         (a)   Fences constructed or installed on corner lots or
parcels having a side yard abutting upon a street may be erected to a height
of six feet above ground level but shall not extend beyond the side yard
building line in the side yard area adjacent to the street side of the
building thereon.



         (b)   Fences located in the street side yard area on
corner lots, between the dwelling and the street property line, shall not
exceed a height of four feet and shall be of open construction except that a
fence six feet in height and of open or closed construction may be erected in
the street side yard area where a corner lot shares a common rear lot line
with the rear adjacent property owner.



      (4)   Fences located in interior side yard areas. Fences
constructed or erected in the interior yard area may be erected to a height
of six feet above ground level and may be of open or closed construction
except that when an abutting dwelling has a door or window (except basement
window) located less than five feet from the fence, said fence shall be
reduced to four feet in height if it is of closed construction.



      (5)   Exceptions. The height restrictions of this chapter
shall not apply to schools, public or private, or to public recreation areas,
or to public utility installations where higher fences are required for the
safety and protection of the public.



   (B)   Industrial districts and business districts. Fences in
industrial districts may not exceed eight feet in height and fences in
business districts may not exceed six feet in height and may be of open or
closed construction, except that fences in required front or street side yard
areas shall be no more than four feet in height and shall be of open
construction. Fences exceeding six feet in height in business districts may
be approved by the Board of Appeals on Zoning as a special exception under §
153.584 when there are unique and exceptional circumstances. Residential uses
in business and industrial zones shall comply with the fence requirements of
division (A) above.



   (C)   Unobstructed site.



      (1)   Unobstructed site distance. No fence, structure, hedge,
or planting shall be erected, established, or maintained on any lot which
will obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of
two streets or the intersection of a street and an alley (see diagram,
Appendix A, § 10). Fences or plantings located in the triangular areas
described below shall not be permitted to obstruct cross-visibility between a
height of 30 inches and eight feet above grade.



      (2)   Unobstructed sight area. The unobstructed triangular
area is described as follows:



         (a)   The area formed at the corner, intersection of two
streets bounded by the curb lines extended to the point of the intersection
and by a base line intersecting each curb 60 feet from said point of
intersection. Where no curb exists, the edge of the roadway shall be
considered a curb within the meaning of this section; and



         (b)   The area formed at the corner, intersection of the
public right-of-way and a driveway, the two sides of the triangular are being
ten feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and the edge of the
driveway, and the third side being a line connecting these two sides.



   (D)   Use of abutting properties. No fence shall be erected where it
would prevent or unreasonably obstruct the use of adjacent property, nor
shall a fence be erected where it would obstruct or prevent the continued
safe use of an existing driveway or other means of access to adjacent
property. In enforcing this provision, the Chief Inspector may require a
fence to be set back a minimum distance from a driveway or property line.



   (E)   Barbed wire. The placement of barbed wire is regulated as
follows.



      (1)   Industrial districts. For industrial properties, barbed
wire must be at least six feet above grade. Barbed wire is not allowed on
properties used for residential purposes in industrial districts.



      (2)   Business districts. For business properties where
outdoor storage is allowed, barbed wire may be approved by the Board of
Appeals on Zoning as a special exception under § 153.584 when there are
unique and exceptional circumstances. If approved by the Board of Appeals on
Zoning, the barbed wire must be at least six feet above grade. Barbed wire is
not allowed on properties used for residential purposes in business districts.



      (3)   Public utility installations. Barbed wire may be placed
on fences surrounding a public utility installation in any zoning district,
provided the barbed wire is placed not less than six feet above grade.



   (F)   Electric fences. Electric fences may be approved in industrial
zones by the Board of Appeals on Zoning as a special exception under §
153.584 of this chapter when there are unique and exceptional circumstances.
See § 153.584(H) for requirements and standards.



   (G)   Materials. Fences shall consist of materials commonly used in
conventional fence construction, such as wood or metal. If, because of design
or construction, one side of the fence has a more finished appearance than
the other, the side of the fence with the more finished appearance shall face
the exterior of the lot.



   (H)   Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained in a good
structural condition at all times. All fences shall be kept neatly painted,
stained, or preserved and such treatment shall be of the same contiguous
color, stain, or other treatment.



(Prior Code, § 153.076)  (Ord. D-1418, § 437, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1621, passed 10-1-1990, effective 10-11-1990; Ord. D-1844,
passed 9-27-1999, effective 10-7-1999)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.087  TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district.



      (1)   In Light Industrial (M-1), General Industrial (M-2), and
Heavy Industrial (M-3), telecommunications facilities shall be a permitted
use provided:



         (a)   The site is not adjacent to or across adjacent
street from any parcel zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RO-1;



         (b)   The site is more than 1,500 feet from any parcel
zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RO-1;



         (c)   The site is more than 1,500 feet from any parcel
which contains a dwelling;



         (d)   The height of a tower designed to accommodate one
antenna is less than 125 feet; and



         (e)   The height of a tower designed to accommodate more
than one user is less than 200 feet.



      (2)   In Light Industrial (M-1), General Industrial (M-2), and
Heavy Industrial (M-3), telecommunications facilities shall be a special use
if the provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b), and (A)(1)(c) above can
not be met.



      (3)   In Central Business (B-3) and General Business (B-2),
telecommunications facilities shall be a permitted use after special approval
provided:



         (a)   The site is not adjacent to or across adjacent
street from any parcel zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RO-1;



         (b)   The site is more than 1,000 feet from any parcel
zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RO-1;



         (c)   The site is more than 1,000 feet from any parcel
which contains a dwelling;



         (d)   The height of a tower designed to accommodate one
antenna is less than 75 feet; and



         (e)   The height of a tower designed to accommodate more
than one user is less than 100 feet.



   (B)   Requirements for telecommunications facilities.
Telecommunications facilities are subject to the design standards as
contained in § 153.490.



(Prior Code, § 153.077)  (Ord. D-1880, passed 11-20-2000, effective
11-30-2000)



NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS



§ 153.100  NONCONFORMANCE REGULATED.



   (A)   Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date
of passage of this chapter and located in a district in which it would not be
permitted as a new use under the regulations of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a nonconforming use and not in violation of this chapter;
provided, however, that a nonconforming use shall be subject to, and the
owner comply with, the regulations in this chapter.



   (B)   The existence of nonconforming uses is hereby declared to be
contrary to the best interests of the community and it is hereby declared to
be the policy of the city as expressed in this chapter to discontinue
nonconforming uses in the course of time, as circumstances permit, having due
regard for the rights of all parties concerned.



(Prior Code, § 153.090)  (Ord. D-1418, § 501, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.101  NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists
which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and
where such use involves no individual structure with a current replacement
cost exceeding $1,000, the use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, provided:



   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;



   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part
to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;



   (C)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason
for a period of more than one year, such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is
located; or



   (D)   No structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.



(Prior Code, § 153.091)  (Ord. D-1418, § 502, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.102  NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.



   If lawful use involving individual structures with a current
replacement cost of $1,000 or more, or of structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of this chapter that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the
lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions.



   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located; or unless granted permission by the Board of Appeals on Zoning by
the authority provided under § 153.584(F) and in accordance with the
following requirements:



      (1)   Any enlarged portion shall conform to the yard and
height requirements for the district in which it is located and be situated
on land which was under the same ownership as that occupied by the existing
building or structure on October 15, 1958, and has continued to be in one
ownership;



      (2)   The total floor area added to any nonconforming use
shall never exceed 50% of the floor area occupied by such use on October 15,
1958, and any extension granted shall be entirely within an enclosed
building; and



      (3)   Any Board of Appeals on Zoning action taken in
connection with the enlargement of a nonconforming use or building shall
conform with the general standards outline in § 153.589.



   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside such building.



   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use
of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the proposed use is equally appropriate or
more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or to a
use permitted in a district of greater restrictions, it shall not thereafter
be changed to a nonconforming use.



   (D)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the entire structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of land.



(Prior Code, § 153.092)  (Ord. D-1418, § 503, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.103  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption of
this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by
reasons of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on
the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may
be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.



   (A)   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in
a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof
may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.



   (B)   Should such structure be moved for any reason whatever, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved.



   (C)   If any such nonconforming structure ceases being used for any
reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such
structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the
district in which such structure is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.093)  (Ord. D-1418, § 504, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.104  SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.



   (A)   (1)   In any R District, a single-family dwelling may be
erected on a substandard lot which is of record at the time of the adoption
of this chapter and under separate ownership from an abutting vacant lot
provided that the side yards meet that allowed by § 153.440 or that
prescribed in Table 1, whichever is less, for corner lots, and Table 2 for
interior lots, and further that no side yard shall be less than three feet,
nor any street side yard be less than ten feet, that the lot area is not less
than 50% of the minimum specified for the district and all other requirements
for the district are complied with.



      (2)   In any R District where a lot of record at the time of
adoption of this chapter is under separate ownership from the lot abutting
the rear lot line and is of sufficient depth to permit a buildable depth of
26 feet, the required rear yard may be reduced by not more than six feet to
provide such 26 foot buildable depth for a single-family dwelling; provided,
however, that the lot area is not less than 50% of the minimum specified for
the district and all other requirements for the district are complied with.

 

Table 1 — Required Side Yards for Selected Corner Lot Widths


Lot Width (feet)
 
Buildable Width (feet)
 
Required Side Yards


Minimum Side Yard (feet)
 
Street Side Yard (feet)
 
Total (feet)


Where the street side yard adjoins an interior lot (see Example “a” in
diagram, Appendix A, § 11)




46
 
26
 
5
 
15
 
20


45
 
26
 
5
 
14
 
19


44
 
26
 
5
 
13
 
18


43
 
26
 
5
 
12
 
17


42
 
26
 
5
 
11
 
16


41
 
26
 
4
 
11
 
15


40
 
26
 
4
 
10
 
14


39
 
26
 
3
 
10
 
13


Where lot adjoins another corner lot (see Example “b” in diagram,
Appendix A, § 11)


46
 
29
 
5
 
12
 
17


45
 
28
 
5
 
12
 
17


44
 
27
 
5
 
12
 
17


43
 
26
 
5
 
12
 
17


42
 
26
 
5
 
11
 
16


41
 
26
 
4
 
11
 
15


40
 
26
 
4
 
10
 
14


39
 
26
 
3
 
10
 
13




 



 

Table 2 — Required Side Yards for Selected Interior Lot Widths


Lot Width (feet)
 
Buildable Width (feet)
 
Required Side Yards


Minimum Side Yard (feet)
 
Other Side Yard (feet)
 
Total (feet)




39
 
26
 
4
 
9
 
13


38
 
26
 
3
 
9
 
12


37
 
26
 
3
 
8
 
11


35
 
26
 
3
 
6
 
9


33
 
26
 
3
 
4
 
7


32
 
26
 
3
 
3
 
6




 



   (B)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of
lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time
of passage of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of
this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied which
does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this chapter,
nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot
width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.094)  (Ord. D-1418, § 505, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.105  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding
15% of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or
nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be provided that the
cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.



   (B)   If the Chief Inspector shall declare it necessary to
strengthen or restore any nonconforming building, structure, or wall, this
shall be permissible, provided that such work shall not include structural
alterations or changes in the type of construction, and that the extent of
such restoration or strengthening shall not exceed the minimum specified by
the Chief Inspector to render the building or structure safe for occupancy.
However, if a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to a lack of
repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the Chief Inspector to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of
the district in which it is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.095)  (Ord. D-1418, § 506, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.106  RECONSTRUCTION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repair, or
restoration and the continued use of any nonconforming building or structure
damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, acts of God or acts of public enemy
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, wherein the expense of such
reconstruction does not exceed 25% of the current replacement cost of the
entire building or structure at the time such damage occurred; provided that
such valuation shall be subject to the approval of the Chief Inspector whose
decision shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Appeals on Zoning,
and provided that such restoration and resumption shall take place within one
year from time of such damage, and provided further, that said use be
identical with nonconforming use permitted and in effect directly preceding
said damage. Where pending insurance claims require an extension of time, the
Chief Inspector may grant a time extension provided that the property owner
submit a certification from the insurance company attesting to the delay.
Until such time as the debris from any fire damage is fully removed, the
premises shall be adequately fenced or screened from access by children who
may be attracted to the premises. No fee shall be charged for an appeal under
the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 153.096)  (Ord. D-1418, § 507, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.107  FORFEITURE OF RIGHT TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING USE.



   When nonconforming use of property is discontinued through vacancy,
lack of operation, or other similar condition for period of one year or more,
thereafter no right shall exist to maintain on said property a nonconforming
use unless the Board of Appeals on Zoning grants such privilege within one
year after such discontinuance. No nonconforming use, if changed to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall be resumed or changed
back to a nonconforming use.



(Prior Code, § 153.097)  (Ord. D-1418, § 508, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.108  CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE.



   (A)   The Chief Inspector may issue a certificate of occupancy for a
change of a nonconforming use only when the proposed change in use is a use
which is permitted in the district, provided applicable yard and area
requirements are met, and following appropriate site plan review.



   (B)   In the event the proposed change in use is a use which does
not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located,
the Chief Inspector may not issue a certificate of occupancy for any change
of a nonconforming use until the proposed change in use has been authorized
by the City Planning Commission after a duly advertised public hearing.



   (C)   In no case shall a legal nonconforming use be replaced by a
use that is less restricted. (See § 153.021 for district listing by
restrictiveness.)



   (D)   In no case shall a legal nonconforming use be replaced by a
nonconforming use which creates more nuisances (such as: noise; smoke; odors;
or dangerous hazards) than the original nonconforming use it is proposed to
replace.



(Prior Code, § 153.098)  (Ord. D-1418, § 509, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.109  CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.



   There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an
existing nonconforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or
character of such nonconforming use.



(Prior Code, § 153.099)  (Ord. D-1418, § 510, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.110  ACQUISITION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   The City Planning Commission may from time to time recommend
to the City Council the acquisition of such private property as does not
conform in use or structure to the regulations and restrictions of various
districts defined in this chapter and the removal of such use or structure.



   (B)   The City Planning Commission shall submit its reasons and
estimates of cost and expense of such acquisition and removal of the
nonconformity and probable resale price of the property to be acquired after
removal of the nonconformity as obtained from the appropriate city
department, board, or commission. The City Planning Commission shall
recommend that portion of the difference between the estimated cost of
acquisition and removal of the nonconformity and the probable resale price
which in its opinion should be either paid from the city’s General Fund or
assessed against a benefitted district.



   (C)   Whenever the City Council has under advisement the acquisition
by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise as provided by law of any
nonconforming building, structure, or use, a preliminary public hearing
thereon shall be held before the City Council. Not less than 15 days before
the hearing, a notice of time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall
be published in a paper circulating in the city and the City Clerk shall send
by mail addressed to the respective owners of any such properties at the
addresses given in the last assessment roll, a written notice of time, place,
and purpose of such hearing. If the cost and expense or any portion thereof
is to be assessed to a special district, the City Assessor shall be directed
to furnish the City Council with a tentative special assessment district and
the tentative plan of assessment, the names of the respective owners of the
property in such district and addresses of such owners in the last assessment
roll. The City Clerk shall also send the notice to the respective owners in
the tentative assessment district.



   (D)   Whenever the City Council, after a public hearing as required
in division (C) above, shall declare by resolution that proceedings be
instituted for the acquisition of any property on which is located a
nonconforming building, structure, or use in accordance with the laws of the
state, the Charter, this chapter, and other applicable ordinances of the
city, the City Clerk shall send by mail a certified copy of such resolution
to the respective owners of the properties and to the owners of the
properties in any special assessment district, if such method of financing is
selected by the City Council, at the address given in the last assessment
roll.



   (E)   Upon passing of the title to the private property so acquired
as provided in division (D) above to the city, the City Council shall cause
the discontinuance or removal of the nonconforming use or the removal,
demolition, or remodeling of the nonconforming structure. The City Council
shall thereafter order such property sold or otherwise disposed of, but only
for a conforming use. If a special assessment district has been created for
this particular acquisition, the City Council shall confirm the cost and
expense of such project and report any assessable cost to the City Assessor
who shall then prepare an assessment roll in the manner provided for in the
Charter, code, and other applicable ordinances of the city. Such assessment
roll may, in the discretion of the City Council, be in one or more but not to
exceed five annual installments.



(Prior Code, § 153.100)  (Ord. D-1418, § 511, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.111  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, NONCONFORMING USE.



   (A)   (1)   At any time after the adoption of this chapter should
the city become aware of a nonconforming use, the owner of said nonconforming
use shall be notified by the Chief Inspector of the provisions of this
section, and that his or her property constitutes a nonconforming use. Within
30 days after receipt of said notice, the owner shall apply for and be issued
a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use by the Chief Inspector.
The application for such certificate shall designate the location, nature,
and extent of the nonconforming use and such other details as may be
necessary for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   If the owner of a nonconforming use fails to apply for a
certificate of occupancy within 30 days after receipt of the foregoing
notice, the use ceases to be a legal nonconforming use and is hereby declared
to be in violation of this chapter. The Chief Inspector and the City Attorney
shall take appropriate action.



   (B)   If the Chief Inspector shall find, upon reviewing the
application for a certificate of occupancy, that the existing use is illegal
or in violation of any other ordinance or law, or, if he or she finds that
the building for which the certificate is requested has been constructed or
altered for the existing use or any other use without full compliance with
the building regulations or this chapter in effect at the time of
construction or alteration, he or she shall not issue the certificate of
occupancy but shall declare such use to be in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   After the adoption of this chapter, or any amendments thereto,
the Chief Inspector shall prepare a record of all known nonconforming uses
and occupations of lands, buildings, and structures, including tents and
trailer coaches, existing at the time of adoption of such chapter. Such
record shall contain the names and addresses of the owners of record of such
nonconforming use and of any occupant, other than the owner, the legal
description of the land, and the nature and extent of use. Such list shall be
available at all times in the office of the Chief Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 153.101)  (Ord. D-1418, § 512, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.112  PLANS ALREADY FILED.



   In any case where plans and specifications for a building or structure
have been filed which would conform with the zoning regulations effective at
the date of such filing but not with the regulations of this chapter, and
where a building permit for such building or structure has been issued and
construction work started at the effective date of this chapter, such work
may proceed provided it is completed within one year of said date of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.102)  (Ord. D-1418, § 513, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.125  OFF-STREET PARKING, GENERAL.



   (A)   In all zoning districts, off-street parking requirements for
the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of
occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered,
or extended shall be provided as prescribed in this subchapter. Such space
shall be under the direct control, either by ownership or long-term lease, of
the owner of the buildings or use served, shall be maintained, and shall not
be encroached upon so long as the main building or structure remains, unless
an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance
with this subchapter.



   (B)   The determination of the required spaces and the regulation
thereof shall be governed by the following regulations.



      (1)   Area requirement. For the purpose of this section, 300
square feet of lot area shall be deemed a parking space for one vehicle,
including access aisle, except that 180 square feet of lot area which has
direct means of ingress and egress from an alley or street may also be deemed
a parking space.



      (2)   Fractional units. In computing units or measurements to
determine the number of required spaces, any fraction up to and including
one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one
space.



      (3)   Loading spaces. Loading spaces shall not be construed as
supplying off-street parking space.



      (4)   Location of spaces. The off-street parking facilities
required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot
or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve and shall
consist of a parking strip, parking apron, or garage. A parking strip or
driveway shall be located such that it leads to at least one parking space in
a yard other than the required front or street side yard. Additional spaces
may be located in the required front or street side yard provided the space
is not located in a space bound by the front building line, the side building
line nearest the parking strip or driveway and the front lot line (see Figure
6.1 in § 12 of Appendix A to this chapter) or on corner lots the space bound
by the front lot line, the street side yard lot line (see Figure 6.2 in § 12
of Appendix A to this chapter). (See also § 72.23 of this code of
ordinances.) Off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall
be located on the lot or on property within 400 feet of any entrance to the
building such parking is intended to serve, measured between such entrance
and the nearest point of such required parking area.



      (5)   Surfacing.



         (a)   Off-street parking and loading areas, including
access drives, for all uses shall be surfaced with either:



            1.   Six inches of portland cement concrete; or



            2.   Two inches of asphaltic concrete laid over a
base of crushed stone with a compacted thickness of six inches and shall be
graded and drained to dispose of all surface water on the property.



         (b)   1.   Exception to divisions (B)(5)(a)1. and
(B)(5)(a)2. above for single-family dwellings parking spaces, strips, or
aprons shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or six inches of stone mix
or gravel.



            2.   Gravel and stone mix surfaces shall be
maintained such that the parking space, strip, or apron is free from ruts or
holes.



            3.   If stone mix or gravel is used the parking
area must be clearly defined by use of side borders of landscape ties,
treated wood, brick concrete, or other similar border materials.



            4.   All parking spaces, strips, or aprons that
are not in compliance with this section must be brought into compliance by
June 1, 2001.



         (c)   Surfacing similar to that described above shall be
required in the case of any “Off-Street Parking A” automobile parking
area approved by the City Planning Commission as a special approval use under
the provisions of § 153.128. To assure the actual completion of improvements
required as a condition for the special approval, a performance guarantee in
an amount sufficient to cover the construction cost of the adequate
improvements, such cost to be determined by the Department of Engineering,
shall be required. (See § 153.563.)



      (6)   Parking barriers. Parking barriers, where required in
§§ 153.128(B)(7) and 153.129(E) and (K), shall consist of continuous curbs
or bumper rails of either wood, metal, or concrete as defined by the city
building regulations, securely anchored, and be not less than six inches or
more than 24 inches in height above the surface of the parking area involved.



      (7)   Similar uses. In the case of a use not specifically
mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a use which
is so mentioned and is similar shall apply.



      (8)   Existing spaces. Off-street parking existing on the
effective date of this chapter, which serves an existing building or use,
shall not be reduced in size to less than required under the terms of this
subchapter.



      (9)   Seating allocation. In stadiums, sports arenas,
churches, and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy
benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such
seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of
determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under this section.



      (10)   Mixed uses in same building. In the case of mixed uses
in the same building or on the same property, the total requirements for
off-street parking and loading shall be the sum of the requirements for the
particular individual uses computed separately in accordance with § 153.126.



      (11)   Collective use of spaces. Nothing in this subchapter
shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking
facilities for two or more buildings or uses; provided, that collectively,
such facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses computed separately in accordance with § 153.126.



      (12)   Joint use of spaces. Not more than 50% of the
off-street parking requirements for a specific use may be satisfied by the
applicant for a building permit or certificate of occupancy by establishing
that the owner of the property on which the proposed building or use is to be
established has, in connection therewith, the legal right of record to the
joint use of private off-street parking facilities meeting the requirements
of this chapter and which are provided by other uses not normally open, used,
or operating during the principal operating hours of the proposed use. The
legal right herein referred to as other than by joint ownership of the land
shall be for the useful life of the building in which the use is to be
established as determined by the Chief Inspector. All questions as to the
existence of such legal right shall be determined by the City Attorney, and
the applicant shall furnish such abstracts of title, title searches, and
legal instruments for examination as the City Attorney may find necessary to
make such determination.



      (13)   Irrevocable use. All required off-street parking spaces
shall be stated in an application for a building permit and shall be reserved
irrevocably for such a use.



      (14)   General conditions. Except when land is used as a
storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage,
the time limit for parking in off-street parking areas shall prevail in
accordance with § 153.129(L), it being the purpose and intention of the
foregoing that the requirements of maintaining vehicle storage or parking
space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the
streets, but such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide for,
and it shall be unlawful to permit, the storage or parking on such open land
of wrecked or junked cars, or for creating a junkyard or a nuisance in such
area.



      (15)   Restriction of parking on private property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any motor vehicle on
any private property, or use said private property as parking space, without
the express or implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the owner,
holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property.



      (16)   Exempt from parking requirements. All uses located
within designated areas containing municipal off-street parking facilities,
as are identified on the Zoning Map, are exempt from the requirements in §
153.126, but if parking is provided such areas shall be improved pursuant to
applicable requirements contained in §§ 153.127 through 153.131, inclusive.



      (17)   Curbing/bumper blocks. Concrete curbing or concrete or
treated wood tire bumper block of a minimum height of six inches and a
maximum height of 12 inches shall be located around the perimeter of the
parking facility, excluding areas of ingress and egress.



      (18)   Parking lot landscaping.



         (a)   In addition to requirements for landscaping
setback areas and buffers, all off-street parking lots of more than 40 spaces
shall incorporate and provide protected landscaped areas located within the
parking lot. The ratio of landscaped area to number of parking spaces shall
be 100 square feet for each 20 parking spaces. The minimum size for an
interior parking lot landscaped island shall be 100 square feet. Required
parking lot setback areas shall not satisfy the requirement for interior
landscaping. Applicants are encouraged to locate landscaped islands adjacent
to end parking stalls to protect end vehicles and improve sight distance.
(See division (B)(19) below.)



         (b)   In all landscaped areas, at least one evergreen
tree with a minimum height of four feet or one deciduous tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches shall be provided for every 200 square feet of
parking lot landscaping required. The landscaping shall be provided with a
variety of plant materials including trees of a selected variety and size as
may be practical for planting and architectural effect. When parking lot
landscaping is provided in one or more end islands, the maximum mature height
of shrubs and similar species shall be 30 inches and the minimum canopy
height of deciduous trees shall be eight feet, in order to provide clear
sight distance.



      (19)   Parking islands. In order to delineate on-site
circulation, ensure adequate sight distance at the intersection of parking
aisles, ring roads and private roads, protect vehicles at the end of parking
bays, and define the geometry of internal intersections, end islands (painted
or landscaped/ curbed) shall be required at the end of all off-street parking
spaces adjacent to an aisle or road. At a minimum, one landscaped island (see
division (B)(18) above) shall be provided for every two painted islands. End
island design shall generally conform to concept shown in Appendix A, § 13.



(Prior Code, § 153.115)  (Ord. D-1418, § 601, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. D-1922,
passed 6-17-2002, effective 6-27-2002)



§ 153.126  TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or
buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as
specified above shall be determined in accordance with the following table,
and the space so required shall be stated in the application of a building
permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use and shall comply with
the provisions of §§ 153.128 through 153.131 as may be applicable.



 

Use
 
Required Number of Parking Spaces




Business and Commercial


Amusement establishments
 
1 per every 50 square feet of gross floor area


Automobile car wash establishment
 
1 for each employee and manager; see § 153.127 for waiting establishment
requirements


Automobile service stations
 
1 for each employee plus 1 for the owner and/or manager, plus 3 for each
grease rack or stall for servicing vehicles or wash rack; for self-serve
stations a minimum of 4 waiting spaces per island in addition to vehicles
actually being serviced


Beauty parlor or barber shop
 
3 spaces for each of the first 2 beauty or barber chairs, and 1.5 spaces for
each additional chair


Beauty schools
 
1 for every 60 square feet of gross floor area less the area devoted to
storage, utility rooms, or lavatories


Bowling alleys
 
8 for each bowling lane, plus required parking for any bar, restaurant, or
assembly space attached to a bowling alley


Carry-out restaurants
 
1 for every 150 square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of 8 spaces


Drive-in restaurants (see also § 153.127)
 
1 for every 2 seats in an established seating plan area, plus 1 for every 15
square feet of usable customer area other than in an established seating plan
area, plus 1 for every 2 employees based upon maximum employment shift, and
plus 1 for each outside customer automobile service stall area


Establishments other than drive-in, carry-out, and fast food establishments
for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food, or refreshments
 
1 for each 70 square feet of gross floor area


Fast food restaurants
 
1 for each 60 square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of 25 spaces;
see § 153.127 for waiting space requirements


Furniture and appliance establishments; household equipment; repair shops;
showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade; clothing and
shoe repair shops; laundries; hardware stores; machinery sales
establishments; and other similar uses
 
4 for each establishment plus 1 space for every 800 square feet of gross
floor area, less the area devoted to storage, processing, or manufacturing
(for which requirements see the entry under “Industrial; industrial
establishments...” below) and less the area devoted to utility rooms and
lavatories


Home occupation
 
1 for each residence in which an authorized home occupation exists in
addition to the 2 spaces required for the residence itself


Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners
 
1 for every 2 washing or dry cleaning machines


Miniature golf course
 
1 for each hole plus 1 for each employee


Mortuary establishments
 
1 for every 75 square feet of floor space in the slumber room, parlors, or
individual funeral service rooms


Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishments
 
1 for each occupancy unit, plus 1 for each employee, plus extra spaces for
dining rooms, ballrooms, or meeting rooms, based upon maximum occupancy code


Motor vehicle sales and service establishments, trailer sales and rental,
boat showrooms, and public garages
 
1 for every 400 square feet of gross floor area of sales room, plus 1 for
each employee, plus 1 for the owner and/or manager, plus 3 for each grease
rack or stall for servicing vehicles


Open air business establishments, except as listed in the provisions of this
table for miniature golf courses and motor vehicle sales and service above
 
1 for every 500 square feet of lot area for retail sales and retail uses


Photography studio
 
1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area


Quick oil change
 
1 for each employee plus one for each oil change bay; see § 153.127 for
waiting space requirements


Radio and television station
 
1 space for each employee on maximum shift plus 5 customer spaces


Rental establishments
 
See requirements as appropriate under the provisions for open air businesses
above and retail stores below


Retail stores, except as otherwise specified herein
 
1 for every 250 square feet of gross floor area


Self service storage facility
 
1 space per every 3 storage units with a minimum of 5 spaces for the complex


Shopping center or clustered commercial
 
5.5 for every 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area


Studios; dance, health, music, and other similar places of instruction and
recreation; pool or billiard parlors; roller or ice skating rinks; exhibition
halls and assembly halls without fixed seats
 
1 for every 40 square feet of gross floor area, less the area devoted to
storage, utility rooms, and lavatories


Theaters (drive-in)
 
1 per each customer vehicle, plus 10% of the total vehicle capacity for
waiting area, plus one for each employee


Industrial


Collision shops
 
1 for every 500 square feet of gross floor area (does not include storage of
wrecked or repaired vehicles)


Industrial establishments, including manufacturing, research, and testing
laboratories, creameries, bottling works, printing, plumbing or electrical
workshops
 
1 for every 500 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 per every 1.5 employee,
computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one
period during the day or night, whichever is greater


Wholesale establishments
 
1 for every 1,700 square feet of gross floor area or 1 for each employee,
computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one
period during the day or night, whichever is greater


Institutional


Campground - RV park
 
1 dust free 10-foot by 30-foot space for each campsite plus 1 parking space
for each employee


Churches, temples, or synagogues
 
1 for every 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of
assembly therein


Colleges and private schools
 
5 spaces for each classroom plus 1 for every 200 square feet of office area


Community center
 
1 for every 3 persons allowed, maximum occupant capacity


Elementary and junior high schools
 
1 for each teacher, employee, and administrator, in addition to the
requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall


Homes for the aged and convalescent homes
 
1 for every 3 beds


Hospitals
 
1 for every 3 beds, plus 1 space for every 3 staff members based upon total
staff at the hospital, or 1.2 spaces per bed, whichever is greater


Libraries, museums, and noncommercial art galleries
 
1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor area, less the area devoted to
book and art storage, utility rooms, and lavatories


Marinas, public or private
 
1 per 5 boat berths and 1 per 500 square feet of dry boat storage and 1 per
employee


Places of outdoor assembly
 
1 for every 3 seats, or 6 feet of benches


Pre-schools, nursery schools, day nurseries, child day care centers
 
1 for every 350 square feet of usable floor space, plus 1 space for each
faculty member, employee, or owner, plus 3 passenger vehicle spaces for
loading and unloading of children


Prison, detention facility
 
1 space for every 3 blocks


Private clubs or lodge halls
 
1 for every 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by the city, county, or state fire, building, or health
regulations


School auditorium
 
1 space for every 6 seats based on the maximum seating capacity in the main
place of assembly therein


Senior high schools
 
1 for every teacher, employee, administrator and 1 for each 10 students, in
addition to the requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall


Stadium, sports arenas, or similar place of outdoor assembly
 
1 for every 3 seats or 6 feet of benches


Substance abuse treatment center
 
1 space for every 3 beds


Tennis clubs, swimming pool clubs, or other similar uses
 
6 spaces for each court, plus 1 for each employee; should spectator area be
provided, 1 space for every 3 seats or 6 feet of benches


Theaters and auditoriums (indoor), other than school auditoriums
 
1 for every 3 seats, based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of
assembly therein, plus 1 for every 2 employees


Offices


Business offices; professional offices of lawyers, architects, engineers,
planners, accountants, or other professions
 
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per 333 square
feet of gross floor area


Drive-in financial institutions (banks, savings and loan offices, credit
unions) (see also § 153.127)
 
Same as requirements for financial institutions below plus waiting spaces
required in § 153.127


Financial institutions (banks, savings and loan offices, credit unions)
 
1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor area


Junk yard
 
1 space for each employee plus one for each 10,000 square feet of storage area


Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions; medical
centers or clinics
 
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per 200 square
feet of gross floor area


Recycling center
 
1 space for each employee plus 15 vehicle waiting spaces for drop off of
materials


Truck terminal
 
1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area, 1 space per employee, whichever
is greater


Residential


Adult foster care small and large group homes
 
1 space for every 3 beds


Bed and breakfast operation
 
1 for each occupancy unit plus 1 for each employee plus 2 for dwelling unit
of owner/operator


Halfway house
 
1 for each resident


Low-rent public housing
 
1 for each dwelling unit


Multiple dwellings
 
2 for each dwelling unit


One-family and two-family dwellings
 
2 for each dwelling unit


Rooming house
 
1 space for each roomer plus 1 additional space for the owner or manager


Senior citizens housing
 
1 for every 2 dwelling units


Senior citizens low-rent housing
 
1 for every 3 dwelling units




 



(Prior Code, § 153.116)  (Ord. D-1418, § 602, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001; Ord. D-1899,
passed 9-24-2001, effective 10-4-2001)



§ 153.127  OFF-STREET WAITING AREA FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.



   (A)   An OFF-STREET WAITING SPACE is defined as an area ten feet
wide by 24 feet long and shall not include the use of any public space,
street, alley, or sidewalk, and shall be located entirely within any RO-1,
B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, or M-3 District.



   (B)   On the same premises with every building, structure, or part
thereof erected and occupied for the purpose of serving customers in their
automobiles by means of a service window or similar arrangement where the
automobile engine is not turned off, there shall be provided off-street
waiting spaces.



 

Use Served by Drive-Through Lane
 
Minimum Stacking Requirements by Lane




Car wash (coin operated)
 
3 vehicles in advance of the washing beyond storage for 1.5 vehicles beyond
the washing bay as a drying vacuum area


Car wash (tunnel wash)
 
4 times the maximum capacity of the auto wash in advance of the tunnel and 3
vehicles beyond the tunnel for drying areas


Child care centers
 
1 vehicle per 15 children inclusive of the vehicle at the drop-off point; no
parking area or maneuvering lanes shall be permitted between the drop-off
point and the principal entrance to the building


Convenience market
 
3 vehicles per lane inclusive of the vehicle at the window


Dry cleaners
 
4 vehicles per lane inclusive of the vehicle at the window


Financial institution
 
6 vehicles per lane inclusive of the vehicle at the window


Quick oil change
 
4 vehicles per lane inclusive of the vehicle being served


Restaurant
 
The distance between the order board and the pick-up window shall store 4
vehicles, and storage shall be provided for 4 vehicles in advance of the menu
board (not including the vehicles at the pick-up window and menu board)


Other uses
 
For uses not listed above, the Planning Commission shall make the
determination of minimum required vehicle stacking spaces at the time of the
site plan review, based upon analysis by the City Traffic Engineer and City
Planner




 



   (C)   Drive-through lanes shall not utilize any space which is
necessary for adequate access to parking spaces from internal maneuvering
lanes.



   (D)   Drive-through lanes shall have a minimum centerline radius of
25 feet.



   (E)   Drive-through lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise
distinctively delineated.



(Prior Code, § 153.117)  (Ord. D-1418, § 603, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001)



§ 153.128  DEVELOPMENT AND STANDARDS—OFF-STREET PARKING A.



   (A)   “Off-Street Parking A” will be permitted in all R
Districts following approval of the City Planning Commission; however, the
Commission may approve “Off-Street Parking A” only when it is reasonably
indicated that business or industrial property in adjoining areas, either
contiguous or across a public right-of-way, is unavailable or impractical for
the development of an off-street parking facility, and there is compliance
with requirements of § 153.562.



   (B)   “Off-Street Parking A” shall be considered a conditional
accessory use to adjoining or adjacent business and industrial property and
as such is to be used for customer or employee vehicle parking of such
adjoining business or industry only. Further, penetration of residence
property for establishment of “Off-Street Parking A” shall not exceed 125
feet measured at right angles from the residential property line adjoining,
either contiguous or across a public right-of-way from a business or
industrial district, except as may be provided in an officially adopted city
community development plan or project, and shall be subject to the following
requirements.



      (1)   No repair or service to vehicles and no display of
vehicles for purpose of sale shall be carried on or permitted upon such
premises.



      (2)   No advertising signs shall be erected on the premises,
but one sign may be erected at each of the points of ingress or egress and
such sign may bear the name of the operator of the facility and the
enterprise it is intended to serve. Signs shall comply with the requirements
of § 153.153 and shall not exceed four feet in height.



      (3)   All land between the parking barriers referred to in
division (B)(7) below and the property lines, as well as the surface of the
parking area, shall be kept free from tall grass, weeds, rubbish, refuse, and
debris, and all unsurfaced areas shall be landscaped.



      (4)   The parking surface shall be covered with a pavement
having an asphalt or portland cement binder as required under §
153.125(B)(5) and shall be graded and drained to the storm sewer so as to
dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such areas. No
surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to drain onto
adjoining property.



      (5)   When lighting facilities are used, reflectors shall be
installed to reflect the light away from adjacent residential areas, and the
source of illumination shall not be more than 15 feet above the parking
surface.



      (6)   Side yards shall be maintained for a space of not less
than ten feet between the side lot lines of adjoining residential lots and
the parking area. The depth of the front yard or street side yard setback
line from the street as established for houses in any block in any given
residential area shall be continued and made applicable to parking space in
such residential area and it is unlawful to use the space between such
setback line and the sidewalk for the parking of motor vehicles; provided,
however, that the barrier in division (B)(7) below shall be located on the
setback line as required in this section. No setback is required where the
parking lot abuts onto a rear lot line of an adjoining residential lot,
provided that the barrier noted above does not allow vehicles to overhang
onto adjacent property.



      (7)   Whenever such parking area adjoins residential property
and/or a residential street or alley, an ornamental wood fence or masonry
wall not less than four feet in height shall be erected and maintained
between any required yard space and the area to be used for parking. On such
other locations where a protective barrier is required, the use of an
ornamental wood fence and masonry wall and/or dense shrubbery, not less than
five feet high, may be permitted by the City Planning Commission. Parking
areas of a type described in § 153.125(B)(6) shall be provided to prevent
vehicles striking said wall or shrubbery. All required walls, fences, or
other barriers shall be properly maintained and kept free of debris, signs or
any advertising whatsoever.



      (8)   Plans for the development of any parking facility must
be submitted in triplicate to the Department of Public Services and must be
approved by the Chief Inspector, City Engineer prior to the start of
construction. The construction shall be in accordance with the requirements
of the building regulations and this chapter, and such construction shall be
completed and approved by the Department of Public Services and Engineering
before actual use of the property as a parking lot.



      (9)   During the time the facility is closed and not available
for the parking thereon of motor vehicles, a suitable chain or gate shall be
placed across every exit and entrance for motor vehicles; such chain or gate
shall be securely locked and access to the lot effectively barred.



      (10)   The use of any loud noise-producing device or public
address system shall be prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 153.118)  (Ord. D-1418, § 604, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.129  DEVELOPMENT AND STANDARDS—BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   Off-street parking in RO-1, B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, or M-3
Districts shall conform to the following requirements.



   (A)   Plans for the development of any parking facility must be
submitted in triplicate to the Department of Public Services and must be
approved by the Chief Inspector, City Engineer prior to the start of
construction. The construction shall be in accordance with the requirements
of the building regulations and this chapter, and such construction shall be
completed and approved by the Chief Inspector and the City Traffic Engineer
before the actual use of the property as a parking lot. Parking structures
may be built in areas to satisfy parking requirements, subject to the area,
height, bulk, and placement regulations for buildings and structures in the
district wherein they are located.



   (B)   Adequate means of ingress and egress shall be provided to all
parking spaces and shown in the plan submitted.



   (C)   The parking surface shall be covered with a pavement having an
asphalt or portland cement binder, as required under § 153.125(B)(5), and
shall be graded and drained to the storm sewer so as to dispose of surface
water which might accumulate within or upon such area. No surface water from
such parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property.



   (D)   Necessary curbs or other protection for the public and for the
protection of adjoining properties, streets, and sidewalks shall be provided
and maintained.



   (E)   Whenever such parking facility adjoins residential property
and/or a residential street or alley, a wall, fence, or planting of such
height, character and design as will meet the approval of the City Planning
Commission shall be erected and maintained. Location of the wall or fence and
parking barrier facing a residential street shall be determined with due
regard for side yard requirements and building setback lines adjoining the
residence district as may be required in the particular business or
industrial zoning district. Parking barriers of a type described in §
153.125(B)(6) shall be provided to prevent vehicles striking the wall or
fence.



   (F)   All street boundaries of such parking facilities where
residential property is located on the opposite side of the street shall be
treated the same as set forth in § 153.128(B)(7).



   (G)   Signs as regulated under § 153.153 may be erected at each
point of ingress and egress indicating such access, the name of the operator,
and the enterprise it is intended to serve.



   (H)   All illumination of such parking facilities shall be deflected
away from residential areas and shall be installed in such manner as to allow
the reduction of the amount of light after normal parking hours each day.



   (I)   Parking lots shall have all parking spaces clearly delineated
on the surface of the lot to ensure maximum usability of the lot and suitable
passage into, through, or from the lot.



   (J)   Where street setback lines are provided by the platting
regulations or established through the Trafficways Plan, or amendment
thereto, such setback lines shall be maintained.



   (K)   In all cases where such parking facilities abut public
sidewalks, bumper guards of a type described in § 153.125(B)(6) shall be
placed thereon so that a motor vehicle cannot be driven or parked with any
part thereof extending into a public right-of-way.



   (L)   It is unlawful to park or store motor vehicles for continuous
periods of more than 48 hours. Such parking facility may not be used for the
storage or parking of junked or wrecked vehicles of any type, or used as a
storage area for industrial equipment or material, or used as a dump for
refuse of any description.



(Prior Code, § 153.119)  (Ord. D-1418, § 605, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.130  DEVELOPMENT AND STANDARDS—RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Off-street parking for uses located in residential districts, excluding
single-family dwellings, and including one-, two-, three-, and four-unit
residential structures, adult foster care, small and large group homes, home
occupations, family and group day care homes, bed and breakfast operations,
and boarding and rooming houses, shall conform to the following regulations.



   (A)   The parking surface shall be covered with a pavement having an
asphalt or portland cement binder, as required under § 153.125(B)(5), and
shall be graded and drained to a storm sewer so as to dispose of surface
water on the property.



   (B)   When lighting facilities are used, deflectors or shields shall
be installed to direct the light away from adjacent residence areas and the
source of illumination shall not be more than 15 feet above the parking
surface.



   (C)   All open parking areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties by means of a brick wall, screen fencing, evergreens, and/or other
barriers to minimize noise from motor vehicles and to prevent the direct
glare of headlights from falling on adjacent properties.



(Prior Code, § 153.120)  (Ord. D-1418, § 606, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective 3-1-2001)



§ 153.131  OFF-STREET PARKING LAYOUT AND DESIGN.



   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in
accordance with the following minimum requirements:



 

Parking Pattern
 
Maneuvering Lane Width
 
Parking Space Width
 
Parking Space Length
 
Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane
 
Total Width of Two Tiers of Space Plus Maneuvering Lane


0 degrees parallel parking
 
12 ft.
 
8 ft.
 
23 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
28 ft.


45 degrees
 
12 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
18.5 ft.
 
33 ft.
 
47 ft.


60 degrees
 
16 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
18.5 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
54 ft.


90 degrees
 
26 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
18.5 ft.
 
44.5 ft.
 
63 ft.



 







(Prior Code, § 153.121)  (Ord. D-1418, § 607, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.132  OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   On the same premises with every building, structure, or part
thereof erected and occupied for industrial establishments, storage, goods
display, department store, hotel, high rise apartment building, market,
hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the
receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, there shall
be provided and maintained on the lot, or within such building or structure,
adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to
avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys.



   (B)   Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately
provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 50 feet, and 15 feet height
clearance, according to the following schedule:



 

Gross Floor Area (In Square Feet)
 
Loading and Unloading Spaces Required in Terms of Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area


Commercial
 
Industrial




0—5,000
 
None
 
None


5,001—20,000
 
1
 
1 + 1/5,000 in excess of 5,000


20,001—50,000
 
1 + 1/20,000 in excess of 20,000
 
3 + 1/15,000 in excess of 20,000


50,001—100,000
 
1 + 1/20,000 in excess of 20,000
 
5 + 1/10,000 in excess of 50,000


100,001—300,000
 
5 + 1/100,000 in excess of 100,000
 
10 + 1/100,000 in excess of 100,000


300,001—500,000
 
10 + 1/100,000 in excess of 300,000
 
10 + 1/100,000 in excess of 300,000


Over 500,000
 
12 + 1/250,000 in excess of 500,000
 
14 + 1/150,000 in excess of 500,000




 



   (C)   No loading space shall be located closer than 50 feet from any
residentially zoned district unless located within a completely enclosed
building or enclosed on all sides facing a residential zoned district by a
solid masonry wall or ornamental fence of a type approved by the City
Planning Commission not less than six feet in height. Lights used to
illuminate loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect away from
adjacent areas.



(Prior Code, § 153.122)  (Ord. D-1418, § 608, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



SIGNS



§ 153.145  FINDINGS.



   The City Planning Commission finds that signs have an obvious impact on
the character and quality of the city. Further, it finds that failure to
regulate their size, location, and construction has in specific instances
resulted in poor identification of individual businesses, deterioration of
the business and residential areas of the city, intensification of the
conflicts between different types of land use, reduction in the effectiveness
of traffic control devices, and safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists.



(Prior Code, § 153.135)  (Ord. D-1418, § 701, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.146  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate signs and
outdoor advertising in a manner which will minimize their harmful effects
while permitting latitude for creative and effective advertising and
identification. To achieve this purpose, this subchapter has the following
objectives:



      (1)   To prevent the placement of on-site signs in a manner
that will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent businesses;



      (2)   To keep the number of on-site signs at a level
reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products;



      (3)   To keep on-site signs within a reasonable scale with
respect to the building to which they relate;



      (4)   To prevent off-site signs from conflicting with
business, residential, and public land uses;



      (5)   To keep an area adjacent to streets clear of signs which
might obstruct the view of motorists;



      (6)   To reduce the visual distractions for motorists on the
streets; and



      (7)   To control the use of signs and of their motion, colors,
illumination, and their insistent and distracting demand for attention which
can be injurious to the mental and physical well being of the public and can
be destructive to adjacent property values and to natural beauty.



   (B)   Accordingly, it has become necessary in the public interest to
regulate the sizes, location, character, and other pertinent features of all
signs in the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.136)  (Ord. D-1418, § 702, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.147  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   Signs are prohibited which:



   (A)   Contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene,
indecent, or immoral character such as will offend the public morals or
decency;



   (B)   Contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or
signal or contain the words “stop”, “go slow”, “caution”,
“danger”, “warning”, or similar words. Traffic directional signs in a
private parking area are exempted from this provision;



   (C)   Are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic
control device or emergency vehicle;



   (D)   Obstruct a motorist’s view of any traffic signs, street
sign, or traffic signal;



   (E)   Contain or consist of banners, pennants, pinwheels, ribbons,
streamers, strings of light bulbs other than holiday decorations or similar
devices. Upon site plan review, the City Planning Commission may approve
specific modifications of this provision; and



   (F)   Have a moving part except for the conveyance of noncommercial
information.



(Prior Code, § 153.137)  (Ord. D-1418, § 703, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.148  VIOLATIONS AND REMOVAL THEREOF.



   (A)   Any sign erected, altered, or converted subsequent to the
passage of this subchapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof
is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.



   (B)   Upon discovery of a violation of this subchapter the Chief
Inspector or his or her deputies shall provide written notice to the person
in possession of the premises upon which the sign is erected as is reasonably
available and to the owner of the premises upon which the sign is erected as
shown by the records of the City Assessor. Such notice shall state the
defects found upon inspection of the sign and order the sign to be brought
into compliance with this subchapter or removed.



   (C)   The Chief Inspector or his or her representative shall also
post a copy of such notice upon the violative sign or upon the premises upon
which the sign is erected. Such notice shall be sufficiently weatherproof to
withstand normal exposure to the elements and shall be readily visible from
the nearest public thoroughfare.



   (D)   If the violative sign has not been removed or brought into
compliance with this subchapter within 30 days from the issuance of the order
specified in division (B) above, the Chief Inspector or his or her deputies
shall provide notice to the person in possession of the premises upon which
the violative sign is erected and to the owner of premises upon which the
sign is erected to appear at a hearing before a hearing officer and to show
cause why the sign should not be considered to be in violation of this
subchapter. Notice shall be provided in the same manner as in divisions (B)
and (C) above. The hearing shall not be less than ten days from the posting
of the notice.



   (E)   The hearing officer shall determine whether the sign involved
is in violation of this chapter based on competent evidence and testimony.
Section 2-106 of Chapter 2-1 of the Michigan Building Code, as amended, shall
govern the appointment of the hearing officer and the conduct of the hearing
except as modified herein.



   (F)   If the hearing officer determines that the sign involved is in
violation of this subchapter, he or she shall order the action necessary to
bring the sign into compliance. Based upon competent evidence and testimony,
the hearing officer shall also establish a reasonable time by which the
requirements of the order shall commence and shall be completed.



   (G)   If the decision and order provided for in division (F) above
are not complied with in the specified time, the hearing officer may cause
the violative sign to be removed and destroyed. The cost of removal,
destruction, and disposal of the sign may be charged against the premises in
accordance with the provisions of § 33.21. The city may also rely upon the
remedies specified in § 153.999.



   (H)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Chief Inspector from
ordering the summary removal of any sign presenting an immediate threat to
the safety of the public.



(Prior Code, § 153.138)  (Ord. D-1418, § 704, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.149  ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   Signs in residential districts may be illuminated with not
more than 200 watts of non-flashing white light. Such lights must be shielded
so that they illuminate only the surface of the sign.



   (B)   No sign shall have blinking, flashing, rotating, or fluttering
illumination.



   (C)   No sign shall be illuminated in a manner which changes light
intensity, brightness, or color.



   (D)   No sign shall have colored lights which may be confused with
or construed as traffic control devices or emergency vehicles.



   (E)   No sign shall be illuminated in such manner that the direct or
reflected light from the sign creates a traffic hazard for motor vehicle
operators on public thoroughfares.



(Prior Code, § 153.139)  (Ord. D-1418, § 705, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.150  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this
subchapter which do not meet the standards thereof may be maintained except
as hereafter provided.



   (B)   No nonconforming signs:



      (1)   Shall be changed to another nonconforming sign;



      (2)   Shall have any changes made in the message displayed
unless the sign is specifically designed for periodic change of message; or



      (3)   Shall be structurally altered so as to prolong the life
of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type, or design of the sign
unless such change renders the sign conforming.



   (C)   If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is
located changes the location of a building, property line, or sign or changes
the use of a building so that any sign on the premises is rendered
nonconforming, such sign must be removed or made to conform to this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.140)  (Ord. D-1418, § 706, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.151  SIGNS FOR NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   On-site signs for any building or land use not conforming to
the zoning provisions for the district in which it is located shall not
exceed the following size limitations, whichever results in the larger sign
area:



      (1)   One-half square foot of sign area for each lineal foot
of building frontage or one-fourth square foot of sign area for each lineal
foot of lot frontage, whichever is greater, not to exceed a maximum of 25
square feet in area; or



      (2)   The maximum sign area permitted for the zoning district
in which the sign is located.



   (B)   Off-site signs shall comply with all the provisions of the
district in which the nonconforming use is located.



(Prior Code, § 153.141)  (Ord. D-1418, § 707, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.152  OFF-SITE SIGNS.



   (A)   The maximum area per sign face of an off-site sign shall not
exceed:



      (1)   Three hundred fifty square feet if the sign is located
within a B-2 District;



      (2)   Seven hundred fifty square feet if the sign is located
in an M-1 or M-2 District; and



      (3)   There is no maximum area limitation if the sign is
located in a M-3 District.



   (B)   Off-site signs shall not be located in any required yard area.



   (C)   No off-site sign structure shall be closer than 300 feet to
another off-site sign structure.



   (D)   Off-site signs shall comply with the height limitations of
this subchapter for the respective zoning districts in which the signs are
located.



(Prior Code, § 153.142)  (Ord. D-1418, § 708, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.153  AUXILIARY PARKING LOT SIGNS.



   (A)   An auxiliary parking lot in conjunction with an adjacent use
may have one on-site identification sign per adjacent street. Each such sign
shall not exceed four square feet in area.



   (B)   The area of signs indicating an entrance or exit shall not
exceed four square feet in area.



   (C)   The area of signs indicating other parking instructions or
traffic direction information shall not exceed three square feet in area.



   (D)   Such signs may be located anywhere within the limits of the
premises subject to the height restriction of the zoning district in which
located.



(Prior Code, § 153.143)  (Ord. D-1418, § 709, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.154  PUBLIC SIGNS.



   Public signs are exempted from the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.144)  (Ord. D-1418, § 710, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.155  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be permitted in any zoning district:



   (A)   Unilluminated signs which identify a construction project and
the architects, engineers, contractors, and other firms or individuals
involved with such construction project. However, such signs shall not
include product advertisements or endorsements. Such signs shall be confined
to the construction site and must be removed within 14 days from the
beginning of the intended use of the project. The total area of all such
signs is limited to 16 square feet per firm;



   (B)   Political signs announcing political and public issues
contained on a ballot, and other pertinent data thereto are permitted
provided the maximum area of all such signs on one lot shall not exceed 32
square feet. All such signs designated as political signs shall be removed
within seven days of the election for which they were erected;



   (C)   Unilluminated signs pertaining to the availability for sale,
lease, or rent of a lot or building existing thereon, and “sold” signs
pertaining to the sale of a lot or building existing thereon provided that
the total area of all such signs on any one lot shall not exceed six square
feet and provided further that each such sign shall be removed immediately
after seven days following closing;



   (D)   (1)   Unilluminated signs pertaining to the sale, lease, or
rent of subdivisions, planned shopping centers, and other developments
consisting of one acre or more shall be in compliance with the following
table:



 

Land Size
 
Total Number Signs
 
Total Maximum Area/Sign


Over one but less than six acres
 
1
 
100 sq. ft.


Over six but less than 20 acres
 
2
 
100 sq. ft.


Over 20 acres
 
3
 
100 sq. ft.



 



      (2)   Such signs shall be removed within two years except that
any such sign may be approved for one additional year by the Board of Appeals
on Zoning after a duly advertised public hearing. Each such sign shall be
removed not more than 60 days after the sale, lease, rent, or development of
the property.



   (E)   Special event signs or banners approved by the City Council in
conjunction with an exhibition authorized in accordance with § 96.021,
provided that all signs and banners are removed immediately after the end of
the exhibition;



   (F)   Interior signs displayed by a business occupying not more than
one-fourth of the ground level window area of said business. No such sign
shall be displayed for more than 15 days in any 30-day period. Signs
displayed for longer than this time period shall be considered permanent
signs and computed in sign area governed by other sections of this subchapter;



   (G)   One unilluminated rummage sale sign not exceeding three square
feet in area provided any such sign is removed promptly after the end of the
sale;



   (H)   All such signs may be erected anywhere within the limits of
the property;



   (I)   No such sign displayed flatly against the surface of a
building shall project above the roof line of the associated structure. No
other such sign shall extend more than ten feet above the average grade at
the base of the sign; and



   (J)   Unless otherwise provided, any such sign may be illuminated in
accordance with § 153.149.



(Prior Code, § 153.145)  (Ord. D-1418, § 711, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1665, passed 10-26-1992, effective 11-5-1992; Ord. D-1941,
passed 12-30-2002, effective 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.156  SPECIAL PURPOSE TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Special purpose temporary signs shall be allowed in any zoning
district, providing that each such sign shall require a permit and be subject
to the following restrictions.



   (A)   Time limit. A special purpose temporary sign may be displayed
for no more than the number of days specified below, commencing on the issue
date of the permit. At the conclusion of the permit period, the special
purpose temporary sign must be removed from the parcel or stored indoors.



      (1)   Residential properties. Special purpose temporary sign
permits shall be valid for a period of two consecutive days and no more than
three special purpose temporary signs shall be allowed per residential parcel
per calendar year.



      (2)   Nonresidential properties. Special purpose temporary
signs may be placed on a parcel for no more than 30 days in a calendar year
and no more than four special purpose temporary sign permits shall be issued
per parcel per calendar year.



   (B)   Size. A special purpose temporary sign shall be no larger than
32 square feet.



   (C)   Location. A special purpose temporary sign is subject to the
height and setback restrictions for signs in the zoning district in which it
is placed. No off-site special purpose temporary signs are allowed.



   (D)   Illumination. Illumination of special purpose temporary signs
is permitted, but only in accordance with § 153.149.



   (E)   Permits. A permit fee, as established by the City Manager with
Council approval, shall be charged, except for residential parcels, each time
such sign is placed on the parcel.



   (F)   Tagging. All special purpose temporary signs shall display a
tag, in a place conspicuous to inspectors, indicating the name of the permit
holder, the permit number, the date the permit was issued and when it
expires, said tag to be provided by the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.146)  (Ord. D-1418, § 711.1, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1654, passed 4-27-1992, effective 5-7-1992)



§ 153.157  SIGNS IN R-1 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any R-1 District, only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the building involved or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Signs indicating the names and addresses of the
occupants not to exceed a total of two square feet;



      (2)   One temporary announcement sign or permanent bulletin
board, with changeable copy, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and one
identification sign not to exceed ten square feet in area;



      (3)   One identification sign for each permitted use after
special approval, except a church or hospital, not to exceed four square feet
in area; and



      (4)   A master plan for signage for each hospital shall be
submitted for approval by the City Planning Commission. Once approved by the
Commission, minor variations in size and height per sign (+/-) five square
feet in area may be approved administratively. The procedure for filing the
master signage plan shall be the same as the procedure for site plan review.
There will not be a fee charged for review of minor variations approved
administratively. The maximum amount of signage allowed for any hospital will
be determined during review of the master sign plan, taking into
consideration the size of the hospital campus, specialized services provided,
location of parking facilities, and traffic directional needs.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   No sign displayed flatly against the surface of a building
shall project above the roof line of the associated structure. No other sign
shall extend more than six feet above the average grade at the base of the
sign.



(Prior Code, § 153.147)  (Ord. D-1418, § 712, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1823, passed 7-13-1998, effective 7-27-1998; Ord. D-1845,
passed 10-11-1999, effective 10-21-1999)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.158  SIGNS IN R-1A DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any R-1A District only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the building involved or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1 Districts as permitted therein;



      (2)   One identification sign each for all other permitted
uses, excluding home occupations, not to exceed four square feet in area
except as otherwise specifically provided; and



      (3)   One identification sign for each university, college,
seminary, golf course, private museum, or agricultural or industrial
exposition, not to exceed 20 square feet in area.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   The height restriction on signs in R-1A Districts shall be the
same as specified for R-1 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.148)  (Ord. D-1418, § 713, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.159  SIGNS IN R-2 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any R-2 District, only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the building involved or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1 and R-1A Districts as
permitted therein;



      (2)   One identification sign for each permitted day care
center or planned mobile home park development not to exceed 12 square feet
in area; and



      (3)   One identification sign for each university, college,
seminary, golf course, private museum, or agricultural or industrial
exposition not to exceed 20 square feet in area.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   The maximum height of signs in R-2 Districts shall be the same
as specified for R-1 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.149)  (Ord. D-1418, § 714, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.160  SIGNS IN R-3 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any R-3 District, only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the building involved or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, or R-2 Districts as
permitted therein;



      (2)   One identification sign for each tourist home, rooming
house, boarding house, or home occupation not to exceed two square feet in
area; and



      (3)   One identification sign for each permitted membership
club or charitable or other welfare institution not to exceed eight square
feet in area.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   The height restriction on signs in R-3 Districts shall be the
same as specified for R-1 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.150)  (Ord. D-1418, § 715, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.161  SIGNS IN R-4 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any R-4 District, only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the building involved or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3 Districts
as permitted therein; and



      (2)   One identification sign for each high rise apartment not
to exceed 16 square feet in area.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   The height restriction on signs in R-4 Districts shall be the
same as specified for R-1 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.151)  (Ord. D-1418, § 716, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.162  SIGNS IN RO-1 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any RO-1 District, only the following on-site signs may be
displayed either flatly against the surface of the associated building or at
least ten feet from any street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, or R-4
Districts as permitted therein; and



      (2)   One identification sign for each membership club,
charitable or welfare institution, private museum, or special approval office
use not to exceed one-half square foot in area for each lineal foot of
building frontage or one-fourth square foot in area for each lineal foot of
lot frontage, whichever is greater. However, no sign shall exceed a maximum
of 25 square feet in area.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any sign permitted may be
illuminated in accordance with § 153.149.



   (C)   The height restriction on signs in RO-1 Districts shall be the
same as specified for R-1 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.152)  (Ord. D-1418, § 717, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.163  SIGNS IN B-1 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any B-1 District, only the following on-site identification
signs may be displayed provided no portion of such sign is located nearer
than nine feet from any street lot line unless otherwise provided:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RO-1
Districts as permitted therein except as modified in this section with regard
to setback;



      (2)   Signs facing the front lot line whose area does not
exceed one and one-half square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage
or one-half square foot for each lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever is
greater;



      (3)   Signs located on corner lots facing other than the front
lot line whose area does not exceed 50% of one and one-half square feet for
each lineal foot of building length along the respective lot line or 50% of
one-half square foot for each lineal foot of lot length along the respective
lot line, whichever is greater;



      (4)   Signs on the vertical faces of marquees provided that no
such sign shall project above or below the marquee if the marquee is located
over the required yard area or public right-of-way;



      (5)   Signs attached to the building or erected separately
subject to the setback requirements of this section; and



      (6)   Signs erected upon the premises of an automobile service
station subject to the size limitation of divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) above
as long as the sign is within the limits of the property for each abutting
street provided that no portion intended for visual communication is less
than 12 feet from grade. The nine foot setback does not apply to automobile
service station signs.



   (B)   Any sign permitted may be illuminated in accordance with §
153.149.



   (C)   No sign displayed on, attached to, or over a building shall
project above the eave line of the associated structure. No other sign shall
extend more than 35 feet above the average grade at the base of the sign.



   (D)   The total area of all signs permitted for any property use,
including corner lots, shall not exceed 200 square feet.



(Prior Code, § 153.153)  (Ord. D-1418, § 718, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.164  SIGNS IN B-1A DISTRICTS.



   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1, or B-1 Districts
as permitted therein is allowed in a B-1A District.



(Prior Code, § 153.154)  (Ord. D-1418, § 719, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.165  SIGNS IN B-2 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any B-2 District, only the following on-site identification
signs may be displayed provided no portion of such sign projects more than
one foot beyond the street lot line:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1,
B-1, or B-1A Districts as permitted therein except as modified in this
section with regard to setback;



      (2)   Signs facing the front lot line whose area does not
exceed three square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage or one
square foot for each lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever is greater; and



      (3)   Signs facing other than the front lot line whose area
does not exceed 50% of three square feet in area for each lineal foot of
building length along the respective lot line or 50% of one square foot in
area for each lineal foot of lot length along the respective lot line,
whichever is greater.



   (B)   Any sign permitted may be illuminated in accordance with §
153.149.



   (C)   The height restrictions on signs in B-2 Districts shall be the
same as specified for B-1 Districts.



   (D)   The total area of all on-site signs permitted for any property
use, including corner lots, shall not exceed 350 square feet.



   (E)   Off-site signs are permitted in accordance with § 153.152.



(Prior Code, § 153.155)  (Ord. D-1418, § 720, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.166  SIGNS IN B-3 AND RMU DISTRICTS.



   (A)   With the exception of off-site signs, any other sign permitted
in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1, B-1, or B-2 Districts as permitted therein
is allowed in a B-3 or RMU District.



   (B)   Off-site signs are not permitted in B-3 or RMU Districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.156)  (Ord. D-1418, § 721, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983; Ord. D-1920, passed 6-3-2002, effective 6-13-2002)



§ 153.167  SIGNS IN M-1 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any M-1 District, only the following on-site signs are
permitted provided no portion of such sign is located closer to the street
lot line than the required front yard setback as specified in § 153.440 for
the M-1 District:



      (1)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R4, RO-1,
B-1, B-1A, B-2 or B-3 Districts as permitted therein except as modified in
this section with regard to setback; and



      (2)   One on-site sign per use facing each lot line subject to
the following size limitations:



         (a)   The on-site sign facing the front lot line shall
not exceed three square feet in area for each lineal foot of lot frontage, or
one square foot in area for each lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever is
greater; and



         (b)   The on-site signs facing other than the front lot
line shall not exceed 50% of three square feet in area for each lineal foot
of building length along the respective lot line or 50% of one square feet in
area for each lineal foot of lot length along the respective lot line,
whichever is greater.



   (B)   Any sign permitted may be illuminated in accordance with §
153.149.



   (C)   There is no maximum height for signs in M-1 Districts.



   (D)   The total area of all on-site signs permitted for any property
use, including corner lots, shall not exceed 750 square feet.



   (E)   Off-site signs are permitted in accordance with § 153.152.



   (F)   Signs may be attached to or project from the surface or roof
of the building involved or may be erected separately.



(Prior Code, § 153.157)  (Ord. D-1418, § 722, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.168  SIGNS IN M-2 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1, B-1,
B-1A, B-2, B-3, or M-1 Districts as permitted therein is allowed in an M-2
District provided that no portion of such sign is located closer to the
street lot line than the front yard setback as specified in § 153.440 for
the M-2 District.



   (B)   Any sign permitted may be illuminated in accordance with §
153.149.



   (C)   There is no maximum height for signs in M-2 Districts.



   (D)   The total area of all on-site signs permitted for any property
use, including corner lots, shall not exceed 750 square feet.



   (E)   Off-site signs are permitted in accordance with § 153.152.



   (F)   Signs may be attached to or project from the surface or roof
of the building involved or may be erected separately.



(Prior Code, § 153.158)  (Ord. D-1418, § 723, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.169  SIGNS IN M-3 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Any sign permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO-1, B-1,
B-1A, B-2, B-3, M-1, or M-2 Districts is allowed in an M-3 District provided
no portion of such sign is located closer to the street lot line than the
front yard setback as specified in § 153.440 for the M-3 District.



   (B)   Any sign permitted may be illuminated in accordance with §
153.149.



   (C)   There is no maximum height for signs in M-3 Districts.



   (D)   There is no maximum area for signs in M-3 Districts.



   (E)   Off-site signs are permitted in accordance with § 153.152.



   (F)   Signs may be attached to or project from the surface or roof
of the building involved or may be erected separately.



(Prior Code, § 153.159)  (Ord. D-1418, § 724, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.180  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   The R-1, Single-Family Residential District is established as
a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings.



   (B)   For the R-1 District, in promoting the general purpose of this
subchapter, the specific intent of this district is:



      (1)   To encourage the construction of and the continued use
of the land for single-family dwellings;



      (2)   To prohibit business, commercial, or industrial use of
land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with
development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district;



      (3)   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that
would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this subchapter;
and



      (4)   To discourage any land use which would generate traffic
on minor or local streets other than normal traffic generated by the
residences on those streets.



(Prior Code, § 153.170)  (Ord. D-1418, § 801, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.181  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the R-1 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings;



   (B)   Municipal, county, state, or federal administrative or service
buildings;



   (C)   Planned developments as provided in §§ 153.400 through
153.406;



   (D)   Public, parochial, or private elementary, junior, and senior
high schools, and colleges offering courses in general education, not
operated for profit;



   (E)   Publicly-owned and operated parks, play fields, golf courses,
community center buildings, museums, libraries, and other community
facilities;



   (F)   Home occupations as defined in § 153.021, as regulated under
§ 153.069(D);



   (G)   An adult foster care family home providing supervision or
care, or both, to six or fewer persons. This division (G) shall not apply to
adult foster care facilities licensed by a state agency for care and
treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional
institutions. At least 45 days before licensing a residential facility herein
described, the state licensing agency shall notify the Zoning Administrator
of the city where the proposed facility is to be located to review the number
of existing or proposed similar adult foster care family homes whose property
lines are within a 1,500-foot radius of the property lines of the location of
the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall, when a proposed facility is to
be located within the city, give appropriate notification of the proposal to
license the facility to those residents whose property lines are within a
1,500-foot radius of the property lines of the proposed facility. A state
licensing agency shall not license a proposed adult foster care family home
when another such facility exists within a 1,500-foot radius, unless
elsewhere permitted by this subchapter, of the proposed location or when the
issuance of the license would substantially contribute to an excessive
concentration of adult foster care family homes within the city. The
foregoing notice and distance requirements shall not apply to state licensed
residential facilities caring for four or fewer minors. These regulations
shall not apply to a state licensed adult foster care residential facility
licensed before March 31, 1977, or to a residential facility which was in the
process of being developed and licensed before March 31, 1977, if approval
had been granted by the City Council; (Refer also to §§ 153.455 through
153.491 for applicable standards.)



   (H)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses, subject to requirements of § 153.070;



   (L)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (J)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132; and



   (K)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.171)  (Ord. D-1418, § 802, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.182  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses shall be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Churches, convents, rectories, and other facilities normally
incidental thereto, subject to site design standards established in §§
153.455 through 153.491;



   (B)   Hospitals, subject to site standards established in §§
153.455 through 153.491;



   (C)   “Off-Street Parking A” land use pursuant to standards in
§ 153.128;



   (D)   Private adult education facilities, and athletic or community
centers, not operated for profit;



   (E)   Private parks, country clubs, golf courses, and golf driving
ranges if in connection with a golf course or country club, subject to
standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491; and



   (F)   (1)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange
buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, municipal pumping
stations, and gas regulator stations without open storage yards, when in
addition to meeting other requirements, the proposed installation can be
shown to be reasonably necessary to the orderly development of the
surrounding residential area.



      (2)   In the case of electric overhead supply systems it shall
be shown that the location and alignment being requested is the arrangement
most compatible with the residential areas involved, necessary to the
regional power network, and that it is extremely unreasonable to locate such
facility entirely in business or industrial districts.



      (3)   Nothing in this division (F) shall authorize overhead
supply systems in conduit districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.172)  (Ord. D-1418, § 803, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.183  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a R-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted of
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083.



(Prior Code, § 153.173)  (Ord. D-1418, § 804, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.184  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.174)  (Ord. D-1418, § 805, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



R-1A, AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.195  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The R-1A, Agricultural Residential District is established as a
district in which the principal use of land is for open agricultural land
use, which areas are also designated for well-planned low density residential
and institutional uses when development consistent with the city’s
Comprehensive Development Plan is proposed.



(Prior Code, § 153.190)  (Ord. D-1418, § 901, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.196  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the R-1A District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the R-1 District;



   (B)   Farms (except commercial animal, poultry, or pet enterprises),
gardens, plant material nurseries, and greenhouses, provided no buildings,
yards, or runs for the care, shelter, or confinement of animals or fowl or
the storage of manure is located nearer than 100 feet from a lot line;



   (C)   Golf courses, including clubhouse facilities and service
buildings;



   (D)   Universities, colleges, and seminaries, including fraternity
and sorority houses, and customary recreational facilities in connection with
such use located on the same property;



   (E)   Home occupations as defined in § 153.021 and regulated under
§ 153.069(D);



   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses, subject to requirements of § 153.070;



   (G)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (H)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132; and



   (I)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.191)  (Ord. D-1418, § 902, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.197  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses shall be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   All permitted uses after special approval in the R-1 District;



   (B)   Agricultural and industrial expositions, thoroughbred horse
racing, harness racing;



   (C)   Cemeteries, including necessary buildings, subject to
standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491; and



   (D)   Private museums.



(Prior Code, § 153.192)  (Ord. D-1418, § 903, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.198  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a R-1A District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083.



(Prior Code, § 153.193)  (Ord. D-1418, § 904, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 153.199  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.194)  (Ord. D-1418, § 905, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



R-2, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.210  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The R-2, Two-Family Residential District is established as a district
in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, and certain low density multiple dwellings subject to site
standards intended to not overcrowd the neighborhood, congest local streets,
or otherwise adversely effect the character of established neighborhoods.



(Prior Code, § 153.210)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1002, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.211  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the R-2 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the R-1 District;



   (B)   Two-family dwellings not to exceed one two-family dwelling per
lot, except in the case of a multiple dwelling maintained since January 1,
1950, in which event said multiple dwelling may be continued to the extent so
maintained for a continuous period since January 1, 1950, and shall hereafter
be subject to all the provisions pertaining to legally established
nonconforming uses. The burden of proof as to the date of establishment of
any use provided for in this section shall be upon the owner;



   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (D)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (E)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132; and



   (F)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.211)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1002, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.212  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses shall be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   All permitted uses after special approval in the R-1 District;



   (B)   Construction of new or conversion of existing structures to
contain three or four dwelling units; (Refer also to § 153.440(G).)



   (C)   Private museums;



   (D)   Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child day care centers,
subject to site standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491; and



   (E)   Adult foster care small group homes.



(Prior Code, § 153.212)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1003, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.213  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a R-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083.



(Prior Code, § 153.213)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1004, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.214  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.214)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1005, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



R-3, LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE DWELLING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.225  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The R-3, Low Density Multiple Dwelling Residential District is designed
primarily for single-family and two-family dwellings and low density
multiple-family dwellings. It is designed to promote a harmonious mixture of
detached and group housing and related education, cultural, and religious
land uses in a basically residential environment.



(Prior Code, § 153.230)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1101, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.226  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the R-3 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the R-2 District;



   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings, including apartments, townhouses,
terraces, and row houses provided all such dwellings shall have at least one
property line abutting a major or secondary thoroughfare as classified in the
city’s Trafficways Plan, or have vehicular access to such a thoroughfare
through property zoned R-3 or R-4. All ingress and egress shall be directly
onto said thoroughfare;



   (C)   Adult foster care small and large group homes subject to
standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (D)   Boarding or rooming houses, lodging houses, and tourist homes
subject to standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (E)   Community garages, provided that not more than two commercial
vehicles of not over one and one-half ton capacity are housed therein;



   (F)   Convalescent and nursing homes subject to standards in §§
153.455 through 153.491;



   (G)   Convents and nurses homes;



   (H)   Day care centers subject to standards established in §§
153.455 through 153.491;



   (I)   Hospitals subject to site design standards in §§ 153.455
through 153.491;



   (J)   Private museums;



   (K)   Private school and educational institutions;



   (L)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (M)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (N)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132; and



   (O)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.231)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1102, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.227  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   All permitted uses after special approval in the R-1 and R-2
Districts;



   (B)   Membership clubs, or fraternal or recreational buildings not
operated for profit;



   (C)   Mobile home park developments subject to standards established
in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (D)   “Off-Street Parking A” land use pursuant to standards in
§ 153.128; and



   (E)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations, municipal pumping stations and
gas regulator stations without open storage yards when, in addition to
meeting other requirements, the proposed installation can be shown to be
reasonably necessary to the orderly development of the surrounding
residential area. In the case of electric overhead supply systems it shall be
shown that the location and alignment being requested is the arrangement most
compatible with the residential areas involved, necessary to the regional
power network, and that it is extremely unreasonable to locate such facility
entirely in business or industrial districts. Nothing in this division (E)
shall authorize overhead supply systems in conduit districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.232)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1103, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.228  SCREENING REQUIREMENT.



   Where required parking lots of any use permitted in an R-3 District are
erected such that the headlights of the cars in the parking lot will face
into any other residential zoned property, a solid ornamental wood fence or
masonry wall, a minimum of three feet in height, shall be required along that
parking lot boundary line facing the residentially zoned property.



(Prior Code, § 153.233)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1104, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.229  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a R-3 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. Site plan review authority
of preliminary plans of mobile home parks, as authorized under the Mobile
Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L. §§ 125.2301 et
seq., shall follow the procedures in § 153.083, except that said preliminary
plans need not include detailed construction plans, rather they should depict
location of the site in relation to surrounding properties, layout, general
design, and other information desirable to fully illustrate the character of
the project. If the plan meets the specific standards (e.g., setback,
parking, buffers) in this chapter, the site plan shall be approved.



(Prior Code, § 153.234)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1105, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.230  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, shall be as provided in §§ 153.084
and 153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.235)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1106, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



R-4, HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE DWELLING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.245  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The R-4, High Density Multiple Dwelling Residential District is
designed to permit a more intensive residential use of land with various
types of multiple dwellings, including high rise apartment structures, and
related institutional uses. These districts would generally be located
adjacent to streets permitting good accessibility, and should be compatible
with adjoining single-family neighborhoods. Various types and sizes of
residential units, for ownership or rental, would be provided at planned
locations in the community to meet the needs of the different age and family
groups in the community.



(Prior Code, § 153.250)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1201, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.246  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the R-4 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the R-3 District;



   (B)   High rise apartment structures;



   (C)   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (D)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (E)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132;



   (F)   Incidental services within high rise apartment buildings for
the convenience of occupants, such as news, tobacco, or candy stands,
delicatessens, restaurants, personal service shops, and similar uses,
provided the following conditions are filled:



      (1)   At least 75 dwelling units shall be contained within the
apartment building or apartment building group;



      (2)   A total of not more than 2% of the gross floor area of
the building shall be used;



      (3)   All such incidental services shall be situated within
the interior of the building so that no part thereof shall be directly
accessible to the general public or to tenants from any street, or public or
private way;



      (4)   No sign or window display shall be discernible or
visible from a sidewalk, street, or public or private way; and



      (5)   Such incidental services shall not be provided on the
same floor as dwelling units are situated, unless separated therefrom by a
fireproof wall as provided in the building regulations.



   (G)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction use.



(Prior Code, § 153.251)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1202, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.247  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562: all permitted uses after special approval in a R-3 District.



(Prior Code, § 153.252)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1203, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.248  SCREENING REQUIREMENT.



   Where required parking lots of any use permitted in an R-4 District are
erected such that the headlights of the cars in the parking lot will face
into any residentially zoned property, a solid masonry wall or other barrier
of opaque material, a minimum of three feet in height, shall be required
along that parking lot boundary line facing the residentially zoned property.



(Prior Code, § 153.253)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1204, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.249  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a R-4 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083.



(Prior Code, § 153.254)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1205, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.250  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.255)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1206, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



RO-1, RESTRICTED OFFICE DISTRICT



§ 153.265  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The RO-1, Restricted Office District is intended for multiple-family
residential uses and those restricted office and restricted business uses
which will provide opportunities for local employment close to residential
areas, thus reducing travel to and from work; and which will provide clean,
modern office buildings in landscaped settings; which will provide, adjacent
to residential areas, appropriate districts for uses which do not generate
large volumes of traffic, traffic congestion, and parking problems; and which
will promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the city’s
Comprehensive Plan.



(Prior Code, § 153.270)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1301, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.266  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the RO-1 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   Dwellings containing four or fewer units;



   (B)   Adult foster care family homes and adult foster care small and
large group homes subject to standards established in §§ 153.455 through
153.491;



   (C)   Hospitals subject to site design standards in §§ 153.455
through 153.491;



   (D)   Day care centers, nursery schools, day nurseries, or child
care centers subject to the requirements of § 153.477;



   (E)   Senior citizen and community education facilities;



   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above permitted principal uses subject to the requirements of § 153.070;



   (G)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (H)   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.125 through 153.132;



   (I)   Home occupations as defined in § 153.021 and regulated under
§ 153.069(D); and



   (J)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.271)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1302, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1477, passed 2-15-1985, effective 2-25-1985)



§ 153.267  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Apartments, townhouses, terraces, and row houses containing
more than four dwelling units;



   (B)   Barber and beauty shops;



   (C)   (1)   Business offices, professional and governmental
offices, including executive, administrative, professional, accounting, real
estate, clerical, stenographic, and drafting; and



      (2)   The above uses shall not be construed to eliminate
offices of recognized manufacturers’ agents, provided that no display will
be in an exterior show window, and the total area devoted to display
including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for
persons observing the displayed objects shall not exceed 15% of the usable
floor area of the establishment using the display of an actual product for
sale as a sales procedure; provided that there shall be no outdoor storage of
goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale, and
provided further, that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of
goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale beyond
that normally incidental to the above permitted office-type uses.



   (D)   Laboratories, x-ray, blood and related human testing
procedures;



   (E)   Medical or dental centers and clinics, not including
veterinary hospitals;



   (F)   Professional office of a medical doctor, osteopath,
chiropractor, dentist, optometrist, architect, lawyer, professional engineer,
land surveyor, landscape architect, or community planner;



   (G)   Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan
offices, credit unions, and loan production offices;



   (H)   Veterinary clinics and offices, excluding outside exercise
yards and pens;



   (I)   Funeral homes;



   (J)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations, municipal pumping stations,
and gas regulator stations, but not including storage yards;



   (K)   Historic theme restaurants, subject to standards established
in §§ 153.455 through 153.491; and



   (L)   Churches, convents, rectories, and other facilities normally
incidental thereto, subject to site design standards established in §§
153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.272)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1303, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.268  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in an RO-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083.



(Prior Code, § 153.273)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1304, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.269  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.274)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1305, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



B-1, LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 153.280  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The B-1, Local Business District is intended to permit retail business
and service uses which are needed to serve the nearby residential areas. In
order to promote such business developments so far as is possible and
appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards,
offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, or heavy truck traffic,
or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage
the concentration of local business areas to the mutual advantage of both the
consumers and merchants and thereby to promote the best use of land at
certain strategic locations and to avoid the continuance of encouraging
marginal, strip, business development along major thoroughfares.



(Prior Code, § 153.290)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1401, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.281  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the B-1 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   Business services, including the following:



      (1)   Business, professional, or governmental;



      (2)   Commercial parking lots;



      (3)   Financial institutions, including banks, savings and
loan association offices, credit unions, and loan production offices; and



      (4)   Post offices or postal stations.



   (B)   Clothing service, including the following:



      (1)   Dressmaking shops;



      (2)   Dry cleaning establishments occupying a total floor area
not to exceed 2,000 square feet and using not more than two clothes cleaning
units, neither of which shall have a rated capacity of more than 40 pounds,
using cleaning fluid which is non-explosive and non-flammable;



      (3)   Laundry agencies;



      (4)   Millinery shops;



      (5)   Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments; and



      (6)   Tailor and pressing shops.



   (C)   Equipment service, including the following:



      (1)   Electric appliance repair shops;



      (2)   Radio and electronic repair, television shops;



      (3)   Shoe repair shops; and



      (4)   Watch repair shops.



   (D)   Food service (excluding drive-in type businesses), the
business of which shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building,
including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Bake shops;



      (2)   Dairy stores;



      (3)   Delicatessens;



      (4)   Groceries;



      (5)   Meat, fish, and poultry markets;



      (6)   Restaurants; and



      (7)   Taverns.



   (E)   Medical offices, including the following:



      (1)   Doctor, dentist, chiropractic offices;



      (2)   Medical centers, industrial health clinics;



      (3)   Medical laboratories, testing, research establishments;
and



      (4)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics, kennels, excluding
outside exercise yards and pens.



   (F)   Personal service, including the following:



      (1)   Barber shops;



      (2)   Beauty shops;



      (3)   Funeral homes;



      (4)   Health salons; and



      (5)   Photographic studios.



   (G)   Retail service and retail stores, generally, including the
following:



      (1)   Antique shops;



      (2)   Apparel shops;



      (3)   Bicycle sales and service;



      (4)   Book stores;



      (5)   Camera shops;



      (6)   Drugstores;



      (7)   Flower shops;



      (8)   Gift shops;



      (9)   Hardware, paint, and wallpaper stores;



      (10)   Hobby shops;



      (11)   Household appliances;



      (12)   Jewelry stores;



      (13)   Newsdealers;



      (14)   Picture framing stores;



      (15)   Radio, television, and record shops;



      (16)   Stationers; and



      (17)   Variety stores.



   (H)   Membership clubs, fraternal, or recreational buildings;



   (I)   All dwellings, including apartments, townhouses, terraces, and
row houses;



   (J)   Uses similar to the above, as determined by the City Planning
Commission;



   (K)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses, subject to requirements of § 153.070;



   (L)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (M)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (N)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.291)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1402, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.282  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Automobile service stations subject to site design standards
in § 153.071;



   (B)   Drive-in restaurants or other drive-in establishments serving
food and/or beverages, subject to site design standards in §§ 153.455
through 153.491; and



   (C)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations,
but not including storage yards.



(Prior Code, § 153.292)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1403, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.283  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   The following conditions are required for all uses in the B-1 District.



   (A)   All business, service, or processing shall be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building, provided further, that all lighting in
connection with permitted business uses shall be so arranged as to reflect
the light away from all adjoining residence buildings or residentially zoned
property.



   (B)   All business or service establishments shall be mainly for the
purpose of dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced or processed
on the premises shall be principally sold at retail on the premises where
produced and/or processed.



   (C)   Where a new or expanded land use occurs in a B-1 District,
after the effective date of this chapter, which abuts directly upon a
residentially zoned district, protective screening shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.082.



(Prior Code, § 153.293)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1404, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.284  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a B-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.294)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1405, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.285  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.295)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1406, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



B-1A, INTERCHANGE BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 153.300  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The B-1A, Interchange Business District is intended primarily for those
activities and services oriented to automobile traffic at interchange areas
of feeder roads and expressway/freeway facilities. The avoidance of undue
congestion on feeder roads, the promotion of smooth traffic flow at the
interchange area and on the interchange business loop, and the protection of
adjacent properties in other zones from adverse influences of traffic are the
prime consideration in the application of this district.



(Prior Code, § 153.310)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1501, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.301  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the B-1A District, no uses shall be permitted, unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses and all permitted uses after
special approval in the B-1 District;



   (B)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses subject to the requirements of § 153.070;



   (C)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (E)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.311)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1502, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.302  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a B-1A District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.312)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1503, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.303  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.083 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.313)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1504, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



B-2, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 153.315  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The B-2, General Business District is intended to permit a wider range
of business and entertainment activities than those permitted in the B-1 or
B-1A Districts. The permitted uses are intended to provide businesses and
services usually found in major business areas along major streets, regional
thoroughfares or near freeway access ramps. These uses generate large volumes
of vehicular traffic, require substantial access for off-street parking and
loading, and require detailed planning particularly as to relationships with
adjacent residential areas. Multiple dwelling residential uses are also
allowed in a planned setting with business uses.



(Prior Code, § 153.330)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1601, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.316  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the B-2 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the B-1 District;



   (B)   Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop
nature, such as a decorator, upholsterer, caterer, exterminator, building
contractor, and similar establishments that require a retail outlet;



   (C)   Assembly halls;



   (D)   Automobile service stations subject to site design standards
in § 153.071;



   (E)   Automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, recreation vehicle, or
boat showrooms, including outdoor storage or display of sales product;



   (F)   Automotive service establishments, entirely within an enclosed
building, limited to the following: body repair; painting and refinishing;
motor repair; truck equipment installation; auto glass installation; waxing
and polishing; tire sales and tire mounting; and muffler and battery service;



   (G)   Bus, transit and train passenger terminals;



   (H)   Business schools or private schools operated for a profit;



   (I)   Business service establishments, such as office machine and
typewriter repair, printing, photostating, blueprinting;



   (J)   Cocktail lounges, night clubs, taverns, supper clubs, and
private clubs, subject to standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (K)   Commercial recreation uses, including the following:



      (1)   Indoor theaters;



      (2)   Bowling alleys;



      (3)   Billiard rooms;



      (4)   Dance halls; and



      (5)   Skating rinks.



   (L)   Colleges or universities;



   (M)   Department stores;



   (N)   Funeral homes;



   (O)   Government buildings and uses;



   (P)   Hotels and motels;



   (Q)   All dwellings, including apartments, townhouses, terraces, and
row houses;



   (R)   Physical cultural facilities, such as gymnasiums, reducing
salons, beauty schools;



   (S)   Printing and publishing establishments;



   (T)   Public utility offices, telephone exchanges, and public
utility substations within a completely enclosed building (not necessarily
roofed);



   (U)   Railroad freight stations or sidings;



   (V)   Retail business whose principal activity is the sale or rental
of merchandise within a completely enclosed building;



   (W)   Garages to be used exclusively for the storage of commercial
and or passenger motor vehicles;



   (X)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses, subject to the requirements of § 153.070;



   (Y)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (Z)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (AA)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.331)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1602, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.317  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, cabarets, or
massage parlors, provided that no such business shall be located within 1,000
feet of another adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, or
massage parlor in order to prevent the concentration of these uses in any one
area and discourage the development of a skid row area, and provided that
none of the above-named uses shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of any
residentially zoned district, except that this provision may be waived if the
person applying for the waiver shall file with the City Planning Commission a
petition which indicates approval of the proposed regulated use by at least
51% of the persons owning, residing or doing business within a radius of
1,000 feet of the location of the proposed use. The petitioner shall attempt
to contact all eligible locations within this radius, and must maintain a
list of all addresses at which no contact was made; (See also §§ 153.455
through 153.491 for applicable standards.)



   (B)   Automobile wash establishments subject to standards in §§
153.455 through 153.491;



   (C)   Central heating plants equipped with facilities for smoke
elimination;



   (D)   Commercial greenhouses subject to standards in §§ 153.455
through 153.491;



   (E)   Drive-in restaurants or other drive-in establishments serving
food and/or beverages, subject to standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (F)   New or used mobile homes, excavation equipment, machinery or
farm implement sales;



   (G)   New or used automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, recreation
vehicle, boat, snowmobiles, travel trailers, campers, motor homes, tents and
accessory equipment, sales or rental, wherein motor vehicles or recreation
vehicles are stored or displayed outside of completely enclosed buildings;



   (H)   Outdoor drive-in theaters, subject to standards established in
§§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (I)   Open air business uses, subject to standards established in
§§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (J)   Pinball parlors, pool halls, billiard rooms, amusement machine
complex/arcades, subject to standards established in §§ 153.455 through
153.491;



   (K)   Radio or television towers, freestanding, subject to standards
established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (L)   Storage or service garages, including self-service storage
facilities;



   (M)   Wholesale stores, storage facilities, warehouses, distributing
plants, freezers, and lockers;



   (N)   Uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses
listed in §§ 153.316 and 153.317, including with any permitted retail
business the incidental manufacture, processing, or storage of goods for
sale, except the killing or dressing of animals or fowl, or the cleaning of
fish, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Any such incidental use shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed building and shall not occupy more than 30% of the total
floor area occupied by the business;



      (2)   No more than five persons shall be employed in any such
incidental operation, and any goods resulting therefrom shall be sold at
retail on the premises; and



      (3)   The incidental use shall be no more obnoxious than the
principal use.



   (O)   Welfare and charitable institutions and homeless shelters,
other than penal or correctional institutions for the care of liquor or drug
addicts, subject to site design standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.332)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1603, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1662, passed 8-10-1992, effective 8-20-1992; Ord.
D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.318  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a B-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.333)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1604, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.319  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.334)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1605, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



B-3, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 153.330  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The B-3, Central Business District is intended primarily for central
shopping and merchandising activities that serve the entire community or
large sections thereof, and which is so located that the provisions of
off-street parking facilities cannot reasonably be required. Certain light
wholesale uses are also permitted. A prime characteristic of this district is
a core of intense pedestrian activity. Most persons entering the district
will come by mass transit or automobile and typically will park once to carry
out several errands.



(Prior Code, § 153.350)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1701, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.331  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the B-3 District, no uses shall be permitted, unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the B-2 District, except
automobile service stations;



   (B)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses, subject to requirements of § 153.070;



   (C)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading facilities including parking
structures in accordance with the requirements of §§ 153.125 through
153.132;



   (E)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.351)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1702, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.332  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Automobile service stations subject to site design standards
in § 153.071;



   (B)   Central heating plants equipped with facilities for smoke
elimination; and



   (C)   Radio or television towers, subject to standards established
in §§ 153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.352)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1703, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.333  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a B-3 District, a site plan shall be submitted review
and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for protective
screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.353)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1704, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.334  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Ord. D-1418, § 1705, passed 11-22-1982, effective 1-21-1983)



(Prior Code, § 153.354)



M-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.345  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   In the M-1, Light Industrial District, the intent is to permit certain
industries which are of a light manufacturing, warehousing, and wholesaling
character to locate in planned areas of the city, so that such uses may be
integrated with nearby land uses, such as commercial and residential uses;
limitations are placed upon the degree of noise, smoke, glare, waste, and
other features of industrial operations so as to avoid adverse effects.



(Prior Code, § 153.370)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1801, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.346  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   Any of the following uses are permitted when the manufacturing
compounding or processing is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
building:



   (A)   Industrial establishments:



      (1)   Assembly, fabrication, manufacture, packaging or
treatment of such products as food products (excluding butchering, animal
slaughtering), candy, drugs, cosmetics and toiletries, musical instruments,
optical goods, toys, novelties, electrical instruments and appliances, radio
and phonographs, pottery and figurines or other ceramic products using only
previously pulverized clay;



      (2)   Assembly, fabrication, manufacture, or treatment of such
products from the following previously prepared materials: bone; canvas;
cellophane; cloth; cork; felt; fibre; glass; leather; paper; plastics;
precious or semi-precious metals or stones; sheet metal (excluding large
stampings such as automobile fenders or bodies); shell; textiles; wax; wire;
wood (excluding power saw and planning mills); and yarns;



      (3)   Bakeries (wholesale);



      (4)   Buffing, polishing, or electric plating, excluding heat
treating furnaces;



      (5)   Building supply, solid fuel businesses or contracting
firms with incidental storage yards on the same lot, including building and
allied craft contractors, subject to standards established in §§ 153.455
through 153.491;



      (6)   Central dry cleaning plants and laundries;



      (7)   Laboratories—research or testing;



      (8)   Tool and die shops; metalworking machine shops involving
the use of grinding or cutting tools; manufacturing of tools, dies, jigs,
fixtures; publishing, printing, or forming of box, carton, and



cardboard products, bookbinding, printing, or engraving;



      (9)   Painting and sheet metal shops, tire vulcanizing and
recapping shops, undercoating and rustproofing shops, welding shops,
automobile bump shops, grinding shops, machine rebuilding, and spray painting
establishments;



      (10)   Pickle processing, subject to standards established in
§§ 153.455 through 153.491;



      (11)   Recreational vehicle storage yards, subject to
standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



      (12)   Truck, bus, and train terminals; and



      (13)   Truck tractor and trailer sales and display, rental,
and repair.



   (B)   Docks, wharves, and boat storage;



   (C)   Public and private utility buildings, telephone exchange
buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator
stations, municipal pumping stations, lines, easements, installations and
facilities, including storage yards;



   (D)   Public buildings and service uses, not dealing directly with
the general public on an individual basis;



   (E)   Automobile repair or service facilities, parking garages, and
lots;



   (F)   Recreation vehicle storage yards subject to standards
established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (G)   Wholesale and warehousing: the sale at wholesale or
warehousing of automotive parts and equipment; dry goods and apparel;
groceries and related products; raw farm products except livestock and
noxious fertilizers; electrical goods, hardware, plumbing, heating equipment
and supplies; machinery and equipment; tobacco and tobacco products; paper
and paper products; furniture and home furnishings, and any commodity the
manufacture of which is permitted in this district;



   (H)   Any other uses similar to any of the above principal permitted
uses, as determined by the City Planning Commission;



   (I)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (J)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (K)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (L)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.371)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1802, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.347  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   The following retail and service establishments, provided that
such establishments are clearly ancillary to the permitted industrial uses
and are in keeping with the intent of the M-1 Districts:



      (1)   Automobile service stations;



      (2)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments when food or beverage
is consumed within a completely enclosed building; and



      (4)   Hotels and motels.



   (B)   Railroad freight depots and classification yards; and



   (C)   Penal and correctional institutions and detention facilities
subject to the standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.372)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1803, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.348  OPEN STORAGE.



   All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within an enclosed
building, except that external storage of materials shall be permitted,
provided that the storage area shall be visually screened from all streets
and adjoining commercial and residential properties with a noncombustible
fence or wall, or with a non-deciduous planted screen at least five feet in
height and at least 80% solid; such fence or wall shall be of such design and
constructed of such material and maintained in such manner as shall be in
keeping with the character of the area.



(Prior Code, § 153.373)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1804, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.349  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a M-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.374)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1805, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.350  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.375)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1806, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



M-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.365  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The intent of the M-2, General Industrial District, is to permit
general industrial uses to locate in desirable areas of the city, which uses
are primarily of an intensive manufacturing, assembling, and fabricating
character, including large-scale or specialized industrial operations
requiring good access by road and/or railroad, and needing special sites, or
public and utility services. Reasonable regulations apply to users in this
district so as to permit the location of industries which will not cause
adverse effects on residential and commercial areas in the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.390)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1902 (1901), passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.366  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the M-2, General Industrial District, no uses shall be permitted,
unless otherwise provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the M-1 District;



   (B)   All permitted uses after special approval in the M-1 District;



   (C)   Assembly and/or manufacture of motor vehicles and components,
cigars and cigarettes, electrical fixtures, batteries, and other electrical
apparatus and hardware;



   (D)   Business machine manufacturing;



   (E)   Cold storage plants;



   (F)   Commercial ice manufacturing;



   (G)   Electroplating;



   (H)   Foundries;



   (I)   Heat treating;



   (J)   Metal stamping, pressing, and buffing plants;



   (K)   Millwork lumber and power saw and planning mills;



   (L)   Nut, bolt, or screw manufacturing;



   (M)   Paint manufacturing;



   (N)   Pharmaceutical products manufacturing;



   (O)   Railroad freight depots and classification yards;



   (P)   Steel fabrication;



   (Q)   Any other uses similar to any of the above principal permitted
uses, as determined by the City Planning Commission;



   (R)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (S)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (T)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (U)   Temporary buildings and trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.391)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1902, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.367  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
of the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562:



   (A)   Breweries, distilleries, canning factories, chemical plants,
subject to standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (B)   Brick yards, concrete block manufacturing;



   (C)   Central station light or power plants;



   (D)   Concrete and asphalt mixing plants;



   (E)   Fertilizer warehouses;



   (F)   Junkyards, subject to standards established in §§ 153.455
through 153.491;



   (G)   Mining, excavating, or other removal of sand, earth, minerals,
or other material naturally found in the earth;



   (H)   Open storage yards of building and construction contractors,
equipment, and supplies, stone, sand, and gravel sales and storage, subject
to standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491;



   (I)   Slaughtering of animals, livestock yards;



   (J)   Tanning, curing, or storage of raw, green, or salted hides or
skins;



   (K)   The following retail and service establishments, provided that
such establishments are clearly ancillary to the permitted industrial uses
and are in keeping with the intent of the M-2 District:



      (1)   Automobile service stations;



      (2)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments when food or beverage
is consumed within a completely enclosed building; and



      (4)   Hotels and motels.



   (L)   Penal and correctional institutions and detention facilities,
subject to the standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.392)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1903, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.368  OPEN STORAGE.



   Required front yard and side yard setbacks adjacent to street frontage
shall not be used for the external storage of materials.



(Prior Code, § 153.393)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1902 (1904), passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.369  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in an M-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.394)  (Ord. D-1418, § 1905, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.370  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Ord. D-1418, § 1906, passed 11-22-1982, effective 1-21-1983)



(Prior Code, § 153.395)



M-3, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 153.385  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The intent of the M-3, Heavy Industrial District, is to permit
intensive manufacturing, assembling, and fabricating industries, including
large-scale or specialized industrial operations requiring good access by
road and/or railroad, and needing special sites, or public and utility
services.



(Prior Code, § 153.410)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2001, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.386  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   In the M-3, Heavy Industrial District, no uses shall be permitted,
unless otherwise provided in this subchapter, except the following:



   (A)   All principal permitted uses in the M-2 District;



   (B)   All permitted uses after special approval in the M-2 District,
except penal and correctional institutions and detention facilities;



   (C)   Any other uses similar to any of the above principal permitted
uses, as determined by the City Planning Commission;



   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above principal permitted uses;



   (E)   Signs as provided in §§ 153.145 through 153.169;



   (F)   Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with
the requirements of §§ 153.125 through 153.132; and



   (G)   Temporary buildings or trailers for use incidental to
construction work.



(Prior Code, § 153.411)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2002, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.387  PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to applicable site design
standards in §§ 153.455 through 153.491 and subject further to the approval
by the City Planning Commission in accordance with processing procedures in
§ 153.562: penal and correctional institutions and detention facilities
subject to standards established in §§ 153.455 through 153.491.



(Prior Code, § 153.412)  (Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective
1-10-2002)



§ 153.388  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   For all uses in a M-3 District, a site plan shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with § 153.083. See § 153.082 for
protective screening requirements.



(Prior Code, § 153.413)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2003, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



§ 153.389  AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.



   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements and performance
standards unless otherwise specified, are as provided in §§ 153.084 and
153.440.



(Prior Code, § 153.414)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2004, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective 1-10-2002)



PDD—PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



§ 153.400  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The Planned Development District (PDD) is intended to provide flexible
land use and design regulations for innovative residential and commercial
development. A Planned Development District shall provide for the development
of land as an integral unit which incorporates within a single plan the
location and arrangement of all buildings, walks, and drives, parking areas,
utilities, landscaping, and any other modifications or additions to the site.
Deviation from the use and dimensional specifications elsewhere in this
chapter may be allowed so long as the general purposes for the standards are
achieved and the general provisions of the zoning regulations are observed. A
planned development is to achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land
and provide for open space and land for recreational purposes. It shall be
compatible with the surrounding area and promote a development pattern in
harmony with the objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



(Prior Code, § 153.425)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2101, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.401  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Minimum area. A planned development shall be comprised of
minimum area of two acres, or represent a natural and logical extension of an
existing PDD.



   (B)   Permitted use. The following uses are permitted in the PDD:



      (1)   Residential, commercial, and recreational buildings and
uses when such mixture provides the best possible living and working
environment while safeguarding the use and development of the surrounding
area;



      (2)   Residences may be of a variety of types, including
one-family, two-family, multiple-family, and other types of dwelling units
provided that such combination of dwelling unit types will not interfere with
orderly and reasonable platting of an area if such area is to be platted or
replatted;



      (3)   Multiple-family dwelling units may be located in
buildings containing or intended to contain commercial and/or office
activities. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on any floor on which
commercial and/or offices are located or intended to be located, unless
separated therefrom by a fireproof wall as provided in the building
regulations; and



      (4)   Dwellings with common party walls may be constructed on
a sub-lot and separately conveyed subject to compliance with all of the
following conditions:



         (a)   Each sub-lot shall be located in an area of the
PDD that is to become a recorded subdivision;



         (b)   The allowable number of sub-lots shall be
determined by dividing the area to be platted by the density limits of the
PDD. In no case, however, shall a sublot have an area of less than 2,000
square feet nor more than one one-dwelling unit thereon. For density
computation purposes any land used for streets, or any land not suitable for
residential development, shall not be included, with the exception of such
land as will be permanently dedicated for park or recreation space, and open
space to be held in common ownership;



         (c)   Off-street parking. There shall be at least two
off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit; refer to § 153.125(B)(4)
for location;



         (d)   The height requirements of the PDD district shall
apply;



         (e)   Use of common areas: when the proposed sub-lots
are located in a subdivision which also contains areas to be held in common
ownership by the respective owners of lots or sub-lots, such common area may
be used for open space uses, for accessory buildings, and for recreational
facilities; and



         (f)   Access: each sub-lot shall have access from a
parking area or public or private street.



   (C)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Signs, subject to the requirements in §§ 153.145
through 153.169, applying to a particular use or type of use shall apply to
such use even though located in the Planned Development District. The City
Planning Commission shall have the authority to decide any questions
involving signs in the PDD that may arise because of the innovative design of
the development. The City Planning Commission may accept, reject, or modify
the size, content, design, location, lighting, and overall appearance of all
proposed signs not provided for in §§ 153.145 through 153.169.



      (2)   Accessory uses for PDD are the approved customary
accessory or associate uses such as, but not limited to, private garages,
storage spaces, parks, recreational and community activities and shall be
permitted in the PDD as deemed appropriate by the City Planning Commission.



   (D)   Density requirements.



      (1)   Because land is used more efficiently in the PDD,
improved environmental quality can often be produced with a greater number of
single dwelling units per net acre than is usually permitted in traditionally
zoned residential districts. The maximum density permitted in a PDD, based
upon the zoning district the proposed PDD was formerly located in, is as
follows:



 

R-1A Districts
 
4 dwelling units per acre


R-1 Districts
 
8 dwelling units per acre


R-2 Districts
 
20 dwelling units per acre


R-3, R-4 Districts
 
35 dwelling units per acre


RO-1, B-1, B-1A Districts
 
50 dwelling units per acre


B-2, M-1, M-2, M-3 Districts
 
50 dwelling units per acre


B-3 Districts
 
50 dwelling units per acre



 



      (2)   In determining the maximum number of dwelling units
which will be permitted, any public rights-of-way or private easement used or
proposed for streets or any land not suitable for residential development
shall not be included, with the exception of such land as will be permanently
dedicated for park or recreation space, and open space to be held in common
ownership.



   (E)   Yard and setback requirements. Specific yard and setback
requirements of the former zoning district(s) in which the PDD is now located
shall be used as a guide and these may be modified to the extent that lot
sizes may be reduced or yard areas eliminated in lieu of providing common
space.



   (F)   Height. The height regulations in the PDD provide that any
buildings exceeding a height of three stories or 35 feet shall be approved as
to specific height by the City Planning Commission. Approval shall be based
upon findings regarding light, air circulation, views, and airport flight
patterns.



   (G)   Off-street parking. There will be compliance with the
off-street parking and loading requirements of the PDD and §§ 153.125
through 153.132 for the particular use involved, except that the number of
spaces required may be reduced in a PDD if approved by the City Planning
Commission as part of the area plan. Such reduction shall be justified by the
applicant and shall be based upon a finding that sufficient parking will be
available through sharing of spaces by different uses (refer to §
153.125(B)(12) regarding joint sharing of parking areas), that the parking
requirement is excessive for the type of use proposed, that walk-in trade for
commercial centers will reduce parking demand, or similar factors.



   (H)   Circulation and access.



      (1)   Each lot or principal building in a PDD shall have
vehicular access from a parking area or public or private street.



      (2)   Each lot or principal building in a PDD shall have
pedestrian access from a public or private sidewalk or walkway where deemed
necessary by the City Planning Commission. All parts and phases of the PDD
shall be interconnected by a walkway system which will provide for the
necessary, safe, and convenient movement of pedestrians. A bicycle path
system may also be provided in the PDD and may be part of the sidewalk system
where approved by the City Planning Commission. Said system shall be
connected to the public sidewalk system.



      (3)   Public streets to be dedicated to the city shall be
designed and constructed according to city standards established for public
streets. Private streets need not be constructed to city standards. However,
if in the future private streets in a PDD are to be dedicated to the city,
the owners shall first fully agree to bear the full expense of repair,
construction, or any other action required to make streets meet city
standards. However, this latter provision shall be incorporated in the
private covenants running with the land.



      (4)   An individual dwelling unit in any single-family,
two-family townhouse, or similar residential structure shall not have direct
access to a collector or arterial street.



   (I)   Utilities.



      (1)   Each principal building in a PDD District shall be
directly or indirectly connected to public water and the sanitary sewer
system.



      (2)   Each structure or parking facility in a PDD District
shall be provided with adequate on-site storm drainage.



      (3)   Electrical, telephone, and cable television lines shall
be underground. Waiver of this requirement may be granted by the Board of
Appeals on Zoning in floodplain areas upon showing of excessive cost or
potential danger.



   (J)   Recreation space regulations.



      (1)   Minimum recreation space ratio (RSR), as defined in §
153.021, and recreation space, as defined in § 153.021, shall be computed
for any development in a PDD District as follows, except that at least 10% of
the total land area within a PDD shall be in such recreation space:



 

Former Zoning District
 
Minimum Recreation Space Ratio




R-1, R-1A
 
.24


R-2
 
.24


R-3, R-4
 
.17


RO-1, B-1, B-1A
 
.15


B-2, M-1, M-2, M-3
 
.11


B-3
 
.09


RSR = Recreation Space ÷ Floor Space




 



      (2)   Recreation space shall be conveniently and equitably
located through the PDD in relation to the location of dwelling units and
natural features.



      (3)   Recreation space shall have minimum dimensions which, in
the City Planning Commission’s opinion, are usable for the functions
intended and which will be maintainable.



      (4)   The City Planning Commission may require that natural
amenities such as ravines, rock outcrops, wooded areas, tree or shrub
specimens, unique wildlife habitats, ponds, streams, and marshes be preserved
as part of the open space system of the PDD.



   (K)   Compatibility to adjacent land uses. Grouping of buildings,
uses, and parking shall be compatible to building arrangements within the
development itself as well as with surrounding development. No building
arrangement shall be approved which adversely affects surrounding properties.



(Prior Code, § 153.426)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2102, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. O-9, passed 6-30-2003, effective 7-10-2003)



§ 153.402  APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND ZONING APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   General. Whenever any Planned Development District is proposed
and before any building permit for the erection of a permanent building in
such district shall be granted or any subdivision or any part thereof may
filed in the office of the City Clerk, the developer or his or her authorized
agent shall apply for and secure approval of such PDD in accordance with the
following procedures.



   (B)   Area plan requirements.



      (1)   Procedure for petition and area plan approvals.



         (a)   Petitioner shall confer with the staff of the City
Planning Commission prior to making application for the rezoning so that
agreement can be reached on basic site and land use considerations, general
development criteria, and detailed processing procedure. This preapplication
conference before submission of a PDD request is required so that the
petitioner does not expend large sums of time and money on detailed plans
until there is general agreement of use and design concepts.



         (b)   Petition for a PDD classification shall be for an
amendment to the official City Zoning Map and approval of an area plan. A
petition for a PDD classification for a parcel of land may be made by the
owner(s) of record or by any person(s) acting on behalf of the owner(s) of
record of the subject parcel.



         (c)   The petition shall be filed with the City Clerk
who shall transmit the petition and the area plan to the City Council. The
City Council shall forward the petition and plan to the City Planning
Commission.



         (d)   Upon receipt of the petition and area plan from
the Council, the City Planning Commission shall undertake a study of same and
shall complete said study within 60 days of receipt of all required
information by the City Planning Commission. The Commission shall also
undertake site plan review of the area plan pursuant to requirements of §
153.083 of this chapter. The City Planning Commission shall advise the
applicant in writing of any recommended changes in the area plan as are
needed to conform to the regulations and standards of this chapter.



         (e)   The City Planning Commission shall, after
receiving the petition and area plan from the Council, establish a public
hearing on the petition and area plan, said hearing to be held after the
receipt by the City Planning Commission of the information required in
division (B)(2) below. The City Planning Commission shall give notice of the
public hearing as required by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act
110 of 2006, being M.C.L. § 125.3103 by publishing a legal notice of the
hearing date in a newspaper which circulates in the city, and sent by regular
mail, at least five days but not more than 15 days prior to the hearing date,
to all property owners and occupants of each dwelling unit in a structures
located within 300 feet of the proposed PDD. For structures containing more
than four dwelling units owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure.



         (f)   Following the public hearing of the City Planning
Commission, the Commission shall transmit a copy of its report and
recommendation on the petition and area plan to the City Council, together
with a summary of the comments received at the public hearing.



         (g)   The City Council shall review the petition and
area plan application and the City Planning Commission report thereon, and
after reviewing the report, a summary of comments received at the public
hearing, minutes of all proceedings, and all documents related to the PDD
shall within 30 days approve, disapprove, or table for further consideration
the ordinance of adoption of the petition and area plan.



         (h)   If the petition and PDD area plan are approved by
the City Council, the applicant shall review the petition and area plan in
their approved form. The applicant and all owner(s) of record or the legal
representative of the owner(s) of record of all property included within the
PDD shall then sign a statement that the approved petition and area plan
shall be binding upon the applicant and owner(s) of record and upon their
heirs, successors, and assigns. The petition and area plan shall not be
officially approved until said statement has been signed as required herein
and has been received by the City Clerk.



         (i)   Following official adoption and enactment of the
ordinance by the City Council, the PDD designation for the area in question
shall be designated on the official City Zoning Map.



      (2)   Information required for area plan. The applicant shall
present the following evidence regarding the following characteristics of the
proposed development in writing:



         (a)   General characteristics.



            1.   General character, concept, and substance of
PDD;



            2.   Objectives and purpose to be served;



            3.   Compliance with city regulations and
standards;



            4.   Scale and scope of PDD development proposed;



            5.   Market analysis and economic feasibility of
the proposed PDD development as deemed necessary by the City Planning
Commission;



            6.   Community impact in terms of streets and
traffic, schools, recreation facilities, costs and revenues, and utility
systems;



            7.   Environmental impact statement as deemed
necessary by the City Planning Commission;



            8.   Development schedules; and



            9.   Compliance with the adopted Generalized Land
Use Plan of the city, or is a logical and acceptable amendment thereto.



         (b)   Design and control features.



            1.   Development plan at a scale of not less than
one inch to 50 feet (one inch = 50 feet) if the subject property is less than
15 acres and one inch to 100 feet (one inch = 100 feet) if 15 acres or more;



            2.   Date, northpoint, and graphic scale;



            3.   Dimensions of all lot and property lines
showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties;



            4.   Existing topographic features of the site;



            5.   Existing or proposed floodway and floodway
fringe areas (refer to §§ 153.505 through 153.521), bodies of water, and
other unbuildable areas;



            6.   Location of all existing and proposed
structures on the subject property and all existing structures within 100
feet of the subject property;



            7.   Location of all existing and proposed drives
and parking areas;



            8.   Location of any accessory signs, and the
dimensions of such signs;



            9.   Location of existing and proposed
right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys;



            10.   Names and addresses of the architect,
planner, landscape architect, or the engineer responsible for the preparation
of the area plan;



            11.   Location of all outdoor lighting facilities;



            12.   Typical floor plans; method of trash and
garbage collection, and in the case of outdoor trash receptacles, the
location and method of screening; location of any covered carports;



            13.   Typical exterior building elevations and
style of architecture;



            14.   Density of use for each use area of the site;



            15.   Location, size, and uses of common open
space public or resident group use areas and facilities, including school
sites, parks, and play areas;



            16.   General description of the organization(s)
or individual(s) who will own and maintain all land areas in the PDD,
including common open space;



            17.   General description of covenants, grants,
easements, or other restrictions to be imposed upon land or buildings,
including the rules and regulations of any homeowners association,
cooperative association, or other type of association;



            18.   Detail of easement on private streets to
allow necessary city access to the streets, water lines, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, as well as provisions for access of emergency vehicles. The
utilities may be maintained by the developer; if so, only access in case of
emergency repairs and access for emergency vehicles is necessary;



            19.   Circulation plan for internal streets,
roadways, and pedestrian walkways;



            20.   Description of applicant’s intentions
regarding selling or leasing of all or portions of land in the PDD and of
dwelling units;



            21.   Description of all proposed nonresidential
uses;



            22.   General landscape concept showing tree
masses to be preserved or added, proposed landscape plan, grading plan
illustrating new land contours, berms, mounds, and similar features;



            23.   Delineation of areas to be subdivided
pursuant to the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L. §§
560.101 et seq.;



            24.   Average initial sales prices of dwelling
units for sale and/or average initial rents for rental dwelling units, and
aesthetic features of the overall development; and



            25.   Schedule and phasing of construction.



      (3)   Petition and area plan standards. The City Planning
Commission shall determine and shall provide evidence of same in its report
to the City Council, pursuant to division (B)(1)(f) above that the petition
and area plan meet the following standards:



         (a)   The proposed development conforms to the adopted
Generalized Land Use Plan or any part thereof, or represents land use policy
which, in the City Planning Commissions opinion, is a logical and acceptable
change in the adopted Generalized Land Use Plan;



         (b)   The proposed development conforms to the intent
and to all regulations and standards of the PDD and of the applicable zoning
requirements;



         (c)   The proposed development is adequately served by
public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire
protection, drainage courses, water and sewer facilities, and refuse disposal;



         (d)   The common open space, any other common
properties, individual properties, and all other elements of the PDD are so
planned that they achieve a unified open and recreation area system with open
space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to
each other, the site, and the surrounding land;



         (e)   The applicant has made provisions satisfactory to
the City Planning Commission to assure that those areas shown on the plan for
use by the public or by occupants of the development will be or have been
irrevocably committed for that purpose. Provisions satisfactory to the City
Planning Commission have been made to provide for the financing of any
improvements shown on the plan for open space areas and common use areas,
streets, walkways, and utilities which are to be included within the
development, and that maintenance of such improvements is assured;



         (f)   The location of the proposed uses, layout of the
site, and its relation to streets giving access to it is such that traffic
to, from, and within the site and assembly of persons in connection therewith
will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the project or the neighborhood. In
applying this standard, the Commission shall consider, among other things,
convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, particularly of children;
relationship of the proposed project to main thoroughfares and street
intersections; and the general character and intensity of the existing and
potential development of the neighborhood;



         (g)   Streets follow topography, are properly spaced,
and are located and aligned in accordance with the intended function of each
street. The property has adequate access to public streets. The plan provides
for logical extensions of public streets and provides suitable street
connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable;



         (h)   Major pedestrian circulation is provided for
within the site and interconnects all residential and community areas. The
pedestrian system provides a logical extension of pedestrian ways from
outside the site and provides pedestrian connections to the edges of the
site, where appropriate;



         (i)   The mix of housing unit types and densities and
the mix of residential and nonresidential uses is acceptable in terms of
convenience, privacy, compatibility, and similar measures;



         (j)   Where applicable, the City Planning Commission
shall determine that noise, odor, light, or other external effects from any
source whatsoever which is connected with the proposed use will not adversely
affect adjacent and neighboring land and uses;



         (k)   The proposed development creates a minimum
disturbance to natural features and land forms; and



         (l)   Phased developments are designed so that each
phase will be complete without depending on completion of a future phase.



(Prior Code, § 153.427)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2103, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.403  EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF PETITION AND AREA PLAN.



   Approval of the petition and area plan by the City Council shall have
the following effects:



   (A)   Approval confers a right to the applicant, for a period of
three years from the date of approval, that existing zoning regulations as
they apply to the land included in the petition and the area plan shall
remain unchanged, provided that required subsequent planning and/or
construction are pursued in accordance with the approved area plan within
this time period. Upon the abandonment of a particular project approved under
this subchapter, or upon the expiration of three years from the effective
date of approval of a planned development wherein the planned development has
not been completed (or commenced and an extension of time granted by the City
Planning Commission), the authorization shall expire and the zoning shall be
reviewed by the City Planning Commission and amended by the City Council to a
suitable zoning district classification;



   (B)   Approval by the City Council and City Planning Commission of
an area plan constitutes acceptance of uses, building location, layout of
streets, dwelling unit count and type, floor areas, densities, construction
schedule, and all other elements of the area plan; and



   (C)   No deviation from the area plan approved by the City Council
shall be permitted except as provided in § 153.404.



(Prior Code, § 153.428)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2104, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.404  AMENDMENT OF AREA PLAN.



   (A)   A developer may request an amendment to an approved area plan.
All amendments shall follow the procedures and conditions herein required for
original submittal and review in full.



   (B)   A request for amendment shall be made in writing to the City
Council and shall clearly state the reasons therefor. Such reasons may be
based upon changing social or economic conditions or potential improvements
in layout mutually affecting the interest of the city and developer such as
technical causes, site conditions, state or federal projects and
installations, and statutory revisions. The City Council upon receipt of such
request shall refer said request to the City Planning Commission for hearing
and recommendations.



   (C)   The City Planning Commission, after the duly noticed public
hearing, shall recommend whether the requested change is to be approved,
modified, or denied. The burden shall be on the applicant to show good cause
for any requested change.



   (D)   The City Planning Commission shall notify the City Council and
any other applicable agency of its recommendation for approval, modification,
or denial of such changes. If the amendment is recommended for approval, the
revised drawings as approved shall each be signed by the applicant and the
owner(s) of record or the legal representative(s) of said owner(s).



   (E)   The City Planning Commission shall then transmit the
recommended revised drawings to the City Council for its approval.



   (F)   Following official adoption of the amendment and enactment of
the amending ordinance by the City Council, the designated change shall
become an amendment to the area plan.



(Prior Code, § 153.429)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2105, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.405  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.



   (A)   (1)   Performance bonds, cash deposits, or other forms of
security acceptable as to type and amount to the city shall be provided by
the applicant to the City Clerk (see § 153.563).



      (2)   Such security shall be for construction of all public
site improvements shown on the approved area plan.



   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall submit a cost estimate of the
improvements to be covered by the guarantee and verified as to amount by the
city’s Department of Public Services and Engineering.



      (2)   The city may release portions of a deposit in relation
to work completed and approved upon inspection as complying with the approved
plan; provided, however, that the balance on deposit will be sufficient to
complete remaining public site improvements.



      (3)   In the event that the applicant shall fail to provide
improvements according to an approved plan, the city shall have the authority
to have such work completed and to reimburse itself for costs of such work by
appropriating funds from the deposited security, or may require performance
by the bonding company.



(Prior Code, § 153.430)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2106, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.406  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any violations of such approved plan shall be grounds for the
Chief Inspector to order that all construction be stopped and to order that
building permits and certificates of occupancy be withheld until the
violation is removed or adequate guarantee of such removal is provided.



   (B)   Violations of any plan approved under this subchapter, or
failure to comply with any requirements of this subchapter, including any
agreements and conditions attached to any approved plan, shall be considered
a violation of this chapter as provided in § 153.999 herein.



(Prior Code, § 153.431)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2107, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



RIVERFRONT MIXED USE DISTRICT



§ 153.420  PURPOSE.



   The Riverfront Mixed Use District is a transitional area of the
Riverfront and Washington Avenue corridor intended for new commercial,
office, residential, park, recreation and marina development.  The District
and the sub-districts described below, are on the city zoning map and are
intended to guide and promote the development of Saginaw's River Corridor and
adjacent business districts in accordance with the Saginaw River Corridor
Master Plan and the City of Saginaw Master Plan.



(Prior Code, § 153.460)  (Ord. O-149, passed 9-9-2013, effective 9-19-2013;
Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.421  CHARACTER OF RMU DISTRICT.



   (A)   General character.  The Riverfront Mixed-Use District is
primarily characterized by commercial development along the Saginaw River
Corridor. A prime characteristic of this District is two cores of intense
pedestrian activity, Old Town and Downtown, with shopping and merchandising
activities that serve the entire community.



   (B)   Street, block and access patterns. The Riverfront Mixed-Use
District consists of two main street districts from which development
radiates and a river that bisects the District. Sites along the river tend to
be longer and more irregularly shaped lots, while downtown and commercial
areas follow a traditional, small-block street grid.



   (C)   Building placement and location. Residential buildings
typically have consistent, moderate front setbacks and consistent
orientation. Commercial buildings typically have consistent orientation
towards primary streets and shallow front setbacks with parking at the rear
and/or side of the building.



   (D)   Building height. The Riverfront Mixed-Use District is
characterized by low-scale buildings except for mid-rise commercial and
mixed-use structures, particularly at nodes or along primary streets, and
high-rise buildings in downtown centers.



   (E)   Mobility. There is a balance of pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle reliance with greater access to the multi-modal transportation system.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.422  DISTRICTS AND REGULATING PLAN.



   (A)   District intent.



      (1)   MS – Main Street District. The intent of the Main
Street District is to create a pedestrian-friendly, compact mixed-use
district. The Main Street District is broken down into sub-districts of MS-E
for Downtown and MS-W for Old Town.



      (2)   UE – Urban Edge District. The intent of the Urban Edge
District is to accommodate a flexible variety of uses and scales, preserve
historic homes, integrate context-sensitive mixed-uses, and serve as a
transition from denser Main Street to surrounding residential neighborhoods.



      (3)   RC – Riverfront Commercial. The intent of the
Riverfront Commercial District is to provide opportunity for more suburban
style commercial development including drive-thru service and restaurants and
wider front yard setbacks.



      (4)   UF – Urban Flex District. The intent of the Urban Flex
District is to acknowledge the transition of industrial uses to flex spaces
such as integrating housing with employment centers and strategically
integrating attached residential units into established residential
neighborhoods along certain corridors.



      (5)   INST – Institutional District. The intent of the
Institutional District is to preserve open space and allow for comprehensive
development of institutional, governmental and hospital campuses.    



      (6)   RR – Riverfront Residential District. The intent of
the Riverfront Residential District is to accommodate a variety of detached
and attached urban housing types.    



   (B)   Regulating plan.



      (1)   The regulating plan is the controlling document and
principal tool for implementing form districts. It is a subset of the Zoning
Map.



      (2)   Comparable to the Zoning Map, the regulating plan
provides specific information on the development parameters for parcels
within each district, and it may identify additional regulations and/or
special circumstances for specific locations.







(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.423  BUILDING FORM STANDARDS.



   (A)   General intent.  The intent of the Riverfront Mixed-Use
District is to:



      (1)   Promote and protect the Central Business District as a
safe, active, pedestrian-scaled, diverse area through building forms that
create a positive public street edge;



      (2)   Implement the Saginaw Master Plan;



      (3)   Integrate higher density in a way that respects and
relates to the character and built environment of adjacent areas;



      (4)   Combine a mix of uses to create a safe, vital community;



      (5)   Create unique, attractive, pedestrian and
bicycle-friendly places with a streetscape that prioritizes pedestrian
circulation; and



      (6)   Encourage urban-style infill development on vacant sites.



   (B)   Building form intent.  The following goals are considerations
with regard to building form in the Riverfront Mixed Use District:



      (1)   Height. Encourage buildings whose forms are responsive
to the surrounding context, including opportunities to reinforce existing and
evolving nodes of mixed-use, pedestrian and transit activities. Arrange
building heights and scaling devices to provide transitions to adjoining
areas.



      (2)   Siting.



         (a)   Required build-to. Provide a consistent street
edge to enhance character of the urban context. Define streets to promote
pedestrian activity and sense of place.



         (b)   Setbacks. Site buildings to be consistent with
intended character and functional requirements of the urban context. Site
buildings to define the street edge/public realm consistent with the context.
Use building siting to create positive transitions between districts.



         (c)   Parking location. Minimize the visual impacts of
parking areas on streets and adjoining property. Minimize conflicts between
pedestrian and vehicles.



      (3)   Design elements.



         (a)   Promote variation in building form that enhances
access to daylight, air and views from within and around new structures.
Encourage variation in building form that provides opportunities for
architectural scale relationships in large building contexts.



         (b)   Transparency. Maximize transparency of windows at
street level to activate the street. Use doors and windows to establish
scale, variation and patterns on building facades that provide visual
interest.



         (c)   Entrances. Give prominence to the pedestrian realm
as a defining element of neighborhood character. Provide convenient access to
buildings and pedestrian active uses from the street. Articulate building
entrances as visual aid in way-finding. Provide a positive relationship to
the street through access, orientation and placement consistent with the
context.    



   (C)   Primary building form standards.  The following standards are
to be used as a guide in developing building forms in the site plan process.



      (1)   Building form intent.



         (a)   General mixed-use. Establish the base set of
standards for a variety of mixed-use applications.







         (b)   Apartment. Establish standards for multi-unit
dwelling development that allows a variety of layouts, but requires a minimum
of one entrance at the street. Also accommodates, where permitted,
appropriately scaled group living, civic, and nonresidential development.







         (c)   Townhouse. Establish standards for appropriately
designed multi-unit dwelling development that requires each unit to have a
street-facing entrance. Also accommodates, where permitted, appropriately
scaled group living, civic, and nonresidential development.







         (d)   Urban house. Establish standards for single- and
two-unit dwelling developments consistent with the established character of
the Riverfront District. Also accommodates, where permitted, appropriately
scaled group living, civic, and nonresidential development.







         (e)   Drive-thru. To allow more flexible design
standards to accommodate unique circumstances of automotive-oriented uses
with an accessory drive-thru lane.







      (2)   Building types permitted by District.



 

P – Permitted
SLU – Special Land Use
 
Districts


MS-E
 
MS-W
 
UE
 
RC
 
UF
 
INT
 
RR


Building Type
 
Description
 
Main Street East - Downtown
 
Main Street West - Old Town
 
Urban Edge
 
Riverfront Commercial
 
Urban Flex
 
Institutional
 
Riverfront Residential




General Mixed-Use
 
Mixed-use buildings to reinforce pedestrian comfort, walkability, and
activity. Typically, active ground floor uses with high transparency window
areas creating a connection between the sidewalk and building interiors.
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
SLU
 



Apartment
 
Multi-unit dwelling requiring at least one street-facing entrance
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
SLU
 

 
SLU


Townhouse
 
Multi-unit dwellings with each unit having street- facing entrance
 
SLU
 
SLU
 
P
 

 
P
 

 
SLU


Urban house
 
Single and two-unit style buildings consistent with established character
 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
SLU
 
P


Drive-thru
 
To allow more flexible design standards to accommodate unique accessory
drive-thru circumstances
 

 

 

 
SLU
 
SLU
 

 



Building types identified above as SLU are subject to the special land use
standards in § 153.562.




 



      (3)   Building form standards by building type.



 

General Mixed-Use
 
Districts


Building Form Standards
 
MS-E
 
MS-W
 
UE
 
RC
 
UF
 
INT




HEIGHT
 

 

 

 

 

 



Stories (min/max)
 
3/-
 
2/5
 
1/3
 
1/3
 
1/5
 
1/-


Feet (min/max)
 
38'/-
 
24'/70'
 
-/50'
 
-/45'
 
-/70'
 
-/60'*


Ground floor, floor to floor height (min)
 
16'
 
16'
 
16'
 
-
 
-
 
-


SITING
 

 

 

 

 

 



REQUIRED FRONT YARD FRONTAGE
 
(min build-to % within front setback min/max) see § 153.427(B)


Primary street
 
85% 

5’-10’
 
85%

0'-5'
 
75% 

0'-5'
 
-
 
-
 
-


Non-primary street
 
75%

0' - 5'
 
75%

0'-5'
 
60%

0'-5'
 
-
 
-
 
-


Side street
 
60%

0'-5'
 
60%

0'-5'
 
40%

0'-5'
 
-
 
-
 
-


SETBACKS
 

 

 

 

 

 



Block sensitive setback required (see § 153.427(C)(2)
 
no
 
no
 
yes
 
no
 
yes
 
yes


Primary street (min)
 
5'
 
0'
 
0'
 
15'
 
5'
 
15'


Front, non-primary street (min)
 
0'
 
0'
 
0'
 
15'
 
0'
 
15'


Side street (min)
 
0'
 
0'
 
0'
 
15'
 
0'
 
15'


Side interior (min) adjacent to residential/ non-residential district
 
0'/0'
 
0'/0'
 
6'/0'
 
10'/5'
 
6'/0'
 
20'/15'


Rear, alley/no alley (min)
 
0' / 0'
 
0' / 0'
 
0'/10'
 
-/10'
 
0'/10'
 
10'/50'


PARKING
 

 

 

 

 

 



Surface parking between building and front street/side street
 
Not permitted/ not permitted
 

 
Not permitted/ not permitted
 
Permitted (10% max lot area)/ permitted
 
Not permitted/ permitted
 
Not permitted / not permitted


Ground floor parking setback from primary street (see § 153.467(C)(4)
 
30'
 
30'
 
30'
 
-
 
-
 
-


Vehicle access
 
From alley when present or as determined during site plan review


DESIGN ELEMENTS
 

 

 

 

 

 



Fenestration, ground floor, primary facade (min)
 
60%
 
60%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
30%


Fenestration, ground floor, secondary facade (min)
 
30%
 
25%
 
25%
 
25%
 
25%
 
25%


Fenestration, upper floors (min)
 
20%


Pedestrian access, primary facade
 
Entrance


*Buildings of greater than the maximum height may be allowed provided side
and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for
each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed.




 



 

Apartment
 
Districts


Building Form Standards
 
UE
 
RC
 
UF
 
RR




HEIGHT
 

 

 

 



Stories (min/max)
 
2/5
 
1/5
 
2/5
 
2/3


Feet (min/max)
 
24'/60'
 
-/60'
 
24'/60'
 
24'/40'


SITING
 

 

 

 



LOT
 

 

 

 



Lot size
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
6,000 sf


Lot width (min)
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
50'


SETBACKS
 

 

 

 



Block sensitive setback required (see § 153.427(C)(2)
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes


Primary street (min/max)
 
5'/15'
 
15'/50'
 
10'/20'
 
15'/25'


Front, non-primary street (min/max)
 
0'/15'
 
10'/25'
 
10'/20'
 
15'/25'


Side street (min)
 
5'
 
10'
 
5'
 
10'


Side interior (min)
 
10'
 
5'
 
5'
 
10'


Rear, alley/no alley
 
12'/20'


PARKING
 

 

 

 



Surface parking between building and primary street/side street
 
Not permitted/ not permitted
 
Not permitted / permitted
 
Not permitted / permitted
 
Not permitted / permitted


Vehicle access
 
From alley; or from street when no alley present


DESIGN ELEMENTS
 

 

 

 



Fenestration, primary facade (min)
 
20%


Fenestration, secondary facade (min)
 
10%


Pedestrian access, primary or secondary facade
 
Entrance




 



 

Townhouse
 
Districts


Building Form Standards
 
MS1
 
UE
 
RC
 
UF
 
RR




HEIGHT


Stories (max)
 
2.5


Feet (max)
 
35’


Ground floor finish elevation (min)
 
18”


SITING


Dwelling units per structure (min/max)
 
3/10


SETBACKS
 

 

 

 

 



Block sensitive setback required (see § 153.467(C)(2))
 
No
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes


Front (min)
 
5'
 
5'
 
20'
 
20'
 
15'


Side (each; min)
 
5'
 
5'
 
5'
 
5'
 
5'


Rear, alley/no alley
 
12'/20'
 
12'/20'
 
12'/20'
 
12'/20'
 
12'/25'


PARKING
 

 

 

 

 



Surface parking between building and primary street/side street
 
Not permitted/permitted


Vehicle access
 
From alley or from street when no alley present


DESIGN ELEMENTS


Fenestration, primary facade (min)
 
20%


Fenestration, secondary facade (min)
 
10%


Street facing garage doors, primary facade
 
Not permitted


Street facing garage door, side street
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted, maximum width 9' per unit
 
Permitted, 3' behind front facade, maximum width 9' per unit


Pedestrian access, primary facade
 
Porch or stoop


1   Not permitted on primary streets




 



 

Urban House
 
Districts


Building Form Standards
 
UE
 
RR




HEIGHT


Stories (max)
 
2.5


Feet (max)
 
35’


Ground floor finish elevation (min)
 
18”


SITING


SETBACKS & BUILDING COVERAGE
 

 



Block sensitive setback required (see § 153.467(C(2))
 
Yes
 
Yes


Primary street or front (min)
 
20’


Side street (min)
 
5’


Rear
 
25’
 
25’


Building coverage, including accessory structures (max)
 
50%
 
40%


PARKING
 

 



Surface parking between building and front street/side street
 
Not permitted/not permitted
 
Not permitted/ permitted


Vehicle access
 
From alley when present


DESIGN ELEMENTS


Attached garage allowed
 
Shall be setback 5' from principal building along the primary facade and
shall not exceed 35% of the entire width of the primary facade or 16',
whichever is greater


Pedestrian access, primary facade
 
Street-facing entrance and entry feature




 



 

Drive-Thru
 
Districts


Building Form Standards
 
RC
 
UF




HEIGHT


Stories (max)
 
3


Feet (max)
 
38'


Ground floor, floor to floor height (min)
 
16'


SITING


SETBACKS
 

 



Primary street or front (min)
 
15'
 
0'


Side street (min)
 
10'
 
0'


Side interior (min), adjacent to residential district/nonresidential
 
10'/ 5'
 
6' /0'


Rear, alley/no alley
 
0'/10'
 
0'/10'


PARKING
 

 



Surface parking between building and front street/side street
 
Permitted (10% max of lot area)/ permitted
 
Not permitted / permitted


Ground floor parking setback from primary street
 

 
30'


Vehicle access
 
One driveway per street frontage*


DESIGN ELEMENTS


Fenestration, primary facade (min)
 
50 - 70%


Fenestration, secondary facade (min)
 
30%


Pedestrian access, primary facade
 
Entrance


*   A second access may be approved by city staff upon a finding that the
additional access is essential for convenient access, and that the access is
spaced adequately and designed to minimize conflicts.




 



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.424  ADDITIONAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Facade articulation.



      (1)   Intent. To create visually interesting and human-scaled
facades, particularly those that face streets or open spaces and avoid large
areas of undifferentiated facades.



      (2)   Design standards. Building facades facing primary and
side streets shall incorporate, at a minimum, three of the following
architectural scaling elements.



         (a)   A change in color;



         (b)   A change in material or material module or pattern;



         (c)   A system of horizontal and vertical scaling
elements such as a belt course, string course, projecting fins, or projecting
cornice or eye brow;



         (d)   Expression of the structural system and infill
panels through a change in plane of at least three inches;



         (e)   Articulation of window and doorway surrounds,
which may include sills, lintels, pilasters, and mullions through a change in
plane of at least two inches;



         (f)   A system of horizontal and vertical articulating
reveals of at least three-eighths inch width by three-eighths inch depth;



         (g)   A system of art or ornament integral to the
building, such as an inset decorative panel or metal framework anchored to
embed in the building facade.



      (3)   Design guidelines.



         (a)   Facade articulation should be more detailed at the
ground floor.



         (b)   Exterior walls shall have architectural
delineation between the first and second stories. The second story facade
height shall be less than the first story height.



         (c)   Architectural scaling elements should be
integrated into the building facade and not appear as an insubstantial
overlay.



         (d)   Architectural scaling elements should be composed
in a way that highlight a building's intrinsic architectural characteristics,
including structural and use or ownership representation.



      (4)   Abutting facade. Where a principal building facade abuts
a facade of secondary importance, such as along an alley or internal service
area, architectural scaling elements should be integrated into that portion
of the secondary facade exposed to public view.



   (B)   Building materials.



      (1)   Intent. To allow for creative building design while
achieving the following:



         (a)   To create visual interest through a varied palette
of texture, color and module;



         (b)   To give buildings and surfaces a human scale;



         (c)   To ensure the consistent use of high quality
materials appropriate for an urban environment; and



         (d)   To promote safety, durability, sustainability and
ease of maintenance.



      (2)   Approved building materials. Only high-quality, durable
materials that complement existing materials and character of the District
shall be used on facades visible from the street. The following materials are
approved for use in any quantity. Other materials of equal quality may be
used.



         (a)   Brick, including glazed brick;



         (b)   Natural and architectural pre-cast stone;



         (c)   Architectural pre-cast concrete;



         (d)   Hard coat stucco;



         (e)   Glass and channel glass units;



         (f)   Wood lap siding;



         (g)   Architectural metal panel systems;



         (h)   Decorative metal framing systems with an
exterior-grade finish system; and



         (i)   Concrete masonry units with an architectural
coloration or finish.



      (3)   Limited building materials. The following materials
shall not be used on building facades visible from the street.



         (a)   Exterior insulation and finishing systems (EIFS);
or



         (b)   Materials of a structural or unfinished nature
such as tilt-up concrete panels and plain concrete masonry units.



   (C)   Rooftop and/or upper story decks.



      (1)   Intent: To protect the privacy of adjacent rear yards in
residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   Rooftop and/or upper story decks are prohibited in the
rear 35% of the zone lot depth.



      (3)   The Chief Inspector, or designee, may prohibit other
similar structures in the rear 35% of the lot as measured from the rear lot
line, when the Chief Inspector, or designee, finds the structure would have
similar adverse privacy impacts.



   (D)   Pedestrian access.



      (1)   Applicability. The building form standards specify which
type of pedestrian access is required for each building form.



      (2)   Pedestrian access requirements. The following are
required supplemental standards for each type of pedestrian access:



         (a)_Entrance. An entrance shall provide a clear, obvious,
publicly accessible connection between the street and the primary use within
the building.



            1.   An entrance shall be located on the primary
street facing facade; 



            2.   An entrance shall be functional and
unobstructed during open business hours; 



            3.   An entrance shall be one of the following:



               a.   Door. An entrance on the same plane as
the building facade.



               b.   Recessed entrance. An entrance inset
behind the plane of the building facade by no more than 15 feet.



               c.   Corner entrance. An angled
street-facing entrance located on the corner of a building at approximately
45º to the intersecting streets.



         (b)   Entry feature. An entry feature shall signal the
connection between the street and the primary use within the building.



            1.   An entry feature shall be located on the
front facade.



            2.   An entry feature shall be a door, gate, front
porch, front stoop, front terrace, canopy and/or arcade.



   (E)   General site design and facility standards. All development
shall provide:



      (1)   Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and
treatment of turf to handle storm waters, prevent erosion and formation of
dust;



      (2)   Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian
circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and loading
space, facilities for waste disposal;



      (3)   Arrangement of buildings and vehicular circulation open
spaces so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily
exposed to vehicular traffic;



      (4)   Adequate amount and proper location of pedestrian walks,
malls and landscaped spaces to separate horizontally or vertically 
pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation loading places from general
vehicular circulation facilities;



      (5)   Arrangement and orientation of buildings and location of
off-street parking areas so as to minimize the impacts on adjacent properties;



      (6)   Proper arrangement of signs and lighting devices with
respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential districts to
minimize hazardous distraction, glare, and reduce visual clutter;



      (7)   Adequate amount and safe location of play areas for
children and other recreational areas according to the concentration of
residential occupancy;



      (8)   Adequate consideration for the access needs of residents
with disabilities; and



      (9)   Adequate identification of buildings, particularly in
development where two or more buildings use one street address or where two
or more buildings are located on private street or drives.



   (F)   Landscaping and screening.



      (1)   Intent: To encourage site design that improves
pedestrian experience, site permeability, reduces the urban heat island
effect, and is easily maintained.



      (2)   Areas of lot coverage that are not paved or occupied by
building footprint must be landscaped with grass lawn, ground covers,
perennial/shrub beds or a combination thereof.



      (3)   Non-organic ground covers (such as, stone chips, rock)
must be arranged in a deliberate manner and may not exceed more than 25% of
the site landscape area.



      (4)   Street yard landscaping within the public rights-of-way.



         (a)   Public rights-of-way shall be planted with grass.
Trees, shrubs, or other ground covers may be planted within the right-of-way
only as otherwise permitted by city ordinance or as otherwise provided by
other appropriate authorities with jurisdiction over the street.



         (b)   Yards abutting primary streets shall incorporate
decorative paving and streetscape elements. Plant material shall be located
in tree wells, bioswales, and above ground planters.



      (5)   Between sidewalk and parking.



         (a)   Setback landscaping between the edge of sidewalk
and parking lot edge shall consist of lawn and landscape planting beds.



         (b)   Landscape planting beds shall be a minimum of 25%
of the landscape setback area.



         (c)   Setback areas greater than 15 feet in depth must
plant at least one deciduous tree for every 30 feet of frontage or part
thereof and a minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each ten lineal feet
of frontage, or portion thereof.



         (d)   These landscape requirements are in addition to
other screening or buffer requirements as indicated in the applicable zoning
district section. 



      (6)   Between sidewalk and building.



         (a)   Non-residential setback landscaping between the
edge of sidewalk and building face shall consist of lawn, landscape planting
beds, and paved pedestrian areas.



         (b)   Landscape planting beds shall be a minimum of 25%
of the landscape setback area. This may be reduced to 0% in areas where the
public sidewalk is immediately adjacent to the building face.



         (c)   Setback areas greater than 20 feet in depth must
plant at least one deciduous tree for every 30 feet of frontage or part
thereof and a minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each ten lineal feet
of frontage, or portion thereof.



      (7)   Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall
be arranged in a manner that improves the safety of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, guides traffic movement, improves the environment and improves the
appearance of the parking area and site. Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with the following standards:    



         (a)   One tree shall be required for each 4,000 square
feet of paved driveway and parking lot surface, provided that no fewer than
two trees are provided.



         (b)   All of the required parking lot trees and
landscape areas shall be placed within landscape islands inside of the
parking lot or the area within ten feet surrounding the parking lot.



         (c)   Each tree shall be provided with an open land area
of not less than 150 square feet to provide area for infiltration and with a
minimum diameter of six feet at the trunk of the tree for protection. If a
sprinkled irrigation system is provided, the open land areas can be reduced
to no less than 75 square feet. Tree plantings shall also be protected from
automobiles with curbing or other suitable device.



         (d)   Landscaping shall be installed such that, when
mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage
patterns on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of
ingress or egress.



      (8)   Parking lot screening.



         (a)   Front yard. An eight-foot landscape buffer is
required which may be reduced to five feet with a three-foot opaque masonry
knee wall.



         (b)   Side and rear yard when adjacent to single-family
residential district.  A six-foot landscape buffer is required which may be
reduced to five feet with a three foot opaque masonry knee wall.



   (G)   Multiple buildings on a single lot.



      (1)   Intent: To provide design flexibility in the siting of
multiple buildings on a single lot while mitigating any potential adverse
impacts.



      (2)   When build-to standards are met for the entire zone lot,
and surface parking location and street level activation standards are met
for the buildings being used to meet the required build-to standards,
additional buildings on the site are not subject to the build-to, surface
parking location, and street level activation standards.







      (3)   A continuous network of pedestrian walkways within and
between developments, providing pedestrians the opportunity to walk between
destinations, including buildings and amenities, must be provided. Pedestrian
walkways that cross a parking lot or internal street or driveway must be
clearly marked through a change in paving materials distinguished by their
color, texture or height.



   (H)   Design standard exceptions.



      (1)   Height exceptions. The requirements of § 153.055 shall
apply.



      (2)   Setback permitted encroachments.



         (a)   Architectural features may project out one and
one-half feet, including belt courses, sills, lintels, pilasters, pediments,
cornices; chimneys and fireplace insert vents not exceeding six feet in width.



         (b)   Canopies providing cover to an entrance shall not
exceed 25% of the width of face of building or 20 feet in width, whichever is
less.



         (c)   Gutters and roof overhangs may encroach up to
three feet.



         (d)   Porches, decks, patios, exterior balconies,
stoops, and above grade stairways at the street level connecting to a porch
must meet the following standards:



            1.   All sides shall be at least 50% open except
for any side abutting a building facade.



            2.   May project up to eight feet in front yard,
five feet at side street and rear.



            3.   Not permitted in side interior.



         (e)   Projecting windows may project one and one-half
feet into front, side streets and rear setbacks and shall be a minimum of one
and one-half feet above finished floor and not extend floor to ceiling.



         (f)   Driveways may encroach any distance into a yard;
surface parking is not allowed.



         (g)   Barrier-free access structures where no
alternative locations are available may encroach any distance into any yard.



         (h)   Gas and electric meters may encroach a maximum of
one and one-half feet into any yard.



         (i)   Ground mounted air conditioning units or other
similar mechanical equipment may encroach a maximum of three feet into a side
or rear yard, as long as the following are met:



            1.   Does not exceed noise standards;



            2.   Does not exceed four feet in height or ten
square feet in area per unit;



            3.   Has adequate screening to conceal it from
view from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way by means of
landscaping and/or fencing; and



            4.   The location of the unit(s) minimizes the
impacts on adjoining properties.



         (j)   An emergency egress meeting Fire Code may project
a maximum of three feet into front and side yards and a maximum of ten feet
into rear yards.



         (k)   A pedestrian bridge where the encroachment is
necessary to complete a connection for access to a mass transit station may
encroach any distance.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.425  MAIN STREET DISTRICT ADDITIONAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of the Main Street District (both east and
west) requires ground floor storefront uses and architectural requirements in
order to preserve the walkable, active interface with the public realm. Main
Street buildings shall also meet the design specifications for the building
form standards of § 153.423 and additional design standards of § 153.424,
except as provided herein.



   (B)   Fenestration.



      (1)   Ground floor fenestration shall comprise a minimum of
70% of the ground story facade between two and eight feet above grade.



      (2)   Ground floor windows may not be made opaque by window
treatments (except operable sunscreen devices). A minimum of 80% of the
window surface shall allow a view into the building interior for a depth of
at least 12 feet.



   (C)   Horizontal articulation.



      (1)   Horizontal articulation is the arrangement and
proportion of facade materials and elements (windows, doors, columns,
pilasters, and bays) into discreet bays.



      (2)   For each block frontage, facades shall be divided into
discreet horizontally articulated bays at no greater than 60 feet each.



      (3)   Adjacent facades shall contain different wall materials
and rhythm of bays to distinguish each storefront in the horizontal plane.



      (4)   There shall be a minimum of one functional entrance
every full 25 feet of frontage.







   (D)   Ground floor articulation.  Main Street buildings shall be
designed to create a distinct and separated ground floor area through the use
of a horizontal expression line, such as a string course, change in material
or textures, awnings or canopies, or a sign band between the first and second
stories.



   (E)   Uses.



      (1)   Only active ground floor uses are permitted:



         (a)   Retail sales and services;



         (b)   Restaurant/bar/lounge; or



         (c)   Residential and lodging uses.



      (2)   Support functions such as lobbies, rental offices, and
club rooms may be located on the ground floor.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.426  USES AND PARKING STANDARDS.



 

P   =   Permitted

SLU   =   Special Land Use
 
DISTRICT


USES
 
MS
 
UE
 
RC
 
UF
 
INT
 
RR




Single unit detached residential
 

 
P
 

 

 

 
P


Attached residential
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 

 
1-4 units: P
 
5+units: SLU


Mixed-use
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
0-2,000 SF commercial: P1


Retail sales and service
 
P
 
P1
 
P
 

 

 



Office
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
SLU
 



Lodging
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



Institutional
 
P
 
P
 

 

 
SLU
 



Public assembly
 

 
SLU
 
SLU
 
SLU
 
SLU
 
SLU


R & D
 

 

 
SLU
 
P
 

 



Light industrial
 

 

 

 
SLU
 

 



Parking
 

 

 

 

 
SLU2
 



1   Along primary streets only

2   Any parking as a principal use (required for an adjacent use)requires
Riverfront Commission approval

Uses identified above as SLU are subject to the special land use standards in
§153.562




 



   (A)   Use definitions.



      (1)   Attached residential.  Two or more family residence,
boarding or lodging houses or residential care facilities, and accessory uses
thereto.



      (2)   Mixed-use.  A development that blends a combination of
residential and nonresidential uses where those functions are physically and
functionally integrated.    



      (3)   Retail sales and service.



         (a)   Commercial establishments involved in the retail
sale of new or used products, and the retail provision of consumer, repair,
banking with a retail focus, or rental services to individuals, households
and businesses; and    



         (b)   Eating/drinking establishments.



      (4)   Office.  Uses where a person transacts his or her
business or carries on his or her stated profession in administrative,
clerical, arts, or professional (such as, architect, lawyer, medical, dental)
fields.



      (5)   Institutional.



         (a)   Elementary, secondary, vocational school, college
and university; and



         (b)   Municipal services, offices and uses.



      (6)   R&D.



         (a)   A research and development facility, training
facility, production studio, laboratory, display/showroom/sales facility, or
other similar use;



         (b)   A facility for scientific research, investigation,
testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory; or



         (c)   Production facilities for the production of
consumer goods such as food, beverages, art, clothing, textiles, etc. that
have a minimum of 20% floor area dedicated to retail sales.



      (7)   Light industrial.



         (a)   Establishments primarily engaged in the sale,
storage, and distribution of goods and materials to retailers or other
businesses for resale to individual or business customers. This land use
category does not include heavy manufacturing, resource extraction, scrap
operations, or salvage operations.



         (b)   Manufacturing establishments primarily engaged in
the fabrication or assembly of products from pre-structured materials or
components; or a manufacturing establishment whose operations include storage
of materials; processing, fabrication, or assembly of products; and loading
and unloading of new materials and finished products, and does not produce or
utilize in large quantities as an integral part of the manufacturing process,
toxic, hazardous, or explosive materials. Because of the nature of its
operations and products, little or no noise, odor, vibration, glare, and/or
air and water pollution is produced, and, therefore, there is minimal impact
on surrounding properties.



   (B)   Parking standards.



      (1)   Parking requirements. Parking shall be provided for all
uses in accordance with the requirements of § 153.126 except that the
Planning Commission may reduce the amount of on-site parking required in the
Riverfront Mixed Use District by up to 50% in the following instances:



         (a)   The parking requirement may be satisfied through
shared parking with an adjacent use. All uses must be located within 300 feet
of the shared parking and a copy of an executed shared parking agreement must
be provided to the city. A mixed-use development that has uses with different
peak hour parking demands, such as a restaurant in an office building.



         (b)   This may include on-street parking that is located
along the lot's frontage and public off-street parking lots that are located
within 500 feet of the site.



         (c)   The parking requirement may be reduced where the
applicant can demonstrate, based on supporting documentation provided by the
applicant, the parking need for that particular use is less than required by
this subchapter or valet service to a satellite parking lot will be provided.



         (d)   Total parking requirements shall not be reduced by
more than 50% even where a site satisfied more than one of the above criteria.



      (2)   Bicycle parking.



         (a)   Intent: The intent of this section is to provide
adequate and safe facilities for the temporary placement and use of bicycles.
This section is intended to specify the required type, number, and location
of bicycle parking spaces on a site. The regulations and requirements are
designed to promote and encourage the safety and general welfare of the
community by:



            1.   Promoting an alternative and energy-efficient
mode of transportation;



            2.   Encouraging a healthy lifestyle by promoting
and accommodating the use of bicycles; and



            3.   Providing adequate and safe facilities for
the temporary placement of bicycles.



         (b)   Applicability.



            1.   Bicycle parking shall be provided for any new
building constructed after the effective date of this section. After the
effective date of this section, bicycle parking shall also be provided on all
sites when an addition to an existing building is constructed that results in
the need for additional motor vehicle parking spaces or for any change in the
use of a building that results in the need for additional motor vehicle
parking spaces.



            2.   This section does not prohibit the voluntary
installation of bicycle parking that conforms to the requirements set forth
in this section.



            3.   Except as otherwise required, a bicycle
parking area shall be treated in a similar manner as required motor vehicle
parking area.



         (c)   Exceptions. Bicycle parking shall be required for
all uses, with the exception of one- and two-family residential uses.    



         (d)   Location.



            1.   A bicycle parking area shall be located such
that it is visible, safe, and convenient with adequate lighting provided.



            2.   Bicycle parking areas shall be located to
maximize accessibility to building entrances.



         (e)   Design criteria and dimensions. Bicycle parking
racks and lockers are encouraged to be unique in design and appearance;
however, the bicycle parking area shall be functional, operational, and shall
provide for the following:



            1.   A bicycle rack, bicycle locker, or
functionally equivalent structures shall be used to secure a bicycle.



            2.   Bicycle parking areas incorporating the
standard inverted “U” shaped bicycle rack, or functionally equivalent
structure, shall have the following dimensions:



               a.   The minimum height of the bicycle rack
shall be 36 inches from the base to the top of the rack.



               b.   The minimum length for the bicycle rack
shall be two feet.



            3.   A bicycle rack shall accommodate at least two
bicycles.



            4.   The exterior surface of bicycle racks and
bicycle lockers shall be non-abrasive, non-marring, and durable.



            5.   The bicycle parking area shall be constructed
with adequate space to allow operation of the locking mechanism and each
bicycle parking space shall be easily accessible. A bicycle parking area
shall not interfere with any designated pedestrian sidewalk or pathway,
required vehicle parking spaces or vehicle maneuvering lanes, and shall not
eliminate any required landscape area.



            6.   The bicycle parking rack shall be installed
so that the rack supports the bicycle in an upright position and allows for
the bicycle frame and front wheel to be securely locked.    



            7.   The bicycle parking area shall be hard
surfaced with material such as asphalt, concrete, or a brick paving system
and shall be adequately maintained and kept free of mud, dust, ice, and snow.



            8.   The bicycle racks, bicycle lockers or
functionally equivalent structures must be securely anchored.



            9.   Up to one-half of the required bicycle
parking spaces on the site may be located inside of a building.



         (f)   Shared bicycle parking facilities. For sites
containing multiple uses or tenants, a single bicycle parking area may be
provided as long as the total number of bicycle parking spaces provided is
not less than the sum of all of the separate uses combined.



            1.   Bicycle parking requirements.  Unless
otherwise provided, one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every ten
motor vehicle parking spaces required. The minimum number of bicycle parking
spaces provided shall not be less than two. The maximum number of bicycle
parking spaces shall not exceed 50.



            2.   Reduction of required motor vehicle parking
spaces. The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces on a site may be
reduced by one motor vehicle parking space for every two bicycle parking
spaces installed on a site in compliance with this section. Motor vehicle
parking spaces may not be reduced by more than 10% of the total number of
required motor vehicle parking spaces.    



         (g)   Waiver. An individual may submit a written request
to the Chief Inspector, or designee, for a waiver from the requirements of
this section. The request shall state the reason(s) for the waiver and
contain any other applicable information related to the waiver. In making a
determination regarding a waiver the Chief Inspector, or designee, may
consider characteristics of the site including the type of use, site layout
(accessibility, maneuverability, design, and other related elements), or
unique circumstances.



      (3)   Parking lot design. The requirements of § 153.131 shall
apply.



      (4)   Loading. The requirements of § 153.132 shall apply.



      (5)   Parking deck design. 



         (a)   Intent. To minimize the visual impact of
structured parking decks on the public realm, mitigate nuisances including
noise and light, and design decks to be visually compatible with the
surrounding character and development.



         (b)   Design standards.



            1.   Spandrel panels or opaque architectural wall
systems, a minimum of 42 inches high, shall be required to screen the view of
parking cars and car headlights from the opposite side of the street.



            2.   For all exposed, above-grade parking
structures on side streets and alleys, at least 50% of the ground floor level
must be covered  by an architectural screen.



            3.   Parking decks exposed to view shall be
subject to the same standards as buildings in terms of massing, form, and
building character.



            4.   The 30-foot parking setback area shall apply
on primary streets and is required to be lined on all exterior ground-floor
elevations by non-parking uses.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.427  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Applicability. For properties located in the Riverfront
Mixed-Use District, as designated on the Zoning Map, compliance with each
component of this subchapter shall apply based on the table below:



 


 
Height
 
Siting
 
Design Standards
 
Uses
 
Parking




New construction
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Expansion of building area:


   0%-25% of building area
 
X
 

 
X
 
X
 
X


   26% or more of building area
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Changes in use:


   Does not require additional parking or building additions
 

 

 

 
X
 
X


   Requires additional parking or expand the parking lot by more than 10%
from the approved site plan
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Expansion of parking area
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
X


Facade changes
 

 

 
X
 

 



Improvements to nonconforming sites, structures and uses are also subject to
review according to §§ 153.100 through 153.112




 



   (B)   Plan review.



      (1)   Site plan and concept plan reviews and approvals shall
be required for the activities or uses listed in § 153.425.



      (2)   Development requiring site plan review shall follow the
site plan review process set forth in § 153.083.



      (3)   Approvals are obtained from the Planning Commission,
City Council, or Chief Inspector, or designee, depending upon the nature of
the proposed construction or use. Where City Council approval is required, it
shall be based upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Where the
ordinance allows the city to grant modifications to a specific requirement,
the approval authority shall be the body with the authority to grant the
associated modification or waiver, based upon the standards provided in that
section. Variances may only be granted by the Board of Appeals on Zoning as
set forth in § 153.586.



      (4)   Activities and uses that are exempt from site
plan/sketch plan approval still require a building permit. All construction
or building modification is subject to city building permit requirements of
the Inspections Division of the Department of Neighborhood Services and
Inspections.



      (5)   The Chief Inspector, or designee, retains the option to
require a complete site plan for review by the Planning Commission,
particularly for sites which do not comply with previously approved site
plans, sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts
or sites experiencing problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or
other general health and safety issues. If a full site plan is required, the
Chief Inspector, or designee, shall inform the applicant to submit a set of
plans in accordance with § 153.083(B) within 14 days of receipt of the
application.



      (6)   Concept plan review. Minor expansions, accessory
structures, or changes in use to existing sites are permitted to provide less
detailed information than a full scale site plan review. The level of
information is intended to be proportional to the extent of the change and
yet ensure adequate review for compliance with applicable standards. 
Submissions for concept plan review shall include:



         (a)   Application form;



         (b)   Conceptual review fee;



         (c)   The name and address of the owner and any
designated representative of the owner;



         (d)   Written description of the proposed use;



         (e)   Conceptual site plan, illustrating existing site
features such as lot dimensions, general footprints of buildings and parking,
and provides more detail on the areas of the site proposed to be changed. The
level of information required shall be established by the Chief Inspector, or
designee, to be sufficient to ensure the modification complies with this and
other applicable city codes; and



         (f)   A location map.



 

Review Process Approvals
 
Administrative
 
Planning Commission
 
City Council


Concept Plan
 
Full Site Plan




Site plan review
 



   New development
 

 

 
X
 



   Major expansion
 

 

 
X
 



   Minor expansion
 
X
 

 

 



   Accessory structures
 
X
 

 

 



   Change in use that requires additional parking or expand the parking
lot by more than 10% from the approved site plan
 
X
 

 

 



   Provide more parking spaces than permitted (must meet special land use
criteria)
 

 

 
X
 



Special land use
 

 

 
X
 



Rezoning
 

 

 
X
 
X




 



   (C)   Modifications requiring Planning Commission approval.



      (1)   Modifications to the design standards of §§ 153.423
and 153.424 may be approved by the Planning Commission. A modification shall
require an application that includes a site plan and a front elevation
drawing of the proposed building superimposed on a color drawing or
photograph of the entire block showing the relationship of the proposed
building to other buildings on the block. The application shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission based upon the following criteria:



         (a)   The design of the building shall be in keeping
with the architectural character of the Riverfront Mixed-Use District, as
articulated in the Master Plan. This shall not prevent innovation and
creativity in design that is in keeping with the Master Plan, as determined
by the Planning Commission.



         (b)   The building shall be oriented toward the front
sidewalk, having a functioning entrance and enhance the continuity of the
pedestrian oriented environment. A modification shall not result in
increasing the dominance of vehicular parking or garage doors along the front
of the building.



         (c)   The design of the roof shall be compatible with
character of other buildings along the block and shall meet district height
requirements.



         (d)   The exterior finish materials shall be of equal or
better quality, in terms of durability and appearance/texture similar to
brick, stone, or wood, as those permitted in the district. The intent is to
accommodate new technologies and building material while maintaining the
desired character of the Riverfront Mixed-Use District, as defined in
subsection (1) above.



         (e)   Ground floor windows shall be provided along the
front sidewalk to maintain the pedestrian-orientation of the streetscape and
upper story windows and shall not be incompatible with the rhythm and
proportions of windows on other buildings along the block.



      (2)   Relief from unlisted standards. Any request for relief
from a required form district standard other than those listed above shall be
made through the variance permit procedures set forth in § 153.586.



      (3)   Deviations from approved site plan. Minor changes to the
approved final site plan may be approved by the Chief Inspector, or designee,
without requiring a resubmittal to the Planning Commission or City Council,
as applicable, provided that the applicant or property owner notifies the
Chief Inspector, or designee, of any proposed amendment to such approved site
plan prior to making said change on the site and the Chief Inspector, or
designee, determines the proposed revision does not alter the basic design,
compliance with the standards of approval, nor any specified conditions of
the approved site plan. Where the modifications are not determined to be
minor, then the site plan shall require resubmittal to the Planning
Commission or City Council, as applicable, for approval as a site plan
amendment. For purposes of interpretation, the following shall be considered
minor changes:   



         (a)   The size of structures may be reduced, or
increased by up to 5% provided the overall density of units does not increase.



         (b)   Movement of a building or buildings by no more
than ten feet.



         (c)   Plantings approved in the landscape plan may be
replaced by similar types and sizes of landscaping which provides a similar
screening effect on a one-to-one or greater basis.



         (d)   Trees to be preserved that were damaged or lost
during construction may be replaced by trees of a similar species with a
minimum caliper of two inches, with two new trees required for each tree
replaced. 



         (e)   Improvements to site access or circulation, such
as deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths and the
like.



         (f)   Changes of building materials to another of higher
quality, as determined by the Chief Inspector, or designee.



         (g)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the
character of the use.



         (h)   Slight modification of sign placement or reduction
of size.



         (i)   Changes required or requested by the city, county,
state or federal agency for safety reasons or for compliance with other
applicable laws.



         (j)   Situations similar to the above.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



§ 153.428  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   Streets and frontages.



      (1)   Primary streets.



         (a)   Primary streets are depicted on the regulating
plan. These are intended to be the defining corridors of the Riverfront
Mixed-Use District. The primary streets are intended for active, retail-based
storefronts and serve as the most visitor-friendly areas for increased
importance on character and accessibility.



         (b)   Primary streets may be along front or side
frontages.



      (2)   Frontages and lot lines.



         (a)   The front shall be the zone lot line abutting the
street frontage, between any intervening rights-of-way (including alleys), on
which a greater number of principal buildings face.



         (b)   The rear shall be the zone lot line opposite the
front.



         (c)   For lots abutting more than one street, the side
street shall be the zone lot line abutting the street that is not the front.



         (d)   The remaining zone lot lines shall be side
interior.







      (3)   Facades.



         (a)   Primary facades shall be the building elevation
along the build-to line on the front yard frontage.



         (b)_Secondary facades shall be any facades that are not
primary facades.



   (B)   Build-to requirements.



      (1)   Required build-to.



         (a)   Intent. To clearly define the public realm through
consistent building placement, massing and orientation.



         (b)   Applicability. The building form standards specify
required build-to standards.



         (c)   Rules of measurement.



            1.   Required build-to standards are measured from
and perpendicular to the lot line abutting a street. Where a public access
easement abuts the public street right-of-way on a lot, the build-to shall be
measured from the easement rather than the lot line.



            2.   Required build-to is calculated as a
percentage using the length of the primary building wall (and/or the length
of a permitted build-to alternative) divided by the total lot width, as
measured at the lot line abutting the subject street right-of-way.



            3.   For recessed vehicle garage doors that
provide direct entrance to an integrated parking structure, but which are
setback farther than the maximum of the build-to range due to city standards
or safety concerns, the width in linear feet may be added to the length of
the applicable building wall for purposes of meeting the minimum percentage.



            4.   Buildings shall be built at or within the
build-to frontage requirement for at least the minimum percentage required
along the front and/or side street frontage.







      (2)   Build-to alternatives. The following alternatives may be
used as alternatives to a required build-to minimum percentage standard,
subject to Chief Inspector, or designee, approval:



         (a)   Permanent outdoor seating. Permanent outdoor patio
seating space shall be placed between the building and the front or side
street lot line.



         (b)   Private open space.  The following requirements
apply:



            1.   Shall be open to the sky, but may include
open structures, such as pergolas;



            2.   May include tables, chairs, benches,
sculptures and similar elements;



            3.   Shall be fully visible from the street; and



            4.   Shall not be permanently enclosed by
railings, fences, gates or walls that do not allow public access during
business hours.



         (c)   Garden wall with covered seating. Garden walls
must be between 30 inches and 42 inches in heights with the following
exceptions:



            1.   Decorative and/or structural piers may exceed
42 inches in height.   



            2.   Seating incorporated into the wall may be a
minimum of 18 inches in height and may be accessed from both sides of the
wall without an intervening division.



            3.   Allowed materials are limited to masonry or
an ornamental metal fence with masonry piers, spaced not more than 25 feet,
with landscaping.



         (d)   Courtyard.  The following requirements apply:



            1.   Shall face the front street;



            2.   Shall have a width of at least 15 feet,
measured as the distance between the two closest edges of the exterior walls
facing each other across the courtyard;



            3.   Shall have a depth of at least 30 feet
measured as the horizontal distance between the primary street-facing
exterior building wall nearest to the primary street zone lot line and the
closest facade of the exterior building wall facing the primary street behind
the courtyard, measured perpendicular to the lot line;



            4.   The courtyard is intended primarily for
pedestrian use and shall include all of the following physical
characteristics:



               a.   Shall be no more than one-half story
above or below grade at the lot line adjoining the front street;



               b.   Shall be physically accessible from the
front street, but may be secured for private use;



               c.   Shall be visible from the front street
zone lot line;



               d.   Shall be open to the sky; and



               e.   Shall be bounded on not less than three
sides with connected building facades.



            5.   The courtyard area may be used for any of the
following:



               a.   Single or multiple entries to uses
within the building;



               b.   Public or private landscaped area; or



               c.   Outdoor seating area.



   (C)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Setbacks. The minimum horizontal distance between the
building line and a front, rear, or side lot line, a protected area or
parking.







      (2)   Block sensitive setback.



         (a)   Intent. To provide context-sensitive infill
development related to existing conditions and to maintain an existing
character along the same side of a street.



         (b)   Applicability. Requirements per building form
standards.



         (c)   Average. A setback equal to the average setback of
50% of the buildings to be retained within the blockface. The applicant shall
provide a map with those measurements.



      (3)   Protected area setback.



         (a)   Intent. To provide a setback from sensitive
natural features.



         (b)   High water mark. Parcels fronting the Saginaw
River or Lake Linton shall be setback 20 feet from the ordinary high water
mark.



      (4)   Parking setback.



         (a)   Intent. To accommodate the functional siting of
buildings and surface parking while continuing to minimize the impacts of
parking on the pedestrian experience.



         (b)   Surface parking not allowed. Where it is indicated
that surface parking is not allowed between a building and a primary street
and/or a side street, surface parking shall not be located in the area
directly between any portion of a building facade and the street.



         (c)   Parking setback. Parking and loading spaces are
not permitted within a primary street 30-foot parking setback, as indicated
in the building form standards. Vehicle maneuvering lanes are highly
discouraged within parking setbacks and are only permitted when alternative
locations are not available or if it is determined necessary during site plan
review.







   (D)   Building height.



      (1)   The minimum and maximum building heights are measured
from the average fronting sidewalk to the halfway point of a pitched roof or
to the top of a wall plate for flat roofs.



      (2)   The minimum height shall be satisfied from the build-to
line back to a depth of at least 30 feet.



      (3)   A building height maximum of a half story, labeled as
“.5", indicates an attic story with dormers in a pitched roof. Dormers in a
half story shall be less than 15 feet wide and their collective width may not
be more than 60% of the building elevation length.



      (4)   Ground floor height shall be measured from the average
fronting sidewalk grade to the second story finished floor elevation.



      (5)   Upper floor clear height is measured from finished floor
elevation to finished ceiling elevation.







   (E)   Upper floor stepbacks adjacent to residential.



      (1)   Intent. To provide adequate light and air for abutting
residential developments.



      (2)   Design standard. An upper floor stepback shall be
required for properties adjacent to single-family residential zoned lots,
whether directly adjacent or abutting through an alley right-of-way. To
determine the height reduction area, a vertical plane shall be extended from
the nearest lot line of the residentially zoned lot 20 feet in height from
average grade and then in a direction of 60º, rising vertically, towards the
center of the subject lot.







   (F)   Fenestration.



      (1)   Fenestration is defined as openings in the building
wall, including windows, doors and open areas. When measuring fenestration,
framing elements (such as muntins) with a dimension less than one inch are
considered part of the opening.



      (2)   Ground floor fenestration shall be measured between two
and eight feet above grade.



      (3)   Windows shall be oriented vertically.



      (4)   Windows glazing shall be clear and shall transmit at
least 65% of the visible daylight.



(Ord. O-202, passed 4-2-2018, effective 4-12-2018)



SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS



§ 153.440  SCHEDULE AND FOOTNOTES TO REGULATIONS.



 


 

 

 

 
Minimum Yard Setbacks (ft.) (N)



 
Sides (C)
 



Zoning District
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Size
 
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
 
Front (D)
 
Least One
 
Total of Two
 
Rear (D)




R-1
 
60
 
6,000
 
40
 
20
 
5
 
14
 
25


R-1A
 
100
 
12,000
 
40
 
20
 
5
 
14
 
25


R-2
 
50 (G)
 
5,000 (G)
 
40
 
20
 
5
 
14
 
25


R-3
 
60
 
(H)
 
40
 
20
 
5
 
14
 
20


R-4
 
200
 
(J)
 
40
 
20
 
5 (I)
 
14 (I)
 
20


RO-1
 
60
 
(H)
 
40
 
20
 
10
 
20
 
20


B-1
 
40
 
4,000 (J)
 
50
 
20 (L)
 
10 (M)
 
20 (M)
 
20


B-2
 
40
 
4,000 (J)
 
50
 
-
 
10 (M)
 
20 (M)
 
-


B-3
 
-
 
(J)
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-


M-1
 
100
 
20,000
 
75
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0


M-2
 
100
 
20,000
 
75
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0


M-3
 
100
 
-
 
75
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0


RMU
 
-
 
(J)
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-




 



 


 
Maximum Height of Buildings (B)
 

 

 

 



Zoning District
 
In Stories
 
In Feet
 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwlg. Unit (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Bldg. Frnt. and Depth

(in ft.)
 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)*
 
Rec Space Ratio (RSR)*




R-1
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
864
 
26
 
-
 
-


R-1A
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
864
 
26
 
-
 
-


R-2
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
864
 
26
 
-
 
-


R-3
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
26
 
0.7
 
.12


R-4
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
26
 
2.0
 
.07


RO-1
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
26
 
1.0
 
.12


B-1
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
-
 
1.0
 
.07


B-2
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
-
 
5.0
 
.07


B-3
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
-
 
10.0
 
.07


M-1
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
0.8
 
-


M-2
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
2.0
 
-


M-3
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
4.0
 
-


RMU
 
-
 
-
 
(K)
 
-
 
10.0
 
.07


PDD
 
See §§ 153.400 through 153.406 for applicable regulations


*FAR =Floor AreaRSR =Recreation Space

Lot Area                  Floor Area




 



   (A)   See also site design standards in §§ 153.455 through
153.491, for land uses requiring special approval.



   (B)   For height exceptions see § 153.055. There must also be
compliance with the Tri-City Area Joint Airport Zoning Ordinance, effective
June 11, 1970, which requires a special permit to erect or extend a
structure, including buildings, radio and television antennas, chimneys,
stacks, gables, towers, or other additions attached to structures in excess
of 99 feet above the existing ground level.



   (C)   (1)   In any R-1, R-1A, or R-2 District, the width of the
required minimum street side yard on any corner lot shall be three-fourths of
the minimum front yard depth required on the contiguous interior residential
lot fronting on the same street as the side yard abuts. If the front yard on
such interior lot is greater than the minimum required, then the minimum
street side yard required shall be three-fourths of the front yard depth as
determined in § 153.062(A)(1). A minimum of 12 feet shall be required where
there is no interior lot. In any R-3, R-4, RO-1, or B-1 District, the width
of minimum required street side yard on corner lots shall be ten feet.



      (2)   Where the side wall of a single- or two-family dwelling
exceeds 35 feet in length, the side yard adjacent to such wall shall be
increased, in addition to the other requirements contained herein, one foot
for each five feet of such excess length up to a maximum side yard width of
50 feet. For the purpose of this section, the length of a side wall of a
building shall be the shortest distance between the front yard and the rear
yard.



      (3)   In all residential districts on a lot occupied by any
building which is permitted in said districts other than solely for
residential purposes, the width of each yard shall be computed as follows:



      Minimum side yard width =



   Length of bldg. (in ft.) along side yd.    +  2 x ht. of bldg. (in
ft.)



                  6



   (D)   In all residential, business, and industrial districts, the
required front and street side yard setbacks shall not be used for off-street
parking, loading, or unloading, and shall remain as open space unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for landscaping, plant materials,
or vehicle access drives, and except that for single-family detached
residences and two-family houses, one passenger motor vehicle may be parked
on a paved driveway or garage apron in a required front yard. (See also §§
153.062 and 153.063.)



   (E)   The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not include
areas of basements, breezeways, unenclosed porches, terraces, attached
garages, attached sheds, or utility rooms.



   (F)   Applies only to multiple dwellings, boarding houses, tourist
homes, rooming houses, and similar residential units.



   (G)   For two-family residences, a minimum lot width of 60 feet and
a minimum lot area of 7,200 square feet shall be provided. For new or
conversion of existing structures to contain three or four dwelling units,
the minimum required lot area shall be 7,200 square feet plus 1,000 square
feet per dwelling unit in excess of two units.



   (H)   For all dwellings there shall be provided a minimum lot area
of 4,000 square feet for the first dwelling unit in a building plus 1,200
square feet for each additional dwelling unit therein. Each lot occupied by
any other building providing permanent or transient sleeping accommodations
shall contain at least 4,000 square feet for the first family or group of
five occupant accommodations, with at least 1,200 square feet for each
additional group of five occupant accommodations or major fraction thereof.



   (I)   (1)   Minimum side yards for multiple dwellings, boarding
houses, tourist homes, rooming houses, and similar residential units shall be
computed as follows:



      Minimum side yard width =



   Length of bldg. (in ft.) along side yd.    +    2 x ht. of bldg.
(in ft.)



                  15



      (2)   Where two or more multiple, row, or terrace dwellings
are erected upon the same lot, a minimum yard space of 50 feet in width shall
be provided between structures. This yard width shall be increased by two
feet for each ten feet or part thereof by which each multiple, row, or
terrace dwelling structure, having common yards, exceeds 40 feet in length on
that side of the dwelling structure facing the common yard; and also
increased by one foot for each five feet or part thereof by which each
permitted multiple dwelling structure having common yards exceeds 40 feet in
height on that side of the dwelling structure facing the common yard.



   (J)   Lot area requirements for residential buildings are determined
from FAR and RSR standards, yard space, and off-street parking requirements.



   (K)   (1)   Floor space area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) shall be
as follows:



 


 
Minimum Size (sq. ft.)


Efficiency
 
450


One-bedroom unit
 
525


Two-bedroom unit
 
750


Three-bedroom unit
 
850


Four- or more bedroom unit
 
1,000



 



      (2)   Not more than 5% of dwelling units in any building may
be of efficiency type. The term bedroom excludes kitchens, bathrooms, utility
rooms, libraries, dens, and rooms for common use of dwelling unit occupants.



   (L)   Where an existing front setback line has been established by
existing commercial buildings occupying 50% or more of the frontage within
the same block, such established setback shall apply.



   (M)   For nonresidential buildings, side yards are not required
along interior side lot lines if all walls abutting or facing such lot lines
are of fire-resistive construction as provided for in the Building Code.
However, where a commercial district borders on a side street and a
residential district exists in the same block, there shall be provided a
setback of ten feet for all buildings, parking, and loading area. Where any
or all of a building in a B-1, B-1A, or B-2 District is used for residential
purposes, side yards shall be provided as required in the R-4 District.



   (N)   Refer to §§ 153.057, 153.058, 153.061, and 153.062.



   (O)   Minimum yard dimensions for M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts are as
follows: any lot adjacent to or across a street from an R District shall
provide the same abutting front, side, or rear yard as is required in the R
District adjacent to or across said street.



   (P)   Minimum yard dimensions for M-2 and M-3 Districts are as
follows: any lot adjacent to or across a street from an R District shall
provide twice the amount of abutting front, side, or rear yard as is required
in the R District adjacent to or across said street.



(Prior Code, § 153.475)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2200, passed  11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1824, passed 7-13-1998, effective 7-27-1998; Ord.
D-1920, passed 6-3-2002, effective 6-13-2002; Ord. O-9, passed 6-30-2003,
effective 7-10-2003)



SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES AND PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL
APPROVAL



§ 153.455  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   For all divisions (D) in the sections in this subchapter, see
also § 153.082 for protective screening of nonresidential uses from
residential areas; and for all divisions (E) in the sections in this
subchapter, see §§ 153.125 through 153.132 for requirements regarding
off-street parking and loading for specific land uses.



   (B)   The requirements noted in this chapter are in addition to, or,
where in conflict, supersede those requirements for particular zoning
districts as indicated in § 153.440. For all permitted uses after special
approval, see processing requirements in § 153.562.



(Prior Code, § 153.490)  (Ord. D-1418, §§ 2332, 2333, passed 
11-22-1982, effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.456  ADULT BOOKSTORES, ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS, CABARETS,
MASSAGE PARLORS.



   The following regulations shall apply to adult bookstores, adult motion
picture theaters, cabarets, and massage parlors:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirement: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: not permitted in locations within 1,000
feet of an existing church or school site or park or playground boundary or
residence, nor in locations within 1,000 feet of an existing adult bookstore,
adult motion picture theater, cabaret, or massage parlor. (See also §
153.317.)



(Prior Code, § 153.491)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2301, passed  11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1564, passed 9-28-1987, effective 10-8-1987)



§ 153.457  ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOMES.



   The following regulations shall apply to adult foster care family homes:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4,
RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: 1,500 feet apart; site to be evaluated for
degree of potential residential-commercial use conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.492)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2302, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1435, passed 8-8-1983, effective 8-18-1983)



§ 153.458  ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOMES.



   The following regulations shall apply to adult foster care small group
homes:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-2, R-3, R-4, and RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site to be evaluated for degree of
potential residential-commercial use conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.493)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2303, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1435, passed 8-8-1983, effective 8-18-1983)



§ 153.459  ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOMES.



   The following regulations shall apply to adult foster care large group
homes:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-3, R-4, and RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site to be evaluated for degree of
potential residential-commercial use conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.494)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2304, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1435, passed 8-8-1983, effective 8-18-1983)



§ 153.460  AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to automobile wash establishments:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: minimum
front yard setback of 40 feet for all structures;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: five-foot high solid masonry
wall, fence, or planting screen along any interior lot line adjacent to a
residential zone excepting the portion adjacent to the front or street side
yards required therein. The height of said screen shall be reduced to four
feet whenever it is within ten feet of any window or door openings which
provide light or air in adjoining residential or business buildings; and



   (E)   Other requirements:



      (1)   A vehicle waiting area shall be provided on the lot
which will accommodate vehicles. In determining the number of vehicle waiting
spaces available to meet minimum code requirements, the number of vehicles
normally accommodated within the building can be counted, but in no case
shall there be less than three automobiles per stall for manual or
self-service establishments, and 15 automobiles per stall for automatic
establishments. Said vehicle waiting area, including entrance and exit
drives, shall be improved to comply with the standards set forth in §
153.129; and



      (2)   Adequate provision shall be made to keep all water from
washing operations on the premises. Where mechanical or manual drying is not
done, a mechanical device shall be provided to ensure that each vehicle shall
wait on the premises a minimum of 90 seconds following the end of the washing
operation.



(Prior Code, § 153.495)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2305, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.461  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to automobile service stations:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, M-1,
M-2, and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: see § 153.071 for regulations;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: see §
153.071 for regulations;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: see § 153.071 for
regulations; and



   (E)   Other requirements: see § 153.071 for regulations.



(Prior Code, § 153.496)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2306, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.462  BOARDING HOUSES, ROOMING HOUSES, LODGING HOUSES AND TOURIST
HOMES.



   The following regulations shall apply to boarding houses, rooming
houses, lodging houses, and tourist homes:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-3 and R-4;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site to be evaluated for degree of
potential residential-commercial use conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.497)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2307, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.463  BREWERIES, DISTILLERIES, CANNING FACTORIES, AND CHEMICAL PLANTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to breweries, distilleries,
canning factories, and chemical plants:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-2 and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: special consideration of potential odor
and pollution nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 153.498)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2308, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.464  BUILDING SUPPLY, SOLID FUEL BUSINESSES, OR CONTRACTING FIRMS
WITH INCIDENTAL STORAGE YARD ON THE SAME LOT; INCLUDING BUILDING AND ALLIED
CRAFT CONTRACTORS.



   The following regulations shall apply to building supply, solid fuel
businesses, or contracting firms with incidental storage yards on the same
lot, including building and allied craft contractors:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-1, M-2, and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: visually screened from all
adjoining residential and commercial properties by a fence, wall, or planting
screen at least 80% opaque, and of a design compatible with the neighborhood;
and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.499)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2309, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.465  CEMETERIES.



   The following regulations shall apply to cemeteries:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1A;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: 20 acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all
structures to be a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: five-foot fence around entire
site except for gates at entrance and exit points; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site must abut a trunkline or major
thoroughfare as designated on the Saginaw Comprehensive Plan Coordinated
System of Trafficways, with all ingress and egress directly to said trunkline
or major thoroughfare. New cemeteries and sections added to existing
cemeteries shall have no markers or monuments above grade.



(Prior Code, § 153.500)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2310, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.466  CHURCHES, CONVENTS, AND RECTORIES.



   The following regulations shall apply to churches, convents, and
rectories:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4,
and RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: two acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: 150
feet minimum lot width; minimum side and rear yard shall be 25 feet;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site must abut and have direct access to a
trunkline or major thoroughfare, as designated on the Saginaw Comprehensive
Plan Coordinated System of Trafficways, or access via a local street through
a business or industrial district connecting to a trunkline or major
thoroughfare.



(Prior Code, § 153.501)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2311, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1515, passed 7-14-1986, effective 7-24-1986)



§ 153.467  COCKTAIL LOUNGES, NIGHTCLUBS, TAVERNS, SUPPER CLUBS, PRIVATE
CLUBS.



   The following regulations shall apply to cocktail lounges, nightclubs,
taverns, supper clubs, and private clubs:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2 and B-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: shall comply with the Michigan Liquor
Control Code, Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L. § 436.1503, as amended, of
the Liquor Control Code of 1988, regarding proximity to a church or school
building.



(Prior Code, § 153.502)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2312, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.468  COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSES.



   The following regulations shall apply to commercial greenhouses:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1A and B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: one acre;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all
structures to be minimum of 40 feet from all lot lines;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.503)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2313, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.469  CONVALESCENT AND NURSING HOMES.



   The following regulations shall apply to convalescent and nursing homes:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-3 and R-4;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site to be evaluated for degree of
potential residential-commercial use conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.504)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2314, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.470  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS OR OTHER DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS SERVING
FOOD AND/OR BEVERAGES.



   The following regulations shall apply to drive-in restaurants or other
drive-in establishments serving food and/or beverages:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-1 and B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: five-foot masonry wall, fence,
or planting screen; and



   (E)   Other requirements: site must abut a trunkline or major
thoroughfare as designated on the Saginaw Comprehensive Plan Coordinated
System of Trafficways, with all ingress and egress directly to said trunkline
or major thoroughfare. (See § 153.072.)



(Prior Code, § 153.505)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2315, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.471  HISTORIC THEME RESTAURANTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to historic theme restaurants:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: RO-1, after special
approval by the Planning Commission;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: fence or shrubbery hedge to
screen parking from residential areas to be approved by the Planning
Commission;



   (E)   Parking requirements: same as specified for eating and
drinking establishments (see § 153.126);



   (F)   Signage requirements: only one sign permitted with a maximum
area of 25 square feet; and



   (G)   Other requirements: must be contained in an existing
residential structure which will be restored to its original condition. The
only exterior changes allowed would be those required for public safety
purposes. Hours of operation to be determined by the City Planning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 153.506)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2315-1, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1433, passed 7-25-1983, effective 8-4-1983)



§ 153.472  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to home occupations:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, and
R-4;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: no evidence of such use may be visible
from the street or from neighboring properties. No signs except as provided
in §§ 153.145 through 153.169 may be displayed in connection with such use.
Any mechanical equipment used at any time in connection with such use is:



      (1)   The same or similar to such equipment as is usual and
permissible for household purposes or hobbies; and



      (2)   Is so designed and constructed that the operation
thereof does not adversely affect insurance rates or the use of radio and
television on other properties. (See also § 153.021 and § 153.069(D).)



(Prior Code, § 153.507)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2316, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.473  HOMELESS SHELTERS.



   The following regulations shall apply to homeless shelters:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2, after special
approval by the Planning Commission;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: lot area requirements determined from floor
area ratio, yard space, and off-street parking requirements;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot requirement: none specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: all activities to occur within the shelter
building. Site to be evaluated for degree of potential residential-commercial
conflicts.



(Prior Code, § 153.508)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2316.01, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1662, passed 8-10-1992, effective 8-20-1992)



§ 153.474  HOSPITALS.



   The following regulations shall apply to hospitals:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4,
and RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: five acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all be
obscured from all residential property view with a wall or banner of suitable
material at least five feet in height; and



   (D)   Other requirements: site must abut to a trunkline or major
thoroughfare as designated on the Saginaw Comprehensive Plan Coordinated
System of Trafficways, with all ingress and egress directly to said trunkline
or major thoroughfare.



(Prior Code, § 153.509)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2317, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.475  JUNKYARDS.



   The following regulations shall apply to junkyards:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-2 and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: ten acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: 20-foot
wide greenbelt adjoining all property lines;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: masonry wall or fence not less
than six feet in height, required at interior boundaries of greenbelt; and



   (E)   Other requirements: junk may not be stacked higher than the
height of the screening wall.



(Prior Code, § 153.510)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2318, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.476  MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   The following regulations shall apply to mobile home parks:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: see § 153.485;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: see §
153.485;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: see § 153.485; and



   (E)   Other requirements: see § 153.485.



(Prior Code, § 153.511)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2319, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.477  NURSERY SCHOOLS, DAY NURSERIES, AND CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS.



   The following regulations shall apply to nursery schools, day
nurseries, and child day care centers:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-2, R-3, and RO-1;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: outdoor
play area of 1,200 square feet exclusive of structures, parking, and
driveways;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: play area to be enclosed by a
four-foot high ornamental fence; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.512)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2320, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1477, passed 2-15-1985, effective 2-25-1985; Ord.
D-1940, passed 12-30-2002, effective 1-9-2003)



§ 153.478  OFF-STREET PARKING A.



   The following regulations shall apply to Off-Street Parking A:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, and
R-4;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: minimum
100-foot lot width;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: no exterior lighting shall cause a driving
hazard on an abutting street, nor be exposed to any adjacent residentially
zoned property.



(Prior Code, § 153.513)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2321, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.479  OPEN STORAGE YARDS OF BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS,
LUMBER YARDS, STONE, SAND AND GRAVEL SALES AND STORAGE.



   The following regulations shall apply to open storage yards of building
and construction contractors, lumber yards, stone, sand, and gravel storage:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-2 and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: visually screened from all
adjoining residential and commercial properties by a fence, wall, or planting
screen at least 80% opaque, of a design compatible with the neighborhood; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.514)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2323, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.480  OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN THEATERS.



   The following regulations shall apply to outdoor drive-in theaters:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: 20 acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all
structures to be minimum of 100 feet from any lot line;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: entire property to be fenced;
and



   (E)   Other requirements: site must abut a trunkline or major
thoroughfare as designated on the Saginaw Comprehensive Plan Coordinated
System of trafficways, with all ingress and egress directly to said trunkline
or major thoroughfare.



(Prior Code, § 153.515)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2324, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.481  PENAL AND CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND DETENTION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-1, M-2, and M-3, after
special approval by the City Planning Commission;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: four acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all
structures to be a minimum of 75 feet from adjoining property line;



   (D)   Location requirements: not permitted within 300 feet of the
nearest adjoining residence; and



   (E)   Special screening requirements: security fencing to meet all
requirements of the Michigan Department of Corrections and/or appropriate
federal agencies. Landscape screening to be provided that will provide a
continuous separation between the facility and adjoining property. Said
screening to be approved by the City Planning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 153.516)  (Ord. D-1912, passed 12-31-2001, effective
1-10-2002)



§ 153.482  PINBALL PARLORS, POOL HALLS.



   The following regulations shall apply to pinball parlors and pool halls:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: not permitted within 500 feet of any
church or school site boundary.



(Prior Code, § 153.517)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2325, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.483  PICKLE PROCESSING.



   The following regulations shall apply to pickle processing:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-1, M-2, and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: special consideration of potential odor
and pollution nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 153.518)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2326, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.484  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to planned unit development
projects:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: all districts;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: two acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: see §§ 153.400 through
153.406; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.519)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2327, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.485  PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   The following regulations applying to planned mobile home park
developments are intended to permit flexibility in land area designs within
the general pattern of existing land use and population density.



   (B)   A planned mobile home park development shall be approved by
the City Planning Commission pursuant to requirements of § 153.227 in an R-3
District subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   There shall be compliance with the Mobile Home
Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L. §§ 125.2301 et seq. and
general rules related thereto as adopted by the State Mobile Home Commission.



      (2)   A mobile home park shall be constructed and maintained
on a lot or a parcel which can provide principal entrances and exits to a
trunkline or major thoroughfare as designated on the “Saginaw Comprehensive
Plan Coordinated System of Trafficways”, or access via a local street
through a business or industrial district connecting to a trunkline or major
thoroughfare.



      (3)   Walkways shall be provided from each mobile home site to
all service buildings, and must be constructed of either asphalt or concrete.
Paved sidewalks shall also be installed on both sides of all internal roads
(unless deemed by the City Planning Commission that a sidewalk on only one
side of a road is necessary, or that none are needed along a particular
road). Walkways and sidewalks where required shall not be less than three
feet in width.



      (4)   (a)   Each mobile home unit space shall be provided
with a permanent foundation as required under R 125.1101(1)(y) of the
Michigan Administrative Code, as defined in R 125.1101(1)(y) of said Code,
upon which the mobile home shall be located. Where required to ensure
stability of the foundation and mobile home, a soil analysis to test soil
stability shall be performed pursuant to R 125.1905(2)(b) of said Code.



         (b)   Prior to occupancy, each mobile home shall be
anchored by an anchoring system meeting the standards and specifications of R
125.1605 and R 125.1607, inclusive of said Code.



      (5)   Street and yard lights: streets and yard lights,
sufficient in number and intensity to permit the safe movement of vehicular
traffic and pedestrians at night, shall be provided and shall be effectively
related to buildings, trees, walks, steps, and ramps, but shall be so located
and shaded as to direct the light away from adjacent properties. All lighting
provided shall comply with illumination standards R 125.1929 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.



(Prior Code, § 153.520)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2333, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.486  PRIVATE PARKS, COUNTRY CLUBS, GOLF COURSES, AND GOLF DRIVING
RANGES.



   The following regulations shall apply to private parks, country clubs,
golf courses, and golf driving ranges:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: R-1, R-1A, R-2;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: five acres;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: all
structures to be minimum of 100 feet from any residential lot line;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.521)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2328, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.487  PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS, TELEPHONE EXCHANGE BUILDINGS, ELECTRIC
TRANSFORMER STATIONS AND SUBSTATIONS, GAS REGULATOR STATIONS, MUNICIPAL
PUMPING STATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to public utility buildings,
telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations,
gas regulator stations, and municipal pumping stations:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: all districts;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: in R Districts proposed installation must
be shown to be reasonably necessary to the orderly development of the
surrounding residential area. In the case of electric overhead supply
systems, it shall be shown that location and alignment being requested is the
arrangement most compatible with the residential areas involved, necessary to
the regional power network, and that it is extremely unreasonable to locate
such facility entirely in business or industrial districts. Nothing in this
division (E) shall authorize overhead supply systems in conduit districts.



(Prior Code, § 153.522)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2329, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.488  RADIO AND TELEVISION TOWERS, FREESTANDING.



   The following regulations shall apply to radio and televisions towers,
freestanding:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2 and B-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: none specified.



(Prior Code, § 153.523)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2330, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.489  RECREATION VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS.



   The following regulations shall apply to recreation vehicle storage
yards:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: B-2, M-2, and M-3;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: one acre;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: storage area to be enclosed by a cyclone
fence at least five feet in height. Additional height may be permitted for
barbed wire cradling.



(Prior Code, § 153.524)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2331, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.490  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   The following regulations shall apply to telecommunications facilities:



   (A)   (1)   Zoning district in which permitted: M-1, M-2, M-3; and



      (2)   After special approval: B-2, B-3.



   (B)   Minimum lot area: see table, § 153.440;



   (C)   Special setback requirements:



      (1)   Front: equal to the height of the tower;



      (2)   Side: 120% of height to the nearest building or
structure;



      (3)   Rear: 120% of height to the nearest building or
structure; and



      (4)   Antennas attached to the roof or supporting structure on
a roof top: provide a one to one (1:1) setback ratio. (Example: ten-foot
antenna and supporting structure requires a ten-foot setback from the roof
edge.)



   (D)   Special screening and appearance requirements:



      (1)   Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security
fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed
to prevent tower access;



      (2)   Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view
of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public
property, and residential property. A landscape plan shall be submitted and
approved by the City Planning Commission;



      (3)   Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a
galvanized steel finish or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or
other federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or
textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce the visual
obtrusiveness; and



      (4)   No illumination is permitted on telecommunications
facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA, or any other state or federal
agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety.



   (E)   Other requirements:



      (1)   Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet
from an existing tower, except more than one tower may be located on a lot
provided all setback requirements are met for each tower;



      (2)   Any equipment shelter or cabinet shall be shielded from
public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding
structures or placed underground. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly
maintained;



      (3)   Towers shall not be located where they will negatively
affect historic or scenic view. Towers shall not be in direct view of any
city park;



      (4)   No advertising may be placed on telecommunications
facilities. However, an antenna may be placed on an existing billboard or
advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this section are met;
and



      (5)   Any drives and/or approaches to such facilities shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete.



(Prior Code, § 153.525)  (Ord. D-1880, passed 11-20-2000, effective
11-30-2000)



§ 153.491  TEMPORARY BUILDINGS FOR USE INCIDENTAL TO CONSTRUCTION WORK.



   The following regulations shall apply to temporary buildings for use
incidental to construction work:



   (A)   Zoning district in which permitted: all districts;



   (B)   Minimum lot area: none specified;



   (C)   Special minimum yard space and lot width requirements: none
specified;



   (D)   Special screening requirements: none specified; and



   (E)   Other requirements: allowed for a period not to exceed one
year.



(Prior Code, § 153.526)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2332, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT



§ 153.505  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of the Floodplain District to protect the natural
resources of the city, and to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare; by application of special regulations for the use of land which may
be subject to periodic inundation at predictable intervals, while permitting
reasonable economic use and considering the physical limitations of such
land. A further purpose is to help protect the public health, public safety,
and general welfare, and reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the
community which may result from improper use of land. All lands included in
the Floodplain District shall be subject to the terms imposed herein in
addition to the terms imposed by any other zoning district in which said
lands may be located.



(Prior Code, § 153.540)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2401, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.506  ADVISORY AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and for promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare, and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land or
premises under this subchapter shall not be considered approval, guarantee,
or warranty of safety or suitability. This subchapter does not imply that
areas outside the Floodplain Districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This subchapter shall
not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this subchapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 153.541)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2402, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.507  FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT AREAS (OVERLAY).



   The Floodplain District shall be considered to overlay existing zoning
districts and shall constitute additional terms over and above those imposed
by the underlying zoning districts. The Floodplain District within the
jurisdiction of this subchapter is hereby divided into two areas: Floodway
Areas and Floodway Fringe Areas. The location and boundaries of the Floodway
and Floodway Fringe Areas shall coincide with those locations and boundaries
of Floodways and Floodway Fringe Areas as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and by the Flood Insurance Study, as published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, effective date October 16, 1997.



(Prior Code, § 153.542)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2403, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1439, passed 10-17-1983, effective 10-27-1983;
Ord. D-1812, passed 11-24-1997, effective 12-4-1997)



§ 153.508  PRECEDENCE OF FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY DATA.



   Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or other sources shall
be reasonably utilized in meeting standards of this subchapter. Data
furnished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence
over data from other sources.



(Prior Code, § 153.543)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2403.1, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1439, passed 10-17-1983, effective 10-27-1983)



§ 153.509  GENERAL PROVISIONS OF BOTH THE FLOODWAY AND FLOODWAY FRINGE
AREAS.



   The following restrictions constitute those general provisions which
shall govern development, construction, improvement, and relocation within
the Floodway and Floodway Fringe Area of the Floodplain District.



   (A)   All persons proposing development within the Floodway and
Floodway Fringe Areas shall obtain approved permits from those government
agencies having jurisdiction over floodplain development. No building permit
or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all such aforementioned
permits have been obtained and have been reviewed by the Chief Inspector.



   (B)   (1)   Developers of new, substantially improved, or
relocated structures within the Floodway and Floodway Fringe Areas shall
submit to the Chief Inspector a written document indicating:



         (a)   The elevation of the lowest habitable floor in the
structure including basement;



         (b)   The elevation to which a structure has been
floodproofed, if floodproofing methods have been employed; and



         (c)   Whether or not the structure contains a basement.



      (2)   Details of specifications proposed and as-built drawings
shall be kept on record and available for public inspection and for use in
determining flood insurance risk premium rates.



   (C)   Persons wishing to develop in areas designated as “A”
Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (that “A” having no number affixed
to the designation) shall provide intermediate regional floodplain elevations
with on-site reference marks set by a registered civil engineer, architect,
or land surveyor. Such elevations shall be subject to review by the
Department of Engineering.



   (D)   When floodproofing measures are employed, a registered
engineer or architect shall certify that methods used produce a watertight
condition and are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact, and uplift forces and any other factors associated with
the intermediate regional floodplain elevation.



   (E)   All new construction and substantial improvements made to
existing structures, including mobile homes, shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation and lateral movement, and shall be constructed with
flood-resistant materials and methods.



   (F)   If new and replaced utility, water, and sanitary facilities
must be located below elevation of the intermediate regional floodplain, they
shall be constructed so as to be watertight, to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads, and to be resistant to the effects of buoyancy. All
measures to floodproof utility and sanitary facilities are subject to the
approval of the Department of Engineering.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems such as septic tanks and leach
fields shall be located to avoid impairment by flood waters associated with
the intermediate regional flood level.



   (H)   The application or discharge of persistent toxic compounds
whose direct or indirect effects through residuals have a half-life greater
than six months, or landfill or any decomposable material, onto or within
those areas defined as Floodway or Floodway Fringe Areas is strictly
forbidden.



   (I)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be constructed at or above the intermediate regional flood protection
elevation for the particular area or shall be floodproofed.



   (J)   Fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by
rip-rap, vegetative cover, or bulkheading.



   (K)   Should any watercourse relocation or alteration be proposed,
notification of said change in the watercourse shall be sent by the developer
to all adjacent communities, to the State Department of Natural Resources,
and to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. With the altered
or relocated portion of any watercourse, the carrying capacity shall be
maintained.



   (L)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent any
permanent structures being constructed on piles meeting the requirements of
the city’s Building Code.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and proposals for new development
shall be designed and located to be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage. In addition, all subdivision proposals shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (N)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or
five acres, whichever is less.



(Prior Code, § 153.544)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2404, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.510  PERMITTED USES BY RIGHT IN THE FLOODWAY AREA OF THE FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICT.



   The following uses having a low flood damage potential and presenting
no, or minimal, obstruction to flood flows shall be permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of
materials or equipment. No use shall in any manner affect the capacity of the
channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or
any other drainage facility or system. Approval from the State Department of
Natural Resources is needed for any construction activity taking place in the
Floodway and Floodway Fringe Areas of the Floodplain District:



   (A)   Recreation uses: parks, playgrounds, playfields, bridle paths,
nature trails, natural wildlife preserves, outdoor tennis courts, archery
ranges, boat launching ramps, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, game
farms, fish hatcheries, and similar uses; land owned by the developer of
multiple housing or of a planned residential development in the Floodway Area
of the Floodplain District may be used to provide the necessary open space
required under the provisions of this subchapter;



   (B)   Golf courses and driving ranges;



   (C)   Non-structural agricultural uses: general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
and wild crop farming;



   (D)   Non-structural uses incidental to single-family dwellings:
lawns, gardens, and play areas;



   (E)   Parking areas: provided said parking areas are unpaved and are
incidental to those uses permitted in divisions (A) through (D) listed above;
and



   (F)   Uses not permitted: permitted uses in underlying zoning
districts shall not be construed as being permitted uses in the Floodway Area
of the Floodplain District unless those uses are indicated as being permitted
in divisions (A) through (E) listed above.



(Prior Code, § 153.545)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2405, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.511  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL APPROVAL IN THE FLOODWAY AREA OF THE
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   Provided such uses shall not, in the opinion of the City Planning
Commission, be adverse to the purpose of this section or damaging to the
public health, safety, or welfare or impose a financial burden upon the
community or shall in any manner affect the capacity of the channels or
floodways of the main stream or tributaries thereto, drainage ditch, or any
other drainage facility or system, the following uses may be permitted by
issuance of a special approval in accordance with § 153.562 and any other
requirements stipulated herein:



   (A)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines;



   (B)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves;



   (C)   Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials;



   (D)   Structures accessory to recreational uses such as shelter
houses, out buildings, or wildlife sanctuaries;



   (E)   Parking areas, paved; and



   (F)   Other uses similar in nature to uses described above which are
consistent with the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 153.546)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2406, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.512  REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL APPROVAL FOR USES IN THE FLOODWAY AREA
OF THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   In addition to the requirements of § 153.562, the applicant for a
special approval in the Floodway Area of the Floodplain District shall submit
the following:



   (A)   A letter of approval from the State Department of Natural
Resources;



   (B)   A location map including existing topographic data at two-foot
interval contours at a scale of one inch representing 50 feet (one inch = 50
feet) for parcels ten acres and under, and at a scale of one inch
representing 100 feet (one inch = 100 feet) for parcels over ten acres;



   (C)   A map showing proposed grading and drainage plans including
the location of all public drainage easements, the limits, extent, and
elevations of the proposed fill and/or excavation;



   (D)   A statement from the County Drain Commissioner indicating that
he or she has reviewed and approved the proposal;



   (E)   A statement from the County Health Department indicating that
it has reviewed and approved the proposal;



   (F)   A statement from the Department of Engineering concerning
feasibility of the proposal and its approval; and



   (G)   Any other information requested by the City Planning
Commission.



(Prior Code, § 153.547)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2407, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.513  STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL APPROVAL IN THE FLOODWAY.



   The City Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances
and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards as well as
those in §§ 153.440 and 153.562(F).



   (A)   Structures shall not be designed for human habitation and
shall have a low flood damage potential.



   (B)   Structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters and, whenever possible, shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of floodflow.



   (C)   No special approval shall be granted for the development of
new structures, the substantial improvement or relocation of old structures,
or development of any kind within the Floodway Area, when such development,
construction, improvement, or relocation would cause any increase in flood
level associated with the intermediate regional flood.



   (D)   All new nonresidential structures and nonresidential
structures requiring substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the level of the intermediate
regional floodplain or shall be floodproofed to one foot above the level of
the intermediate regional floodplain.



(Prior Code, § 153.548)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2408, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.514  PERMITTED USES BY RIGHT IN THE FLOODWAY FRINGE AREA OF THE
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   The following uses having a low flood damage potential and presenting
no, or minimal, obstruction to floodflows shall be permitted within the
Floodway Fringe District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage
of materials or equipment. Approval from the State Department of Natural
Resources is required prior to development activity taking place in the
Floodway Fringe:



   (A)   Recreation uses: parks, playgrounds, playfields, bridle paths,
nature trails, natural wildlife preserves, outdoor tennis courts, archery
ranges, boat launching ramps, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, game
farms, fish hatcheries, and similar uses. Land owned by the developer of
multiple housing or of a planned residential development in the Floodway
Fringe Area of the Floodplain District may be used to provide the necessary
open space required under the provisions of this subchapter, provided the
open space requirements of the specific section of this subchapter are met;



   (B)   Golf courses and driving ranges;



   (C)   Non-structural agricultural uses: general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
and wild crop farming;



   (D)   Non-structural uses incidental to single-family dwellings:
lawns, gardens, play areas, and parking areas;



   (E)   Permitted uses in underlying zoning districts, including
residential areas, provided that the petitioner submits to the Chief
Inspector drawings signed by a registered civil engineer or architect that
indicate that the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement floor, of
the structure will be higher than the regulatory flood elevation; and



   (F)   Accessory structures to permitted uses in underlying zoning
districts, provided that they are not utilized for human habitation; they are
designed to have low flood damage potential; they are constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
flood waters; they are firmly anchored to prevent flotation; and service
facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed. Where accessory structures have
a current replacement cost equal to more than 20% of the principal structure,
they must also satisfy the minimum elevation or floodproofing requirements of
the principal structure.



(Prior Code, § 153.549)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2409, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1439, passed 10-17-1983, effective 10-27-1983)



§ 153.515  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL APPROVAL IN THE FLOODWAY FRINGE AREA
OF THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   Provided such uses shall not, in the opinion of the City Planning
Commission, be adverse to the purpose of this section or damaging to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or impose a financial burden upon the
community, the following uses may be permitted by issuance of special
approval in accordance with other requirements stipulated in § 153.562:



   (A)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines;



   (B)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves;



   (C)   Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials;



   (D)   Accessory structures for recreational uses such as shelter
houses, out buildings, or wildlife sanctuaries;



   (E)   Those uses which are permissible with a special approval in
those zoning districts which underlie the Floodplain District;



   (F)   Dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner. In the
case where Floodway Fringe Areas have no groundwater recharge or impoundment
potential, filling may occur through compensating excavation and shaping of
the Floodway Fringe in such a way as to maintain or improve the flow or
natural impoundment capacity of the Floodway Fringe; and



   (G)   Other uses similar in nature to uses described above.



(Prior Code, § 153.550)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2410, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.516  REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL APPROVAL FOR USES IN THE FLOODWAY
FRINGE AREA OF THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   In addition to the requirements of § 153.562, the applicant for a
special approval in the Floodway Fringe Area of the Floodplain District shall
submit that information listed as necessary in § 153.562.



(Prior Code, § 153.551)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2411, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.517  STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL APPROVAL WITHIN THE FLOODWAY FRINGE.



   The City Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances
and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards as well as
those in §§ 153.440 and 153.562(F):



   (A)   All new residential structures and residential structures
requiring substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the level of the intermediate regional
floodplain; and



   (B)   All new nonresidential structures and nonresidential
structures requiring substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the level of the intermediate
regional floodplain or shall be floodproofed to one foot above the level of
the intermediate regional floodplain.



(Prior Code, § 153.552)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2412, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.518  MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS LOCATED IN
FLOODPLAIN AREAS.



   When a mobile home, mobile home park, or mobile home subdivision is to
be developed or substantially redeveloped or reconstructed and is located
either totally or partially within the Floodway and/or Floodway Fringe Areas
of the Floodplain District, the following regulations shall apply in addition
to those applicable in other sections of this subchapter.



   (A)   No mobile homes shall be placed in the Floodway Area of the
Floodplain District except within mobile home parks or mobile home
subdivisions which were existing prior to the effective date of this section.



   (B)   Mobile homes placed within the Floodway and Floodway Fringe
Areas shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement in
the following manner.



      (1)   Over-the-top ties to ground anchors shall be provided at
each of the four corners of the mobile home with two additional ties per side
at intermediate locations, however, mobile homes of less than 50 feet long
shall be required to have only one additional tie per side.



      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home
with five additional ties per side at intermediate points along the mobile
home; however, mobile homes of less than 50 feet long shall be required to
have only four additional ties per side.



      (3)   All equipment used to tie down the mobile home shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.



      (4)   Any additions to the mobile homes located within the
floodway shall be anchored in a similar manner.



   (C)   No new mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, or
expansions to existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, shall
take place in the floodplain areas.



   (D)   Any mobile home which is to be located, reconstructed, or
repaired on an individual lot not associated with a mobile home park or
mobile home subdivision and which is located either totally or in part in the
Floodway Fringe Area shall meet those requirements for elevation, drainage,
and piling design set forth herein.



   (E)   All mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions located
within the Floodway Area shall develop an evacuation plan indicating
alternate vehicular access and escape routes and shall submit copies of said
plan to the civil defense agencies for the county and to any other disaster
relief agency deemed appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 153.553)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2413, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.519  STANDARDS FOR VARIANCE BY THE BOARD OF APPEALS ON ZONING FROM
THE STRICT INTERPRETATION OF THE REGULATIONS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   No variance shall be granted for the development of new
structures, the substantial improvement, or relocation of old structures, or
development of any kind within the Floodway Area when such development,
construction, improvement, or relocation would cause any increase in flood
levels associated with the intermediate regional flood.



   (B)   The following four criteria shall be met in addition to those
stipulated in § 153.586(B) before a variance shall be granted:



      (1)   A sufficient cause for granting the variance must be
shown;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with this subchapter; and



      (4)   A determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief.



   (C)   (1)   Upon application for a variance for construction
below the elevation of the intermediate regional flood, the city shall notify
the applicant for variance in writing that:



         (a)   Issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the elevation of the intermediate regional flood will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation; and



         (b)   Such construction below the elevation of the
intermediate regional flood increases risk to life and property.



      (2)   Record of such notification shall be maintained along
with records of all variance actions dealing with floodplain development.



(Prior Code, § 153.554)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2414, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.520  CONFLICT BETWEEN THIS SUBCHAPTER AND THE REMAINDER OF THIS
CHAPTER.



   In the event of conflict between those regulations stipulated in this
subchapter and the remainder of this chapter, those regulations found in this
subchapter shall take precedence.



(Prior Code, § 153.555)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2415, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.521  RELATIONSHIP OF THIS SUBCHAPTER TO STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to exempt a property owner
from the requirements of any state or federal statute or regulation
applicable to the proposed activity; nor shall any permit or approval issued
to an owner from a state or federal agency be deemed to exempt the developer
from the requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.556)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2416, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



HISTORIC DISTRICTS



§ 153.535  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to:



   (A)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts in
the city which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political,
archaeological, engineering, or architectural history;



   (B)   Stabilize and improve the property values in such districts;



   (C)   Foster civic beauty;



   (D)   Strengthen the local economy; and



   (E)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.570)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2501, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. O-144, passed 4-15-2013, effective 4-25-2013)



§ 153.536  BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS AND LOCATION OF HISTORIC
RESOURCES/LANDMARKS.



   (A)   The city’s historic districts shall be those areas shown and
bounded as such on the City Zoning Map.



   (B)   Establishment of new districts or amendment of existing
district boundaries shall be done in accordance with procedures in §§
153.541 and 153.561.



(Prior Code, § 153.571)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2502, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.537  REGULATION OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   No work shall be performed upon a resource located within a
historic district as depicted on the City Zoning Map, nor shall the exterior
appearance of any resource be altered unless such action complies with the
requirements set forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   The regulatory authority of the Historic District Commission
extends only to the exterior features of a structure and does not apply to
interior alterations so long as such alterations do not affect the exterior.



   (C)   Compliance with this subchapter shall not relieve the
applicant from complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
of any other ordinance, rule, or statute.



(Prior Code, § 153.572)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2503, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003)



§ 153.538  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation of Historic District Commission. In order to execute
the purposes declared in this subchapter, there is hereby created a
commission to be called the Saginaw Historic District Commission.



   (B)   Membership of Commission. The Historic District Commission
shall consist of seven to nine members whose residence is located in the
city. Members shall be appointed by the City Council for terms of office of
three years, except that the initial appointments of some of the members
shall be for less than three years so that the initial appointments are
staggered and that subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time.
Subsequent members shall be appointed for terms of three years as terms
expire. Members of the Historic District Commission may be re-appointed after
their terms expire. The terms of office of the members shall begin as of the
effective date of Ord. D-1914 (March 7, 2002).



   (C)   Membership eligibility.



      (1)   A majority of the members shall have a clear and
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation.



      (2)   All members must have their principal place of residence
within the city; removal from the city causes the member’s seat to become
vacant. All duly organized historic preservation societies within the city
shall be requested to submit a list of citizens’ names as nominees for any
vacancy; at least two members of the Historic District Commission shall be
appointed from such nominations. At least one member of the Historic District
Commission shall be shall be a graduate of an accredited school of
architecture who has two years of architectural experience or who is an
architect registered in the state, if such person resides in the city and is
available for appointment. At least one of the remaining members shall be a
property owner who is a resident of a Residential Landmark Structure or
District and at least one of the remaining members shall be a property owner
of a Commercial Landmark or District.



      (3)   A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Historic
District Commission for any cause shall be filled within 60 calendar days by
a person appointed by the City Council for the unexpired or new term.



      (4)   The members of the Historic District Commission shall
serve without compensation.



   (D)   Duties and powers of the Historic District Commission.



      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall have the
authority to review all work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource
in a historic district and shall not consider interior arrangements, nor
shall it disapprove applications except in regard to considerations as set
forth in § 153.539.



      (2)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect
the exterior of a resource the Commission considers valuable to local unit,
state, or nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss
of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the local unit,
state, or nation, the Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of
the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource.



      (3)   Work within a historic district shall be permitted
through the issuance of a notice to proceed if any of the following
conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by finding of
the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the
following conditions:



         (a)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of
the public or to the structure’s occupants;



         (b)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement
program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the
applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning
approvals, financing, and environmental clearances;



         (c)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial
hardship to the owner when a governmental action, act of God, or other events
beyond the owners control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives
to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource
for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site
within the historic district have been attempted and exhausted by the owner;
and



         (d)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of
the majority of the community.



      (4)   The Historic District Commission shall have the
following powers and duties in regard to the identification of historic
resources:



         (a)   To establish basic standards for the selection of
sites, buildings, structures, and districts to be placed on the list of
potential historic districts;



         (b)   To compile and maintain a current list of
potential landmarks and districts, such list to include a description setting
forth the general characteristics and location thereof, and the reasons for
its inclusion in the list;



         (c)   To identify specific historical
resources/landmarks and districts of historical or cultural value to be
preserved and protected under this subchapter after a public hearing of local
area occupants and property owners; and



         (d)   To recommend to City Council such historic
resources/landmarks and historic districts and the locations and boundaries
thereof.



   (E)   Rules of the Historic District Commission.



      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall elect from its
membership a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson whose terms of office shall be
fixed by the Commission. The Chairperson shall preside over the Commission
and shall have the right to vote. The Vice Chairperson shall, in the case of
the absence or disability of the Chairperson, perform the duties of the
Chairperson.



      (2)   The Associate Planner, or his or her designee, shall be
Secretary. The Secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings,
and actions of the Historic District Commission and report periodically to
the City Council.



      (3)   The number of members of the Historic District
Commission necessary for the transaction of business shall depend upon the
overall number of members. If the Historic District Commission has seven
members, a quorum will consist of four members; if the Historic District
Commission has eight or nine members, a quorum will consist of five members.
The Historic District Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular
meetings. They shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the
Chairperson or by at least two members of the Historic District Commission.
All meetings of the Historic District Commission shall be open to the public
and any person or his or her duly constituted representative shall be
entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before it reaches its decision.



      (4)   The Historic District Commission shall keep a record,
which shall be open to public view, of its resolutions, proceedings, and
actions. The concurring affirmative vote of a majority of members shall
constitute approval of plans before it for review or for the adoption of any
resolution, motion, or other action of the Historic District Commission.



      (5)   The Historic District Commission shall promulgate
regulations, guidelines, and standards to enable the Commission and
applicants to evaluate proposals. The Historic District Commission can
declare certain plan elements described in an application involving minor
classes of work and allow for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by
staff. In such case, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the staff
shall be entitled to have the application reviewed by the Historic District
Commission at its next meeting.



      (6)   The Historic District Commission shall submit an annual
report to the Council of the general activities of the Historic District
Commission for the preceding year and shall submit such special reports as
requested by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 153.573)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2504, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. D-1852, passed 1-24-2000, effective 2-3-2000; Ord. D-1914, passed
2-25-2002, effective 3-7-2002; Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective
8-21-2003; Ord. O-144, passed 4-15-2013, effective 4-25-2013)



§ 153.539  PROCEDURE FOR THE REVIEW OF PLANS.



   (A)   Application for a building permit for work on any resource in
an historic district shall be made to the Chief Inspector (or his or her
designee). It shall be the responsibility of the Chief Inspector to determine
whether the property is in an established historic district and if the
resource is a historic resource. The Chief Inspector shall immediately refer
a complete application and all required supporting materials to the Historic
District Commission.



   (B)   In reviewing the application and supporting materials, the
Historic District Commission must give the applicant an opportunity to
present his or her application at a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Historic District Commission.



   (C)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least once each
month in which there are pending applications, said meeting to be at a
regularly scheduled day of each month as determined by the Historic District
Commission. The business of the Historic District Commission shall be
conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq. Public notice of the
time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in accordance with the
Open Meetings Act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall
include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by
the Historic District Commission.



   (D)   The Historic District Commission shall approve or disapprove
such plans and if approved shall issue a certificate of appropriateness which
is to be signed by the Chairperson, attached to the application for a
building permit, and immediately transmitted to the Chief Inspector. The
Chairperson shall stamp all prints submitted to the Historic District
Commission signifying its approval. The Historic District Commission shall
not issue a certificate of appropriateness unless the applicant has certified
in the application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or
will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system,
or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale
Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L. §§
125.1501 et seq.



   (E)   If the Historic District Commission disapproves of such plans,
it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such
action and reasons therefor in writing to the Chief Inspector and to the
applicant. The Historic District Commission may advise what it thinks is
proper if it disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant, if he or she
so desires, may make modifications to his or her plans and shall have the
right to resubmit his or her application at any time after so doing.



   (F)   The failure of the Historic District Commission to approve or
disapprove of such plans within 60 days from the date the complete
application is referred to the Historic District Commission, unless otherwise
mutually agreed upon by the applicant and Historic District Commission, shall
be deemed to constitute approval and the Chief Inspector shall proceed to
process the application without regard to a certificate of appropriateness.



   (G)   After the certificate of appropriateness has been issued and
the building permit granted to the applicant, the Chief Inspector shall, from
time to time, inspect the construction, alteration, or repair approved by
such certificate and shall take such action as is necessary to force
compliance with the approved plans.



   (H)   The Historic District Commission shall have all the powers,
duties, and authority as conferred upon it by the Local Historic Districts
Act, Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L. §§ 399.201 et seq., as amended.
It shall be the duty of the Historic District Commission to review all
applications for work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource in an
historic district before a permit for such work can be granted. In reviewing
the application, the Historic District Commission shall give consideration to:



      (1)   The historical or architectural value and significance
of the structure and its relationship to the historic value of the
surrounding area;



      (2)   The relationship of the exterior architectural features
of such resource to the rest of the resources and to the surrounding area;



      (3)   The general compatibility of the exterior design,
arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used; and



      (4)   To any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems
pertinent.



(Prior Code, § 153.574)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2505, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-144, passed
4-15-2013, effective 4-25-2013)



§ 153.540  APPEALS.



   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District
Commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State
Historic Preservation Review Board of the State Historical Commission. The
appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the
applicant. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic
Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court.



(Prior Code, § 153.575)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2506, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003)



§ 153.541  ESTABLISHING NEW DISTRICTS AND IDENTIFYING HISTORIC RESOURCES/
LANDMARKS.



   (A)   Establishment of new districts and identifying historic
resources. Establishment of new historic districts and historic resources
shall be established by ordinance. Before such establishment, the City
Council shall appoint a historic district study committee. The committee
shall contain a majority of the persons who have clearly demonstrated
interest in or knowledge of historic preservation and shall contain
representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation
organizations. The committee shall do the following:



      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within
each proposed historic district following procedures established by the
center;



      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic
district and the historic resource located within that district;



      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric
resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of the historic
resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for
evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for
inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set
forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 60, and additional criteria in division (F) below;



      (4)   Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee
report that addresses at a minimum all of the following:



         (a)   The charge of the committee;



         (b)   The composition of the committee;



         (c)   The historic district or districts studied;



         (d)   The boundaries for each proposed historic district
in writing and on maps;



         (e)   The history of each proposed historic district; and



         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as
well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent
the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the
evaluation criteria.



      (5)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the Planning Commission, to the Michigan Historical
Center, to the Michigan Historical Commission, and to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board; and



      (6)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the
public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of
1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 et seq.



   (B)   Notice of public hearing. Not less than 60 days after
transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public
hearing in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq. Public notice of the time, date, and place
of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings
Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq.



   (C)   Written notice. Written notice shall be mailed by first-class
not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties
within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the
local unit.



   (D)   Actions. After the date of the public hearing, the committee
and the City Council shall have not more than one year, unless authorized by
the City Council, to take the following actions.



      (1)   The committee shall prepare and submit a final report
with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any of the Planning
Commission to the City Council. If the recommendation is to establish a
historic district or districts, the final report shall include a draft of a
proposed ordinance or ordinances.



      (2)   After receiving a final report that recommends the
establishment of a historic or historic districts, the City Council, at its
discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If
City Council passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more
historic districts, the city shall file a copy of that ordinance or those
ordinances, including the legal description of the property or properties
located within the historic district or districts, with the Register of
Deeds. The City Council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous
historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners
within the proposed district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit,
have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a
written petition.



   (E)   Writing available to the public. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Historic District Study
Committee in the performance of an official function shall be made available
to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act
442 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 et seq.



   (F)   Historic district criteria. A historic district shall not be
established unless the resources in the proposed district are at least 30
years old and meet at least one of the following criteria:



      (1)   Historic.



         (a)   Has significant character, interest, or value as
part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city,
state or nation; or is associated with the life of a person significant in
the past;



         (b)   Is the site of a historic event with a significant
effect upon society; or



         (c)   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic,
social, or historic heritage of the community.



      (2)   Architecturally worthy.



         (a)   Portrays the environment in an era of history
characterized by a distinctive architectural style; or



         (b)   Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of
an architectural or engineering type;



         (c)   Is the work of a designer whose individual work
has significantly influenced the development of the community;



         (d)   Is the work of a designer of such prominence that
such work gains its value from the designer’s reputation;



         (e)   Contains elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation;



         (f)   Contains any architectural type, detail, or other
element in danger of becoming extinct; or



         (g)   Owing to its unique location or physical
characteristics, represents an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood or the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.576)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2507, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003; Ord. O-144, passed
4-15-2013, effective 4-25-2013)



§ 153.542  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFT, GRANT, OR BEQUEST.



   (A)   The city may accept gifts, grants, or bequests from the state
or federal government for historic restoration purposes or historic purposes;
it may accept public or private gifts, grants, or bequests for said purposes,
provided, however that such gifts, grants, or bequests are not prohibited by
the Charter of the city; and are not used for the purposes of paying any fees
or expenses arising out of any litigation; further, the City Council may
appoint the aforementioned Historic District Commission to administer on
behalf of the city said gifts, grants, or bequests for the purposes herein
provided.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall be custodian of funds of the
Historic District Commission and authorized expenditures shall be certified
to the Finance Director by the Secretary or other officer designated by said
Historic District Commission. The Historic District Commission shall annually
report to the City Council any money it shall receive or expend.



(Prior Code, § 153.577)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2508, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1542, passed 2-9-1987, effective 2-19-1987)



§ 153.543  ACTION OF THE COMMISSION REGARDING HISTORIC RESOURCES THREATENED
WITH DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.



   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a
historic district or proposed historic district is threatened with demolition
by neglect, the Commission may do either of the following:



   (A)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect; or



   (B)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time,
the Commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as
are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall
be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the local unit as a special
assessment against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the
property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the
Circuit Court.



(Prior Code, § 153.578)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2509, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992;
Ord. O-10, passed 8-11-2003, effective 8-21-2003)



§ 153.544  WORK DONE ON A RESOURCE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and
the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the resource
to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to
modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness.



   (B)   If the owner does not comply with the restoration or
modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an
order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to
its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a
certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court’s order.



   (C)   The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may
be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property.



   (D)   When acting pursuant to an order from the Circuit Court, the
Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section.



(Prior Code, § 153.579)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2510, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1679, passed 11-9-1992, effective 11-19-1992)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.555  ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered by the Chief
Inspector and his or her deputies.



(Prior Code, § 153.590)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2601, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.556  DUTIES OF CHIEF INSPECTOR; BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   The Chief Inspector shall have the power to grant building,
land use, and occupancy permits, and to make inspections of buildings or
premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful for the Chief Inspector to approve any plans or
issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he or she
has inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this
chapter. To this end, the Chief Inspector shall require that every
application for a building permit for excavation, construction, moving or
alteration, or change in type of use or the type of occupancy be accompanied
by written statements and plans or plats drawn to scale, in duplicate, and
showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Chief Inspector to
ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformance with this
chapter:



      (1)   The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the
premises to which the certificate of occupancy is to apply;



      (2)   The lines of all lots or parcels under separate
ownership contained within the subject premises;



      (3)   The width and alignment of all abutting streets, alleys,
easements of access, and public open spaces;



      (4)   The shape, size, height, and location of all buildings
or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any buildings or
other structures already on the lot;



      (5)   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such
structures upon it, including, in the residential areas, the number of
dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate; and



      (6)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining
lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this
chapter are being observed.



   (B)   If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or
alteration, or use of land, as set forth in the application are in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, the Chief Inspector shall issue a
permit. If any application for such permit is not approved, the Chief
Inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause for such
disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving
any provisions of this chapter. If any plans filed with the Chief Inspector
are rejected because they do not comply with the standards as to type and
style herein established, an appeal from the ruling may be filed with the
Board of Appeals on Zoning, which Board shall have the power to hear and
determine such appeal and give relief in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   The Chief Inspector is under no circumstance permitted to
grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order, or regulation
contained in this chapter to any person making application to excavate,
construct, move, alter, or use either buildings, structures, or land within
the city.



   (D)   The Chief Inspector is under no circumstance permitted to make
changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out
his or her duties as Chief Inspector.



   (E)   The Chief Inspector shall make a record of all nonconforming
uses, for which a certificate of occupancy has been applied for, which are
existing at the effective date of the chapter for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of § 153.111.



(Prior Code, § 153.591)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2602, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.557  PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits required. It is unlawful for any person to commence
excavation for or construction of any building or structure, or moving of an
existing building without first obtaining a permit from the Chief Inspector.
No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration, or remodeling of
any building or structure until an application has been submitted in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter showing that the
construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and with any building regulations. A permit shall be issued after the receipt
of the application if it is found that the proposed construction, alteration,
or remodeling of any building or structure is in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   No plumbing, electrical, drainage, or other permit shall
be issued until the Chief Inspector has determined that the plans and
designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as
planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   ALTERATION or REPAIR of an existing building or
structure includes any changes in structural members, stairways, basic
construction; type, kind or class of occupancy; light or ventilation; means
of egress and ingress; or any other changes not involving any of the
aforesaid provisions.



   (B)   Permits for new use of land. A permit shall be obtained for
the new use of land, whether presently vacant or a change in land use is
proposed.



   (C)   Permits for new use of buildings or structures. An occupancy
permit shall also be obtained for any change in use of an existing building
or structure to a different class or type. (See also § 153.108 regarding
change of use of a nonconforming use.)



   (D)   Notification for final inspection. The recipient of any permit
for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building,
structure or part thereof shall notify the Chief Inspector immediately upon
completion of the work authorized by such permit for a final inspection.



(Prior Code, § 153.592)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2603, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.558  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   It is unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building, or
structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be
used any building or structure altered, extended, erected, repaired, or
moved, until the Chief Inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy
stating that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.



   (A)   Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy
shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or
existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings,
structures, or parts thereof or such use of land are in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Temporary certificates. Temporary certificates of occupancy
may be issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation
of the entire building or structure, provided that such temporary certificate
of occupancy shall not remain in force more than six months, nor more than
five days after the building or structure is fully completed and ready for
occupancy and provided, further, that such portions of the building or
structure are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of
occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Chief Inspector, and copies of
such certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved.



   (D)   Certificates for accessory building to dwellings. Accessory
buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate
of occupancy, but rather may be included in the certificate of occupancy for
the principal dwelling, building, or structure on the same lot when such
accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the
principal use.



   (E)   Application for certificates. Certificates of occupancy shall
be applied for in writing to the Chief Inspector on forms provided by the
Chief Inspector, and shall be issued after the receipt of such application if
it is found that the building or structure or part thereof or the use of land
is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If such certificate is
refused for cause, the applicant shall be notified of such refusal and the
cause thereof.



   (F)   Certificates for nonconforming buildings and uses. Reference
is made to §§ 153.108 and 153.111.



   (G)   Effect. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to
authorize and is required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of
the building, structure, or land to which it applies, and shall continue in
effect as long as such building, structure, or use is in full conformity with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. On the serving of
notice of a violation of this chapter, as provided in § 153.999, the
certificate of occupancy for such use, building or structure shall become
null and void, and a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any
further use of such building, structure or land.



(Prior Code, § 153.593)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2604, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.559  FEES.



   (A)   Fees as established by City Council for inspections and the
issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the issuing office
or agency and transmitted to the Finance Director in advance of the issuance
of such permits or certificates. All fees shall be deposited in the General
Fund of the city.



   (B)   Such fees shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision
resulting from the enforcement of this chapter, and shall be established by
Council and posted in the Office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   Fees for divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above shall not be
cumulative and only the highest fee shall be charged, unless multiple reviews
or hearings are required or requested.



(Prior Code, § 153.594)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2605, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.560  CITY PLANNING COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Planning Commission as established by the Charter of
the city in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33
of 2008, being M.C.L. §§ 125.3801 et seq., is designated as the Commission
specified in M.C.L. § 125.3811, and shall perform the duties of said
Commission as provided in the statute in connection with amendments to this
chapter, and shall exercise such other powers and duties as specified in this
chapter.



   (B)   The Commission shall hear and decide appeals or requests
including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Permitted uses requiring special approval;



      (2)   Nonconforming use substitutions;



      (3)   Site plan review; and



      (4)   Rezoning petitions.



(Prior Code, § 153.595)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2606, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1821, passed 7-13-1998, effective 7-27-1998)



§ 153.561  AMENDMENTS; PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE; REPORT OF CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION; VOTE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The City Council may, upon recommendation from the City
Planning Commission, amend, supplement, or change the regulations or the
district boundaries of this chapter as established herein, pursuant to the
authority and procedure set forth in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L. §§ 125.3801 et seq., as amended.



   (B)   Any applicant desiring to have any change made in this chapter
shall, with his or her petition for such change, deposit a fee as established
by City Council with the City Clerk at the time that the petition is filed to
cover the publication and other miscellaneous costs for processing said
petition.



   (C)   At least one public hearing shall be held by the City Planning
Commission before an amendment becomes effective. Not less than 15 days’
notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall first be published
in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in the city and not
less than 15 days’ notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall
first be given by mail to each public utility company and to each railroad
company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the
districts or zones affected that registers its name and mailing address with
the City Clerk for the purpose of receiving the notice. An affidavit of
mailing shall be maintained. A hearing shall be granted a person interested
at the time and place specified on the notice.



   (D)   The City Planning Commission shall make its final report to
the City Council. A summary of the comments submitted at the public hearing
shall be transmitted with the report of the Commission to the City Council.
The City Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it
necessary.



   (E)   The City Council shall not determine the boundaries of
districts nor impose regulations until after the final report of the City
Planning Commission, nor shall the ordinance or maps be amended after they
are adopted in the first instance until the proposed amendment has been
submitted to the City Planning Commission and it has held at least one
hearing and made a report thereon. In either case, the City Council may adopt
the ordinance and maps, with or without amendments, after receipt of the City
Planning Commission’s report, or refer the ordinance and maps again to the
Commission for a further report.



   (F)   After the ordinance and maps have in the first instance been
approved by the City Council, amendments or supplements thereto may be made
as provided in this section, except that if an individual property or several
adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, notice of the proposed
rezoning and hearing shall be given to the owners of the property in question
at least 15 days before the hearing.



   (G)   Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the
requirements of this division (G), an amendment to this chapter which is the
object of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the City
Council, unless a larger vote, but not to exceed a three-quarters vote, is
required by ordinance or Charter. The protest petition shall be presented to
the City Council before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall
be signed by one of the following:



      (1)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included
in the proposed change;



      (2)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included
within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of
the land included in the proposed change; and



      (3)   For purposes of this division (G), publicly-owned land
shall be excluded in calculating the 20% land area requirement.



   (H)   Following adoption of an amendment to this chapter by the City
Council, one notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city within 15 days after adoption. The notice shall
include:



      (1)   Either a summary of the regulatory effect of the
amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the
amendment;



      (2)   The effective date of the amendment; and



      (3)   The place and time where a copy of the amendment may be
purchased or inspected.



(Prior Code, § 153.596)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2607, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.562  POWERS OF THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION CONCERNING SPECIAL
APPROVALS.



   The City Planning Commission, as herein created, shall have the
following specific powers and duties concerning special approvals.



   (A)   Purpose. In hearing and deciding upon special approvals, the
City Planning Commission shall base its actions on the theory that the
development and execution of a comprehensive zoning ordinance is founded upon
the division of the city into districts within which districts the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are variations in the nature of special uses which, because of
their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular
district or districts without consideration in each case of the impact of
those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular
use at the particular location. Such special uses fall into two categories:



      (1)   Uses either municipally operated or operated by publicly
regulated utilities or uses traditionally affected with a public interest; and



      (2)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an
unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with
respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.



   (B)   Authorization. The special approval of specific land uses and
activities, as required under §§ 153.182, 153.197, 153.212, 153.227,
153.247, 153.267, 153.282, 153.317, 153.332, 153.347, and 153.367 may be
authorized by the City Planning Commission pursuant to the requirements of
this section.



   (C)   Application. An application for special approval for a land
use shall be filed and processed in the manner prescribed for application for
site plan review in § 153.083 and shall be in such form and accompanied by
such information as shall be established from time to time by the City
Planning Commission. Any application for special approval shall be filed
simultaneously with an application for site plan review for the subject use.



   (D)   Notice of request for special approval.



      (1)   Notice of a request for special approval of a land use
shall be in the form of one notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, plus a notice sent by mail or by personal delivery
to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of
the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300
feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than five and not more
than 15 days before the application will be considered.



      (2)   If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
“occupant” may be used in making notification. Notification need not be
given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure
contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a
single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of
the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure.



      (3)   The notice shall:



         (a)   Describe the nature of the special land use
request;



         (b)   Indicate the property which is the subject of the
special land use request;



         (c)   State when and where the special land use request
will be considered;



         (d)   Indicate when and where written comments will be
received concerning the request; and



         (e)   Indicate that a public hearing on the special land
use request may be requested by a property owner or the occupant of a
structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being
considered for a special use.



   (E)   Hearing. At the initiative of the City Planning Commission, or
upon the request of the applicant for special approval of a land use, or a
property owner or the occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property being considered for a special land use, a public
hearing with notification as required for a notice of a request for special
land use approval, as provided in division (D) above, shall be held before a
decision on the special approval request is made. If the applicant or the
City Planning Commission requests a public hearing, only notification of the
public hearing need be made. A decision on a special approval request which
is based on discretionary grounds shall not be made unless notification of
the request for special approval, or notification of a public hearing on a
special approval request, is given as required by this section.



   (F)   Standards. No special approval shall be granted by the City
Planning Commission unless the special use:



      (1)   Will reasonably promote the use of land in a socially
and economically desirable manner for those persons who will use the proposed
land use or activity; for those landowners and residents who are adjacent;
and for the city as a whole;



      (2)   Is necessary for the public convenience at that location;



      (3)   Is compatible with adjacent uses of land;



      (4)   Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected;



      (5)   Can be adequately served by public services and
facilities without diminishing or adversely affecting public services and
facilities to existing land uses in the area;



      (6)   Will not cause unreasonable injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located;



      (7)   Will reasonably protect the natural environment and help
conserve natural resources and energy;



      (8)   Is within the provisions of uses requiring special
approval as set forth in the various zoning districts herein, is in harmony
with the purposes and conforms to the applicable regulations of the zoning
district in which it is to be located, and meets applicable site design
standards for use in §§ 153.455 through 153.491; and



      (9)   Is related to the valid exercise of the city’s police
power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.



   (G)   Approval. The City Planning Commission may deny, approve, or
approve with conditions, requests for special approval of a land use. The
decision on a special approval shall be incorporated in a statement of
conclusions relative to the specific land use under consideration. The
decision shall specify the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed.



   (H)   Record. The conditions imposed with respect to the special
approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the
special approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual
consent of the City Planning Commission and the landowner. The City Planning
Commission shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions.



(Prior Code, § 153.597)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2608, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.563  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.



   Where in this chapter there is delegated to the City Council, Board of
Appeals on Zoning, or the City Planning Commission the function of
establishing certain physical site improvements as a contingency to securing
a zoning amendment, special approval, or variance, the City Council, Board of
Appeals on Zoning, or the City Planning Commission may, to ensure strict
compliance with any regulation contained or required as a condition of the
issuance of a permit or certificate of occupancy, require the permittee to
furnish a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit,
or surety bond to be deposited with the Department of Public Works for those
items relating to actions of the City Planning Commission or Board of Appeals
on Zoning, and with the City Clerk for those items relating to actions of the
City Council, in an amount determined by the Department of Engineering to be
reasonably necessary to insure compliance hereunder; provided, however, that
in fixing the amount of such cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank
letter of credit, or surety bond, the City Council, Board of Appeals on
Zoning, or the City Planning Commission shall take into account the size and
scope of the proposed improvement project, current prevailing cost of
rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator, estimated expenses
to compel the operator to comply by court decree, and such other factors and
conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the
light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. The
performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the
permit authorizing the activity or project. The city may not require the
deposit of the performance guarantee before the date on which the city is
prepared to issue the permit. The city shall establish procedures under which
a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work
completed on the required improvements will be made as work progresses. This
section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been
deposited pursuant to the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being
M.C.L. §§ 560.101 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 153.598)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2609, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



BOARD OF APPEALS ON ZONING



§ 153.575  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established a Board of Appeals on Zoning which shall perform
its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Public Act 110 of 2006,
being M.C.L. § 125.3603, in such a way that the objectives of this chapter
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.



(Prior Code, § 153.610)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2701, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.576  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning as created by the city in Ord.
D-465, effective October 15, 1958, shall continue to so function and shall
consist of six members.



   (B)   When the terms of the individual members of the Board expire,
no more than two terms expiring in any one year, the City Council shall
appoint a successor for a three-year term from the date of expiration of said
original member’s term.



   (C)   All members shall be freeholders residing in the city, shall
be citizens of the United States, and residents of the city for a full year
prior to appointment; provided, that no employee of the city may serve
simultaneously as a member of the Board of Appeals on Zoning.



   (D)   One member shall be appointed from the membership of the City
Planning Commission, and the Board of Appeals on Zoning, and the City
Planning Commission shall at all times have one member in common.



   (E)   After the initial appointment, each member shall hold office
for a period of three years or until a successor is appointed.



   (F)   Members may be removed at the pleasure of the City Council.
Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled by the City Council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



   (G)   The City Council may appoint not more than two alternate
members to the Board, said alternate members to have the same term as regular
members of the Board and to be subject to the same qualifications and other
provisions contained herein applicable to regular members of the Board.



   (H)   The President, or the Vice President in the absence of the
President, may call upon either or both of the alternate members on a
rotating basis to sit as regular members of the Board in the absence of one
or two regular members; or where a regular member has abstained for reasons
of a conflict of interest.



   (I)   Once appointed to hear a case, an alternate member shall serve
in the case until a final decision has been made and shall have the same
voting rights as a regular member of the Board.



(Prior Code, § 153.611)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2702, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1545, passed 6-1-1987, effective 6-11-1987)



§ 153.577  OFFICERS.



   The President, the Vice President, and the Secretary of the Board of
Appeals on Zoning shall be elected annually by the members of the Board at
the first meeting held in each calendar year.



(Prior Code, § 153.612)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2703, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.578  MEETINGS; RECORD KEEPING; SUBPOENA POWER; FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.



   (A)   All meetings of the Board of Appeals on Zoning shall be held
at the call of the President or by the Vice President in the absence of the
President or upon the written request of any two members of the Board.



   (B)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, and shall keep records of its findings, proceedings at hearings,
and other official actions; and which shall be a public record.



   (C)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning may request the production of
books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it.



   (D)   The business which the Board of Appeals on Zoning may perform
shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Board held in compliance with
the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et
seq. Public notice of the time, date, and the place of meeting shall be given
in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L. §§ 15.261 et seq., as amended.



   (E)   A document prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by the Board of Appeals on Zoning in the performance of an official
function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom
of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 153.613)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2704, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.579  APPEALS, PROCEDURE, HEARING.



   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals on Zoning by
any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or
bureau affected by a decision of the Chief Inspector concerning this chapter.
Such appeals shall be taken within 60 days from the decision by filing with
the Chief Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Chief Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.



   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Chief Inspector certifies to the Board, after
the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not
be stayed.



   (C)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning shall select a reasonable time
and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the
parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay.
Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney.



(Prior Code, § 153.614)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2705, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.580  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   The Board of Appeals on Zoning, in conducting any public hearing, shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice
to the parties concerned, including all owners of record of property and
occupants of single- and two-family dwellings thereof if not the owner of
record, within 300 feet of the premises in question. Such notices shall be
delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and
tenants at the address given in the city’s last assessment roll. The Board
shall decide the appeal within a reasonable period of time.



(Prior Code, § 153.615)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2706, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.581  APPEALS; FEES.



   Fees for hearings before the Board of Appeals on Zoning shall be as
established by City Council. Such fees shall be paid to the Finance Director
for credit to the General Fund of the city at the time notice of the appeal
is filed.



(Prior Code, § 153.616)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2707, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.582  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning as created in this subchapter
is a body of limited powers. The Board shall have the specific powers and
duties as set forth in §§ 153.583 through 153.589.



   (B)   The Board shall hear appeals and requests including, but not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Variances from the strict application of the provisions
of this chapter;



      (2)   Requests for special exceptions; and



      (3)   Interpretations of zoning district boundaries and
interpretations of the text of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.617)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2708, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1821, passed 7-13-1998, effective 7-27-1998)



§ 153.583  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   The Board of Appeals on Zoning has the power to hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error of law in any
order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the
Chief Inspector or any other administrative official in carrying out or
enforcing any provision of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 153.618)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2709, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.584  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   The Board of Appeals on Zoning has the power to hear and decide, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for special
exceptions as follows.



   (A)   Public utilities. The Board may permit the erection and use of
a building, or an addition to an existing building, of a public service
corporation to be used for public utility purposes in any permitted district
to a greater height or of a larger area than the district requirements
established in this chapter, and permit the location in any use district of a
public utility building, structure, or use; provided, the Board finds such
use, height, area, building, or structure reasonably necessary for the public
convenience and service, and provided further that such building, structure,
or use is designed, erected, and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the
general architecture and plan of such a district.



   (B)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. The Board may
permit the modification of the off-street automobile parking or loading space
requirements specified in §§ 153.125 through 153.132 where, in the
particular instance, such modifications will not be inconsistent with the
purpose and intent of such requirements.



   (C)   Construction below elevation of intermediate regional flood
level in floodway area. The Board may grant construction of new structures,
improvement or relocation of existing structures, and other development in a
floodway area below the elevation of the intermediate regional flood level
subject to criteria set forth in § 153.519.



   (D)   Off-street parking development regulations. The Board may
permit a variation, modification or exception in the required regulations
specified in §§ 153.128 through 153.130, if after investigation by the
Board it is found that such variation, modification, or exception is
necessary because of peculiar existing conditions, that such variation,
modification, or exception will not be inconsistent with the purpose and
spirit of this chapter, and that there has been a favorable decision by the
City Planning Commission regarding the permitting of such “Off-Street
Parking A” land use on residential property pursuant to the requirements of
§ 153.128.



   (E)   Temporary building and uses. The Board may permit temporary
buildings and uses for periods not to exceed six months, provided that such
buildings and uses in no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land
normally permitted in the zoning district, and that such temporary buildings
and uses contribute materially to the general welfare of the city,
particularly in time of emergency, under conditions peculiar to the time and
place involved. Such period may be extended not more than for an additional
period of six months.



   (F)   Nonconforming uses. The Board may permit the expansion of a
building or structure used in connection with a nonconforming use subject to
requirements established in § 153.102(A).



   (G)   Fences in business districts. The Board may permit fences
exceeding six feet in height and fences with barbed wire when the barbed wire
is at least six feet above grade in business districts, when there are unique
and exceptional circumstances.



   (H)   Electric fences. The Board may permit electric fences (a fence
carrying electric current or charge of electricity) in industrial districts
upon such terms and conditions as the Board may require in cases where there
are unique or exceptional circumstances and in instances where, in the
Board’s opinion, such business use by its nature has a high degree of
vandalism and theft. The Board shall be guided by the following criteria when
permitting such electric fence:



      (1)   The electric fence shall not exceed 12 feet in height;



      (2)   The electric charge shall not exceed 12 volts;



      (3)   The property shall be protected from unauthorized touch
by a perimeter fence (open or closed construction), not less than six feet
high and not closer than two feet to the electric fence;



      (4)   Liability insurance acceptable to the City Attorney
shall be provided; and



      (5)   Warning signs approved by the Board on all sides of the
property where entrance to the fenced area could be accomplished.



(Prior Code, § 153.619)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2710, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1621, passed 10-1-1990, effective 10-11-1990;
Ord. D-1844, passed 9-27-1999, effective 10-7-1999)



§ 153.585  INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the Zoning Map fixing the
use districts accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map. In
cases of any question as to locations of any boundary line between zoning
districts, the Board of Appeals on Zoning shall interpret the Zoning Map.



(Prior Code, § 153.620)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2711, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.586  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning has the power to authorize,
upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of any provision of
this chapter where by reason of exceptional irregularity, narrowness,
shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
conditions of such property, the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to or
unnecessary undue hardship upon the owner of such property.



   (B)   In hearing and deciding appeals for variances, the Board of
Appeals on Zoning shall adhere to the following criteria in determining
whether practical difficulties and/or unnecessary hardships exist:



      (1)   If the property owner complies with the provisions of
this chapter he or she can secure no reasonable return from or make no
reasonable use of his or her property;



      (2)   The hardship results from the application of this
chapter to his or her property, rather than from some other factor;



      (3)   The hardship of which he or she complains is suffered
merely by his or her property directly, and not by others;



      (4)   The hardship is not the result of his or her own
actions; and



      (5)   The hardship is peculiar to the property of the
applicant.



   (C)   Specific variances which the Board of Appeals on Zoning may
grant, subject to conformance with the criteria delineated in division (B)
above include the following:



      (1)   Height, yard spaces, and area requirements. The Board
may permit such modification of the height, yard space, and area requirements
as may be necessary to secure appropriate improvement of a lot which is of
such shape of so located with relation to surrounding development of physical
characteristics that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without
such modification; and



      (2)   Additions to buildings. The Board may permit
modification of zoning requirements for additions or enlargements to existing
buildings provided that all requirements for the particular use in the zoning
district where such use is first permitted cannot be met without extreme
physical hardship owing to the shape of the lot, adjacent land uses, or
topography.



(Prior Code, § 153.621)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2712, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.587  VOTE REQUIRED TO REVERSE DECISIONS; LIMITATION OF POWER.



   (A)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Appeals on
Zoning shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Chief Inspector in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision.



   (B)   The power or authority to alter or change the zoning
regulations or the Zoning Map is reserved to the City Council in the manner
provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 153.622)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2713, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.588  STANDARD FOR JUDGING APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations of this
chapter, the Board of Appeals on Zoning shall, before making any variations
from the chapter in a specific case, first determine that the proposed
variation involves exceptional circumstances not found in other areas of the
same zoning district, will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent
of this chapter, will not impair the public health, safety, comfort, or
welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and meets the following general
standards:



   (A)   The proposed use will be of such location, size, and character
that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of
the surrounding neighborhood;



   (B)   The proposed use will be of a nature that will make vehicular
and pedestrian traffic not more hazardous than is normal for the district
involved, taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in relation
to routes of traffic flow, proximity and relationship to intersections,
adequacy of sight distances, location and access of off-street parking, and
provisions for pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing
child-vehicle contacts in residential districts;



   (C)   The location, size, intensity, site layout, and periods of
operation of any such proposed use will be designed to eliminate possible
nuisance emanating therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any
other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes,
vibration, smoke, or lights; and



   (D)   The location and height of buildings or structures and the
location, nature, and height of walls and fences will be such that the
proposed use will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect
their value.



(Prior Code, § 153.623)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2714, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.589  CONDITIONS OF APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals on Zoning, in acting favorably on any
appeal in connection with a request for a variance or special exception may
attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish
the reasonable application of the standards set forth in § 153.588. In
addition, the Board shall have the authority to require performance bonds to
insure compliance with any requirements deemed necessary for approving any
variance of special exception. (See § 153.563.) Following establishment of
any land use pursuant to a variance or special exception, any change and/or
modification, as well as the original provisions of the building and site
plan which have not been modified shall be maintained as a condition of the
establishment of any use to which they are appurtenant and applicable. The
Board may also deny any appeal but only in accordance with said standards.



   (B)   In exercising the above powers of this chapter, the Board of
Appeals on Zoning may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and
to that end shall have all the powers of the Chief Inspector from whom the
appeal is taken.



(Prior Code, § 153.624)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2715, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.590  PERIOD OF VALIDITY.



   No order of the Board of Appeals on Zoning permitting the erection or
alteration of a building or character of an open air land use shall be valid
for a period longer than six months unless such use is established within
such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent
upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in
force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is
obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and
proceeds to completion in accordance with such permit.



(Prior Code, § 153.625)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2716, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.591  CIRCUIT COURT APPEAL.



   (A)   The decision of the Board of Appeals on Zoning shall be final.
However, a person having an interest affected by this chapter may appeal to
the Circuit Court. Upon appeal, the court shall review the record and
decision of the Board of Appeals on Zoning to ensure that the decision:



      (1)   Complies with the Constitution and laws of the state;



      (2)   Is based upon proper procedure;



      (3)   Is supported by competent material and substantial
evidence on the record; and



      (4)   Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted
by law to the Board of Appeals on Zoning.



   (B)   If the court finds the record of the Board of Appeals on
Zoning inadequate to make the review required by this section, or that there
is additional evidence which is material and with good reason was not
presented to the Board of Appeals on Zoning, the court shall order further
proceedings before the Board on conditions which the court considers proper.
The Board of Appeals on Zoning may modify its findings and decision as a
result of the new proceedings, or may affirm its original decision. The
supplementary record and decisions shall be filed with the court.



   (C)   As a result of the review required by this section, the court
may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Board of Appeals on Zoning.



(Prior Code, § 153.626)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2717, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   General provisions. A person who violates any provision of
this chapter, known as the Saginaw Zoning Code, is responsible for a Class C
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth
in Ch. 37, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat
offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as provided
by Ch. 37. All definitions, procedures, and provisions set forth in Ch. 37
shall govern municipal civil infractions under the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Authorized city official. The Chief Inspector and/or his or
her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official, as defined
by Ch. 37, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil
infraction violation notices as provided by this chapter and Ch. 37.



(Prior Code, § 153.999)  (Ord. D-1418, § 2802, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983; Ord. D-1766, passed 9-30-1996, effective 11-11-1996)



APPENDIX A:  ILLUSTRATIONS



Section



   1.   Floor area terminology



   2.   Floor area ratio (FAR)



   3.   Building height requirements



   4.   Corner, interior, and double frontage lots



   5.   Nonconforming use



   6.   Yard requirements



   7.   Basement and story illustration



   8.   Basic structural terms



   9.   Lot terms



   10.   Fences



   11.   Required side yards for selected corner lots widths



   12.   Off-street parking diagram



   13.   Parking islands



To view Appendix A Sections 1 - 13 in PDF, click HERE



§ 1.  FLOOR AREA TERMINOLOGY.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 1)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 2.  FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 2)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 3.  BUILDING HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 3)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 4.  CORNER, INTERIOR, AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 4)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 5.  NONCONFORMING USE.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 5)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 6.  YARD REQUIREMENTS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 6)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 7.  BASEMENT AND STORY ILLUSTRATION.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 7)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 8.  BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 8)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 9.  LOT TERMS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 9)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982, effective
1-21-1983)



§ 10.  FENCES.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 10)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 11.  REQUIRED SIDE YARDS FOR SELECTED CORNER LOTS WIDTHS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 11)  (Ord. D-1418, passed 11-22-1982,
effective 1-21-1983)



§ 12.  OFF-STREET PARKING DIAGRAM.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 12)  (Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective
3-1-2001)



§ 13.  PARKING ISLANDS.







(Prior Code, Ch. 153, App. § 13)  (Ord. D-1887, passed 2-19-2001, effective
3-1-2001)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   OFFICIAL MAP CHANGES



      II.   STREET VACATIONS



      III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



      IV.   FRANCHISES



      V.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



      VI.   RELINQUISH RIGHTS-OF-WAY



      VII.   STREET AMENDMENTS



      VIII.   LOW INCOME HOUSING TAX EXEMPTION



      IX.   MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES



Editor’s Note:



   The Tables of Special Ordinances only contains ordinances dating back
to 1990. For copies of all other special ordinances, please contact the City
Clerk’s office. A complete copy of these ordinances are available on the
city’s website at www.saginaw-mi.com or in the City Clerk’s office, 1315
S. Washington, Saginaw, MI 48601



TABLE I:  OFFICIAL MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description




D-1638
 
7-29-1991
 
8-8-1991
 
An ordinance to amend the official map of the City of Saginaw by widening a
portion of Court St. between Niagara St. and the West Bank of the Saginaw
River.


D-1792
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the official map of the City of Saginaw by widening a
portion of Second Ave. between E. Genesee Ave. and Lapeer Ave.


D-1793
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the official map of the City of Saginaw by widening
Franklin St. between Meredith St. and Emerson St.


D-1795
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the official map of the City of Saginaw by widening
Emerson St. between Franklin St. and Baum St.


D-1796
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the official map of the City of Saginaw by widening
Emerson St. between Washington Ave. and Franklin St.


O-75
 
11-24-2008
 
12-4-2008
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by adding Norman Little Plank Rd.
to the existing street signs on East Genesee Ave. at South Washington Ave.,
Water St., Federal Ave., South Warren Ave., and Janes St.


O-199
 
2-5-2-18
 
2-15-2018
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by renaming 2nd Ave. to Roosevelt
Austin Ave. from Washington Ave. South to East Genesee Ave.




 



 



TABLE II:  STREET VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description




D-1606
 
1-2-1990
 
1-12-1990
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the State St. right-of-way lying between
the east line of Warwick St. and the west line of N. Morson St.


D-1617
 
8-27-1990
 
9-6-1990
 
An ordinance to vacate Schaefer St. lying between the southerly line of
Congress Ave. and the northerly line of Irving Ave., located in Penoyer Farm,
and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1619
 
9-24-1990
 
10-4-1990
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Fifth Ave. lying between Janes Ave. and
Thompson St., located in Glasby, Gallagher, and Little’s Addition, and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1626
 
1-7-1991
 
1-17-1991
 
An ordinance to vacate the easterly 60 feet of the alley adjacent to lots
210, 211, and 214, Belmont, in the block bounded by Thurman St., Osborn St.,
Yale St., and Brockway St.


D-1627
 
1-28-1991
 
2-8-1991
 
An ordinance to vacate the L-shaped alley adjacent to lots A, B, C, D, and E,
J.A. Weaver’s Subdivision of a part of Outlot 31, Glasby and Gallagher’s
Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable
television.


D-1634
 
6-17-1991
 
6-27-1991
 
An ordinance to vacate Miller St., lying between the easterly line of N.
Michigan Ave. and the westerly line of N. Hamilton St., and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1644
 
9-23-1991
 
10-3-1991
 
An ordinance to vacate the portion of the alley abutting 719 S. Bond St. and
716-718 S. Oakley St. in the block bounded by S. Oakley St., Jackson St., S.
Bond St., and Williams St., and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities and cable television.


D-1667
 
11-2-1992
 
11-12-1992
 
An ordinance to vacate Emerson St. lying between the westerly line of Howard
St. and the easterly line of Owen St. located in Emerson’s Addition, and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1680
 
11-26-1992
 
11-26-1992
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Trier
St., Mackinaw St., Goetz St., and Adams Blvd., located in Block 8, boulevard
plat, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable
television.


D-1690
 
3-29-1993
 
4-8-1993
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Russell
St., Hess Ave., S. Washington Ave., and Ortman St., located in Block 4, Hess
and Bundy’s Addition to the Village of Salina, and to retain therein and
easement for public utilities.


D-1691
 
3-29-1993
 
4-8-1993
 
An ordinance to vacate the alley in the block bounded by E. Remington St.,
Cornelia St., Phelon St., and S. Warren Ave., located in Block 3,
Remington’s Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities.


D-1699
 
9-7-1993
 
9-17-1993
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Holmes
St., S. Niagara St., Stanley St., and S. Maple St., located in Block 42,
Saginaw Improvement Company’s Addition I, and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities.


D-1706
 
10-11-1993
 
10-11-1993
 
An ordinance to vacate the unopened portion of Fulton St. lying west of
Limerick St. and abutting Lots 12 through 17, Webber Ct.


D-1707
 
1-3-1994
 
1-3-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate the northerly 20 feet of Lyon St. lying between the
westerly line of S. Michigan Ave. and the easterly line of S. Fayette St.,
located in City of Saginaw in division south of Cass St., and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1712
 
3-21-1994
 
3-21-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by
Jackson, S. Webster, Lyon, and S. Harrison Sts., located in Block 23, City of
Saginaw in division south of Cass St., and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities.


D-1713
 
3-21-1994
 
3-21-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate the walkway abutting Lots 7, 8, 22, and 23, Block 3,
Sheridan Park.


D-1721
 
8-8-1994
 
8-8-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Hayes,
N. Porter, Monroe, and N. Bond Sts., located in Block 175, City of Saginaw in
division north of Cass St., and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities.


D-1722
 
8-8-1994
 
8-8-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate N. Third Ave. lying between the southerly line of
Tuscola St. and the northerly line of Lapeer Ave., located in Glasby and
Gallagher’s Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities.


D-1724
 
8-29-1994
 
8-29-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
Thurman, Birney, Yale, and Beech Sts. and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities.


D-1725
 
9-12-1994
 
9-22-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Schaefer St. lying between the southerly
line of Irving Ave. and the northerly line of Cooper Ave. and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1728
 
11-14-1994
 
11-14-1994
 
An ordinance to vacate Burrows St. lying between the westerly line Wheeler
St. and the easterly line of Superior St. and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities.


D-1736
 
3-6-1995
 
3-6-1995
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Owen
St., Rust Ave., Lowell Ave., and Webber St. and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities.


D-1754
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Meredith St. lying between the westerly
line of Jefferson Ave. and the easterly line of Baum St.


D-1755
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
An ordinance to vacate Owen St. lying between the southerly line of Hoyt Ave.
and the northerly line of Meredith St. located in Emerson’s Addition, and
to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1756
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
An ordinance to vacate Jefferson Ave. lying between the southerly line of
Hoyt Ave. and the northerly line of Holden St. located in Emerson’s
Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable
television.


D-1759
 
2-5-1996
 
2-5-1996
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
N. Bond, Throop, N. Oakley, and Miller Sts. located in Block 200, City of
Saginaw in division north of Cass St., and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities and cable television.


D-1783
 
11-18-1996
 
11-18-1996
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
Cass St., S. Mason St., Adams St., and S. Oakley St., located in Block 211,
City of Saginaw, in division north of Cass St., and to retain therein an
easement for public utilities and cable television.


D-1797
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate Meredith St. lying between the easterly line of
Jefferson Ave. and the westerly line of Owen St., located in Emerson’s
Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and cable
television.


D-1798
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate of a portion of Baum St. lying between the southerly
line of Emerson St. and the northerly line of Meredith St., located in
Emerson’s Addition, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities
and cable television.


D-1799
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate Baum St. lying between the southerly line of Hoyt.


D-1800
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Emerson St. between Washington Ave. and
Franklin St., and to retain therein an easement for public utilities and
cable television.


D-1801
 
3-17-1997
 
3-27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate the northerly 177.23 feet of the alley in the block
bounded by Court St., S. Oakley St., Adams St., and S. Mason St. and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1802
 
3-24-1997
 
3-24-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Hayes
St., N. Oakley St., Throop St., and N. Bond St., and to retain therein an
easement for public utilities.


D-1811
 
10-27-1997
 
10–27-1997
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of North Fourteenth St. and to reserve an
easement therein for public utilities and maintenance access.


D-1826
 
9-14-1998
 
10-1-1998
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
N. Mason St., N. Oakley St., Miller St., and Throop St. and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities.


D-1831
 
11-9-1998
 
11-19-1998
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
W. Remington St., N. Mason St., N. Oakley St., and W. Holland Ave. and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1834
 
4-5-1999
 
4-15-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Millard St. lying between the westerly line of S.
Washington Ave. and the easterly line of S. Water St., located in Hoyt’s
Plat, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1835
 
5-17-1999
 
5-17-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
Laurel, Yale, S. Charles, and Cypress Sts. and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities and cable television.


D-1837
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Carlisle St. between Cathay St. and 21st St., and to
re-align and rename 21st St. to Munson Ct.


D-1838
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Needham St. lying between Leon Scott Ct. and Veterans
Memorial Parkway, located in Eddy Urban Renewal Replat No. 3, and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1841
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Claytor Ct. lying east of Leon Scott Ct., located in
Fuller’s Subdivision, and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities.


D-1846
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Montgomery St. lying between Wisner St. and Hess Ave.,
located in Rosedale Subdivision.


D-1848
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Franklin St. lying between the northerly line of
Meredith St. and the southerly line of the street closed under Ord. D-1794,
and to retain therein an easement for public utilities.


D-1849
 
12-6-1999
 
12-16-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of outer drive abutting Lot 16, Sherwill
Addition and to reserve therein an easement for public utilities and cable
television.


D-1850
 
12-6-1999
 
12-6-1999
 
An ordinance to vacate Carlisle St. between Cathay St. and 21st St. and to
re-align and rename 21st St. to Munson Ct.


D-1860
 
7-10-2000
 
7-20-2000
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Leon Scott Ct., to extend Leon Scott Ct.
to N. Washington Ave. and to change the name of Leon Scott Ct. to Leon Scott
St., located in Eddy Urban Renewal Replat No. 3.


D-1864
 
8-14-2000
 
8-24-2000
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
S. Mason, S. Woodbridge, Mackinaw, and Van Buren Sts. and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, telecommunications, and cable television.


D-1883
 
1-22-2001
 
2-1-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located in the block bounded by
S. Jefferson Ave., Randolph St., Elizabeth St., and Morris St. and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


D-1889
 
4-16-2001
 
4-26-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate a ten-foot walkway located in the Block 5, Sheridan
Park and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


D-1890
 
5-14-2001
 
5-24-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate Cass St. lying between S. Webster St. and S. Harrison
St. and to retain therein an easement for public utilities,
telecommunications, and cable television.


D-1894
 
8-27-2001
 
9-6-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate the 100 block of North Harrison St., between Court St.
and Hancock St., abutting 600 Court St. and 700 Court St., and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


D-1895
 
9-10-2001
 
9-20-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate McCoskry St. lying between the westerly line of S.
Washington Ave. and the easterly line of S. Water St., located in Emerson’s
addition, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


D-1901
 
9-24-2001
 
10-4-2001
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of S. Water St. lying between Meredith St.
and Atwater St. and to add to the right-of-way of a portion of S. Water St.
between McCoskry St. and Atwater St. and to retain within the portion of S.
Water St. to be vacated an easement for public utilities, cable television,
and telecommunications.


D-1917
 
4-22-2002
 
5-2-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate the alley abutting Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 , 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, and 14 in Block 52, Emerson’s Addition (the block bounded by S.
Washington Ave., Atwater St., S. Water St. (vacated), and McCoskry St.
(vacated)) and to retain an easement for public utilities, cable television,
and telecommunications to the same extent as though said alley had not been
vacated and no structure shall hereafter be erected thereon without the prior
written consent of the city.


D-1921
 
6-17-2002
 
6-27-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate N. Hamilton St. lying between W. Remington St. and N.
Michigan Ave., and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


D-1924
 
7-1-2002
 
7-11-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate Irving Ave. lying between the easterly line of
Schaefer St. and the westerly line of N. Michigan Ave. and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1925
 
7-15-2002
 
7-25-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by
Mackinaw, S. Bond, Lyon, and S. Oakley Sts. and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1926
 
7-15-2002
 
7-25-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate Symphony Ln. lying between the easterly line of North
Washington Ave. and the westerly line of North Jefferson Ave. and to limit
access to and from Symphony Ln. and to retain


therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


D-1928
 
7-29-2002
 
8-8-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate Irving Ave. lying between the easterly line of Stone
St. and the westerly line of Stark St. and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1931
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Janes
Ave., Federal Ave., S. 10th, and S. 11th Sts. and to retain therein an
easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1932
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate Irving Ave. lying between the easterly line of
Hanchett St. and the westerly line of Schaefer St. and to retain therein an
easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1934
 
8-26-2002
 
9-5-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate the alley in the block bounded by Mackinaw, S.
Harrison, S. Webster, and Lyon Sts. and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


D-1935
 
8-26-2002
 
9-5-2002
 
An ordinance to vacate 230 feet of Lapeer St. lying east of North Jefferson
Ave. to the westerly line of North Warren Ave. subject to a standard easement
reservation for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-12
 
8-25-2003
 
9-4-2003
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Owen St. lying between Euclid St. and
Garey St., located in Hoyt’s Subdivision of the James Riley Reserve, and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-19
 
4-19-2004
 
4-29-2004
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of Mackinaw St., lying between South
Hamilton St. and South Niagra St., located in the city, in division south of
Cass St., and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


O-22
 
5-17-2004
 
5-27-2004
 
An ordinance to vacate the entire alley lying between East Genesee Ave. and
South Fourth St., located in the city, and to retain an easement for public
utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-23
 
6-7-2004
 
6-17-2004
 
An ordinance to vacate unused right-of-way of Fifteenth St. lying between
Annesley and Hartsuff Sts., except the 15 feet at a right angle to Fifteenth
St. and Hartsuff St. and to retain therein an easement for public utilities,
cable television, and telecommunications.


O-26
 
9-13-2004
 
9-23-2004
 
An ordinance to vacate the entire alley lying between North Gallagher St.,
West Remington St., North Porter, and West Holland Ave. and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-27
 
9-13-2004
 
9-23-2004
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley lying between North Oakley St.,
West Remington St., North Mason, and West Holland Ave. and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-34
 
5-2-2005
 
5-12-2005
 
An ordinance to vacate the unused right-of-way abutting the westerly line of
North Harrison St. and Lot 12, Block 154, Bernard Richman and McArdles
Addition and Covenant-Harrison Hospital Campus.


O-47
 
5-15-2006
 
5-25-2006
 
An ordinance to vacate the entire alley lying between Federal Ave. and South
Sixth St., Janes St., and South Seventh St., and to retain therein an
easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-52
 
9-11-2006
 
9-21-2006
 
An ordinance to vacate the unused portion of North Fourth St. lying between
vacated Water St. and the C & O Railroad, and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-55
 
4-2-2007
 
4-12-2007
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley bounded by Bliss St., Gratiot
Ave., North Elm St., and Wells St. abutting the west half of Lots 5 through
8, Block Two of Brockway’s Addition and to retain therein an easement for
public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-56
 
4-2-2007
 
4-12-2007
 
An ordinance to vacate the alley bounded by Sheridan Ave., E. Holland Ave.,
Cornelia St., and Remington Ave. and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-62
 
7-30-2007
 
8-9-2007
 
An ordinance to vacate the closed Lyon St., Block 74, Smith and Hayden’s
Addition and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


O-63
 
7-30-2007
 
8-9-2007
 
An ordinance to vacate the closed Almira St. abutting the southerly line of
Lots 1 and 7, Block 69, Smith and Hayden’s Addition and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-66
 
1-7-2008
 
1-17-2008
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley lying between South Mason St.,
Van Buren St., South Woodbridge St., and Mackinaw St., located in the City of
Saginaw, and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


O-67
 
1-7-2008
 
1-17-2008
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley lying between Webber St.,
Oakwood Ave., Hiland St., and Sheridan Ave., located in the City of Saginaw,
and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-74
 
10-10-2008
 
11-16-2008
 
An ordinance to vacate North Weadock St. between Fitzhugh and Johnson Sts.
located in the City of Saginaw, and to retain therein an easement for public
utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-79
 
4-6-2009
 
4-16-2009
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley bounded by Lyon St., South
Mason St., Mackinaw St., and South Oakley St., abutting properties known as
1220 Lyon St. and 523 South Oakley St. located in the City of Saginaw, and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-84
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley located west of Superior St.
between Joslin St. and West Michigan Ave. located in the City of Saginaw, and
to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-85
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
An ordinance to vacate a portion of the alley bounded by West Remington St.,
North Harrison St., West Holland Ave. and North Fayette St., abutting the
properties known as 609 West Remington St., 1016 North Harrison St. and a
portion of 1012 North Harrison St. located in the City of Saginaw, and to
retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-86
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
An ordinance to vacate the alley located west of Grout St. between Joslin St.
and West Michigan Ave. located in the City of Saginaw, and to retain therein
an easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-87
 
9-14-2009
 
9-24-2009
 
An ordinance to vacate a 95-foot portion of the alley bounded by South
Harrison St., Van Buren St., South Webster St., and Mackinaw St., abutting
properties known as 421 and 429 South Harrison St., 415 South Harrison St.,
714 Mackinaw St., and 416 South Webster St., located in the City of Saginaw
and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-105
 
11-22-2010
 
12-2-2010
 
An ordinance to vacate a 45-foot portion of the 20-foot alley between 403
South Porter and 1021 Van Buren Sts., described more particularly as the
20-foot alley lying between Lots 5 and 10, Block 135, City of Saginaw in
Division South of Cass St., located in the City of Saginaw and to retain
therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-106
 
11-22-2010
 
12-2-2010
 
An ordinance to vacate a 45-foot portion of the 20-foot alley between 820
Lyon and 521 South Webster Sts., described more particularly as the 20-foot
alley lying between Lots 1 and 6, Block 15, City of Saginaw in Division South
of Cass St., located in the City of Saginaw and to retain therein an easement
for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications.


O-109
 
3-21-2011
 
3-31-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating North Weadock Ave.
between Fitzhugh St. and Wadsworth Ave., lying between Blocks 82 and 83 of
Hoyt’s Plat, located in the City of Saginaw and to


retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications.


O-110
 
3-21-2011
 
3-31-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating North Second Ave.
between Fitzhugh St. and Wadsworth Ave., lying between Block 83 in Hoyt’s
Plat and Block 49 Glasby and Gallaghers Addition, located in the City of
Saginaw and to retain therein an easement for public utilities, cable
television, and telecommunications.


O-118
 
6-20-2011
 
6-30-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate a 118.78 foot portion
of the alley between 2903 South Washington Ave. and 308 Hess Ave., between
Lot 2 and Lots 15 and 16, Block 4, Hess and Bundy’s Addition and reserved
in the alley vacated an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications and no structure shall hereafter be erected thereon
without the prior written consent of the city.


O-121
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating a portion of North
Water St. bounded by Tuscola St. and East Genesee Ave., in the plat of
Hoyt’s Plat, Saginaw, between Blocks 5 and 18 located in the city and
reserved an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications and no structure shall hereafter be erected thereon with
the prior written consent of the city.


O-122
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating a portion of North
Water St. bounded by Johnson St. and Tuscola St., in the plat of Hoyt’s
Plat, Saginaw, between Blocks 5 and 17, located in the city and reserved an
easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications and
no structure shall be erected thereon without the prior consent of the city.


O-123
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating the northerly half of
Tuscola St. lying between North Washington Ave. and North Water St., in the
plat of Hoyt’s Plat, Saginaw, between Blocks 17 and 18 and reserved an
easement for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications and
no structure shall be erected thereon without the prior consent of the city.


O-125
 
8-8-2011
 
8-18-2011
 
An ordinance to vacate a 145 foot portion of the alley between 1121 Lyon St.,
603, 607, and 611 South Bond St., and 608 and 612 South Oakley St., Block
160, more particularly described as the northerly 145 feet of the center
alley of Block 160, City of Saginaw in Division South of Cass St. and
reserved an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications and no structure shall be erected thereon without the
prior consent of the city.


O-129
 
10-10-2011
 
10-20-2011
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate a portion of Johnson
St. at Water St. and to retain therein an easement for public utilities,
cable television, and telecommunications and no structure shall be erected
thereon without the prior consent of the city.


O-140
 
6-25-2012
 
7-5-2012
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate an alley between
Thatcher St. and Julius St. on Block 29 of Thatchers Addition to the Village
of Salina.


O-142
 
12-17-2012
 
12-27-2012
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate the portion of Dearborn
St. between the eastern line of King St. and the western line of Queen St.
abutting Lots 4 and 5 of Block 91, H.L. Miller’s Addition and abutting Lots
1 and 8 of Block 96, H.L. Miller’s Second Addition and also abutting Lot 1
of Block 95 of H.L. Miller’s Addition and the western line of Queen St. and
to reserve an easement for public utilities, cable television, and
telecommunications and no structure shall be erected thereon without the
prior written consent of the city.


O-143
 
12-17-2012
 
12-27-2012
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate that portion of Salt
St. between the northern line of Fraser St. and the southwestern line of
Queen St. abutting Lots 5 and 6 of Block 91, H.L. Miller’s Addition and
abutting the southwestern line of Queen St. and also abutting Lots 5, 6, 7,
and 8 of Block 96, H.L. Miller’s Second Addition and Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5
of Block 95 of H.L. Miller’s Addition and to reserve an easement for public
utilities, cable television, and telecommunications and no structure shall be
erected thereon without the prior written consent of the city.


O-159
 
9-22-2014
 
10-2-2014
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map by vacating Miller St. between
the south line of Niagara St. and the Saginaw River being between Blocks 50
and 55, City of Saginaw in Division North of Cass and reserved an easement
for public utilities, cable television, and telecommunications and an
easement for a bicycle and walking path and no structure shall be erected
thereon without the prior consent of the city.


O-170
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate North Second St. from
the south line of Kirk St. to the north line of Sears St.


O-171
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate North First St. from
the south line of Kirk St. to the north line of Sears St.


O-172
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Kirk St. from the east
line of North First St. to the southerly line of redirected Kirk St.


O-173
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Franklin St. from the
north line of Potter St. to the easterly line of North Washington Ave.


O-174
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate an unnamed street from
the easterly line of North Washington Ave. to the westerly line of Franklin
St. This small section of street is between Sears St. to the north and Potter
St. to the south.


O-175
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Sears St. from the
easterly line of North Washington Ave. to the west line of North Third St.


O-180
 
5-23-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Federal Ave. from the
east line of Water St. to the west line of South Washington Ave.


O-181
 
5-23-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate an alley running north
and south in the center of Block 33, Saginaw Improvement Company’s Addition
B.


O-185
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Esop St. from the east
right-of-way of Veterans Memorial Pkwy. east approximately 100 feet to the
east line of the Buena Vista Gardens plat.


O-186
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Galen St. from the east
right-of-way of Veterans Memorial Pkwy. east approximately 100 feet to the
east line of the Buena Vista Gardens plat.


O-187
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Meredith St. from the
westerly line of Lot 1, Block 37, Emerson’s Addition extended to the
northerly line of Block 38, Emerson’s Addition east to the section of
Meredith St. that was vacated by Ord. D-1754 on 11-6-1995.


O-188
 
5-8-2017
 
5-18-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Mackinaw St. east from
the east right-of-way of Niagra St. between Blocks 14 and 21 plat of the City
of Saginaw in Division South of Cass St. to the west edge of the Saginaw
River.


O-195
 
10-9-2017
 
10-19-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate the east 100 feet of
the west 250 feet of an alley running east and west in the center of Block
40, Saginaw Improvement Company’s Addition “I” in the City of Saginaw.


O-196
 
11-6-2017
 
11-16-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate Baum St. between Blocks
44 and 59 and extended north to the north right-of-way line of Tuscola St.,
Hoyt’s Plat in the City of Saginaw.


O-197
 
11-6-2017
 
11-16-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to vacate the 500 Block of South
Fayette lying between Blocks 17 and 18 in the City of Saginaw south of Cass
St.




 



 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description




D-1607
 
4-2-1990
 
4-12-1990
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the southewesterly corner of Bagley and Robert Sts.


D-1620
 
10-1-1990
 
10-11-1990
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the westerly side of the 2100 block of E. Genesee Ave.


D-1624
 
11-19-1990
 
11-29-1990
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of the block bounded by S.
Hamilton, Mackinaw, S. Niagara, and Lyon Sts.


D-1629
 
2-18-1991
 
2-28-1991
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of the block bounded by
Williams, S. Niagara, Stephens, and S. Hamilton Sts.


D-1630
 
2-25-1991
 
3-7-1991
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the westerly side of the 1500 and 1600 blocks of Superior St.


D-1666
 
10-26-1992
 
11-5-1992
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
south of Court St., west of S. Harrison St., north of Brockway St., and east
of S. Alexander St.


D-1692
 
5-13-1993
 
5-13-1993
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
south of Hoyt Ave., west of East Genesee, north of Garey St., and east of N.
Franklin St.


D-1696
 
6-21-1993
 
7-1-1993
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the northwesterly corner of Sheridan Ave. and Webber St.


D-1718
 
7-11-1994
 
7-21-1994
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the southeasterly corner of E. Remington St. and Ward St.


D-1720
 
8-22-1994
 
9-1-1994
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the northeasterly corner of Jackson St. and S. Fayette St.


D-1727
 
10-10-1994
 
10-20-1994
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
south of Gratiot Ave., east of S. Michigan Ave., north of the CSX R.R. and
east of Superior St.


D-1742
 
6-5-1995
 
6-15-1995
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the southwesterly corner of W. Michigan Ave. and Superior St.


D-1757
 
11-6-1995
 
11-16-1995
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the southwesterly portion of the block bounded by N. Bates St., Ames St.,
N. Woodbridge St., and Hancock St.


D-1803
 
4-7-1997
 
4-17-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 2800 and 2900 blocks of E. Genesee Ave.


D-1808
 
7-14-1997
 
7-24-1997
 
An ordinance to amend zoning classification of certain property located in
1200 block of Court St.


D-1809
 
8-11-1997
 
8-21-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
on the northwesterly corner of Wadsworth St. and Veterans Memorial Pkwy.


D-1810
 
9-29-1997
 
10-9-1997
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 2600 blocks of Bay and Weiss Sts.


D-1815
 
5-4-1998
 
5-14-1998
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 500 block of Davenport Ave.


D-1816
 
5-18-1998
 
5-28-1998
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
at the northwesterly corner of E. Genesee and Hess Aves.


D-1827
 
9-14-1998
 
9-24-1998
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 500 block of State St.


D-1840
 
7-22-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
An ordinance to amend the classification of certain property located in the
1200-1400 blocks of Veterans Memorial Pkwy.


D-1847
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 4000 blocks of Hess Ave. and Wisner St.


D-1851
 
12-20-1999
 
12-30-1999
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the 400 block of W. Remington St. and the 300 block of Bristol St.


D-1888
 
3-19-2001
 
3-29-2001
 
An ordinance to change the zoning of the properties known as 2604 and 2620 W.
Genesee Ave. from RO-1, Restricted Office to B-1, Local Business.


D-1898
 
9-24-2001
 
10-4-2001
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain property located
in the area bounded on the north by Meredith St., on the east by S.
Washington Ave., on the south by Atwater St. and on the west by the Saginaw
River.


D-1902
 
10-22-2001
 
11-1-2001
 
An ordinance establishing a single historic resource district located at 100
S. Jefferson Ave.


D-1903
 
11-5-2001
 
11-15-2001
 
An ordinance establishing a single historic resource district located at 234
S. Water St.


D-1910
 
12-31-2001
 
1-10-2002
 
An ordinance to change the zoning of Lots 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36 of Block
15, Saginaw Improvement Company, Addition G, from R-1 to M-2.


O-2
 
3-24-2003
 
4-3-2003
 
An ordinance to rezone property located at 1915 Schaefer St., described as
Lots 3 and 4 and Lot 5, except the north 15 feet, Block 29, Penoyer Farm,
from RO-1 to B-2.


O-4
 
5-19-2003
 
5-29-2003
 
An ordinance establishing a single resource historic district located at 201
and 211 N. Washington Ave.


O-8
 
6-30-2003
 
7-10-2003
 
An ordinance to rezone property located in the block bounded by S. Washington
Ave./East St., Youmans St., Glasby St., and Nimmons St. from B-1 to R-1.


O-28
 
2-7-2005
 
2-17-2005
 
An ordinance to include an expansion of the Old Saginaw City Historic
District, North Michigan Ave. between Cleveland St. and Eleanor St.


O-43
 
1-9-2006
 
1-19-2006
 
An ordinance to rezone property at 501 Potter St. from M-1 Light Industrial
to B-2 General Business.


O-50
 
7-10-2006
 
7-20-2006
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain properties within
H.L. Miller’s 3rd Addition, Adeline Miller’s Addition, Adeline Miller’s
2nd Addition, and Harry Miller’s Addition, also a parcel of land at the
intersection of Michigan Ave. and Vermont St., from M-1, Light Industrial and
RO-1, Restricted Office to B-1, Local Business.


O-70
 
5-19-2008
 
5-29-2008
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning map by rezoning the area from the centerline
of West Genesee Ave., east to Schaefer St., around Covenant Healthcare
Campus, south to Hancock St., and west to North Bates St. from R-2, R-3,
RO-1, B-1, and M-1 to R-1, Single- Family Residential.


O-88
 
9-14-2009
 
9-24-2009
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning map by rezoning the area bounded by Durand
St., Pleasant St., Schaefer St., and Davenport Ave. from R-2, One- and
Two-Family Residential to R-1, Single-Family Residential.


O-150
 
9-9-2013
 
9-19-2013
 
An ordinance to amend the zoning classification of certain properties within
an area more or less bounded to the north by Weiss St. extended easterly; to
the east by part of Washington Ave., 2nd Ave., Millard St., Owen St., Howard
St., and Jefferson Ave.; to the south by part of Rust Ave. and Stephens St.;
to the west by part of Fayette St., S. Harrison St., Remington Ave., N. Bond
St., Cooper Ave., Stone St., Congress Ave., Schaefer St., Davenport Ave. and
Carrolton St., to RMU, Riverfront Mixed Use.


O-155
 
1-6-2014
 
1-16-2014
 
An ordinance to rezone property at 2811 E. Genesee from R-1A,
Residential/Agricultural to B-1, Local Business.


O-176
 
3-14-2016
 
3-24-2016
 
An ordinance to rezone Lots 3 and 4, Block 21, City of Saginaw in Division
North of Cass St. from R-2, Two-Family Residential to RO-1, Restricted Office.


O-194
 
10-9-2017
 
10-19-2017
 
An ordinance to amend the official city map to rezone Lots 11 through 20,
Block 7, Wadsworth Farm, from B-1, Local Business to B-2, General Business.




 



 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description


D-1859
 
6-19-2000
 
6-29-2000
 
An ordinance granting an electric franchise to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc.



 



 



TABLE V:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description


D-1633
 
5-13-1991
 
5-23-1991
 
An ordinance to adopt and approve the development plan and tax increment
financing plan for the Florentine Inn; Great Lakes Junior College; Sil’s
Island; International Centre; Mitten Bay Girl Scout Council; and Michigan
Department of Natural Resources Projects, pursuant to the provisions of
Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as
amended, and to provide for other matters related thereto.


O-3
 
5-5-2003
 
5-15-2003
 
An ordinance amending Ord. D-1633 adopting and approving the amended
development plan and tax increment financing plan #2 - Area A and Area B,
pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended, and to provide for other matters
related thereto.


O-108
 
2-7-2011
 
2-17-2011
 
An ordinance amending Ords. D-1633, O-3, D-1380, and D-1511, “An ordinance
to adopt and approve the development plan and tax increment financing plan
for Downtown Development District, pursuant to the provisions of Public Act
197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended, and
to provide for other matters related thereto”, to be newly


entitled, “An ordinance to adopt and approve the amended development plan
and tax increment financing plan, pursuant to the provisions of Public Act
197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended, and
to provide for other matters related thereto”.



 



 



TABLE VI:  RELINQUISH RIGHTS-OF-WAY



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description


D-1640
 
9-9-1991
 
9-9-1991
 
An ordinance to relinquish a portion of the easement reserved for public
utilities located in vacated Adeline St.


D-1648
 
12-9-1991
 
12-9-1991
 
An ordinance to relinquish the easements reserved for public utilities in the
alleys in Block 10, boulevard plat.


D-1854
 
4-17-2000
 
4-27-2000
 
An ordinance to relinquish a walkway easement located in a portion of vacated
Stark St. lying between Houghton Ave. and Cooper Ave.



 



 



TABLE VII:  STREET AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description


D-1794
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
An ordinance to close a portion of Franklin St. to vehicular traffic.


D-1839
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
An ordinance to extend Leon Scott Ct. to N. Washington Ave. and to change the
name from Leon Scott Ct. to Leon Scott St., located in Eddy Urban Renewal
Replat No. 3.



 



 



TABLE VIII:  LOW INCOME HOUSING TAX EXEMPTION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description




O-17
 
4-5-2004
 
4-15-2004
 
HDC, LLD.


O-32
 
3-31-2005
 
3-21-2005
 
Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church (TMBC) (amended by Ord. O-46).


O-37
 
7-25-2005
 
8-4-2005
 
MV Communities, Ltd. (MVC).


O-40
 
12-5-2005
 
12-15-2005
 
Wolgast Corporation (WC). Deleted by Ord. O-94.


O-44
 
3-6-2006
 
3-16-2006
 
Amurcon Corporation.


O-46
 
3-20-2006
 
3-30-2006
 
Amends Ord. O-32.


O-73
 
10-6-2008
 
10-16-2008
 
Repeals Ord. O-32 and Ord. O-46.


O-78
 
3-23-2009
 
4-2-2009
 
Saginaw Shelter for the Homeless Non-Profit Housing Corporation.


O-89
 
10-12-2009
 
10-22-2009
 
Saginaw Shelter for the Homeless Non-Profit Housing Corporation (amends Ord.
O-78).


O-94
 
12-21-2009
 
12-31-2009
 
Wickes Park Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Partnership.


O-99
 
5-24-2010
 
6-3-2010
 
St. Paul Saginaw 2009 LDHA Limited Partnership.


O-130
 
10-10-2011
 
10-20-2011
 
Westbrook Housing Development Limited Liability Corporation.


O-133
 
1-9-2012
 
1-19-2012
 
Amend Exhibit A of Ord. O-130, Westbrook Housing Development Limited
Liability Corporation.


O-157
 
4-21-2014
 
5-1-2014
 
Finlay Brookwood Park Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited
Partnership.




 



 



TABLE IX:  MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Effective Date
 
Description


O-126
 
8-22-2011
 
9-1-2011
 
Amending Ord. D-98 adopted July 22, 1946 as amended by Ord. D-357 adopted
April 25, 1955 authorizing the execution of an agreement between the City of
Saginaw and the City of Midland, Michigan with respect to the acquisition and
operation of a joint source of water supply for said cities.


O-131
 
10-24-2011
 
11-3-2011
 
Repealing Ord. O-126.


 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Michigan Compiled Laws



References to Prior Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS



 

M.C.L. Section
 
Code Section




15.231 et seq.
 
12.038, 153.541, 153.578


15.231 to 15.246
 
116.04, 116.17


15.261 et seq.
 
12.038, 153.539, 153.541, 153.578


15.261 through 15.275
 
12.019


24.201 to 24.328
 
70.01


30.401 through 30.420
 
35.01, 35.02


37.1101 et seq.
 
93.03


38.1701 et seq.
 
16.30


41.806a
 
92.11


117.4j
 
92.11


117.5c
 
12.038


123.851
 
99.19


125.402
 
50.01


125.651 et seq.
 
12.036


125.901 et seq.
 
12.085


125.902
 
12.089


125.904
 
12.086, 12.087


125.1415a
 
14.02


125.1415A(1)
 
14.02


125.1501 et seq.
 
153.539


125.1501 through 125.1531
 
150.01


125.1508b(2)
 
150.01


125.1601 et seq.
 
12.071, 12.072


125.1651 et seq.
 
12.055, TSO V


125.1655
 
12.055


125.2301 et seq.
 
153.021, 153.229, 153.485


125.3101 et seq.
 
153.002, 152.003, 153.560, 153.561


125.3103
 
153.402


125.3603
 
153.575


125.3801 et seq.
 
152.002, 152.003, 153.021, 152.023


125.3811
 
153.560


125.3811 et seq.
 
12.035, 12.037


129.201 et seq.
 
14.34


141.121
 
50.09, 51.074, 52.42


141.501 through 141.787
 
33.01


206.201
 
112.15


206.504
 
33.02


207.771 et seq.
 
33.40, 33.41


257.1 et seq.
 
70.99, Ch. 75 Sch. I


257.1 to 257.923
 
70.01


257.252
 
98.05


257.724
 
71.16


257.907
 
70.99, 72.50, 72.99


324.101 et seq.
 
51.020


324.80101 et seq.
 
97.03, 97.05


324.82101 et seq.
 
74.01, 74.03, 74.04, 74.09


324.51501 et seq.
 
92.11


333.7101 et seq.
 
112.29, 130.33, 130.50, 132.21, 151.111


338.1051 et seq.
 
90.03


339.2502a
 
151.131


399.201 et seq.
 
153.021, 153.539


400.701 et seq.
 
153.021


400.703(5)
 
153.021


418.101 et seq.
 
11.19, 15.03, 16.17, 16.18, 16.22


418.161
 
16.22


432.1 et seq.
 
131.01


432.101 et seq.
 
131.01


436.1101 et seq.
 
111.01, 130.15, 132.03


436.1503
 
153.467


450.98 et seq.
 
12.071, 12.072


484.2102
 
116.03


484.2251
 
116.04


484.3101 et seq.
 
116.01, 116.03


552.601 et seq.
 
16.30


560.101 et seq.
 
152.002, 152.003, 153.563, 153.402


600.101 through 600.9948
 
37.01


600.8395
 
72.50


600.8396
 
37.01, 37.05


600.8701 through 600.8735
 
30.99


600.8705
 
37.03, 37.05


600.8707(6)
 
37.01


600.8709
 
37.05


712A.2
 
130.50


722.673
 
131.03


752.362
 
131.03


764.9a et seq.
 
37.06


764.9f
 
37.06


 




 



 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2018 Code Section




10.01
 
10.01


10.02
 
10.02


10.03
 
10.03


11.01
 
11.01


11.10
 
11.15


11.13
 
11.16


11.14
 
11.17


11.15
 
11.18, 11.99


11.16
 
11.19


11.17
 
11.20


12.01
 
12.001


12.02
 
12.002


12.03
 
12.003


12.04
 
12.004


12.10
 
12.015


12.11
 
12.016


12.12
 
12.017


12.13
 
12.018


12.14
 
12.019


12.15
 
12.020


12.16
 
12.021


12.30
 
12.035


12.31
 
12.036


12.33
 
12.037


12.34
 
12.038


12.35
 
12.039


12.36
 
12.040


12.37
 
12.041


12.50
 
12.055


12.60
 
12.070


12.61
 
12.071


12.62
 
12.072


12.63
 
12.073


12.75
 
12.085


12.76
 
12.086


12.77
 
12.087


12.78
 
12.088


12.79
 
12.089


12.80
 
12.090


12.81
 
12.091


12.82
 
12.092


13.01
 
13.01


13.02
 
13.02


13.03
 
13.03


13.04
 
13.04


13.05
 
13.05


13.06
 
13.06


13.07
 
13.07


13.08
 
13.08


13.09
 
13.09


13.10
 
13.10


13.12
 
13.11


13.13
 
13.12


14.10
 
14.01


14.12
 
14.02


14.20
 
14.30


14.21
 
14.31


14.22
 
14.32


14.23
 
14.33


14.24
 
14.34


14.25
 
14.35


14.26
 
14.36


14.27
 
14.37


14.28
 
14.38


14.29
 
14.39


14.30
 
14.40


14.31
 
14.41


14.32
 
14.42


14.33
 
14.43


14.34
 
14.44


14.35
 
14.45


15.01
 
15.01


15.02
 
15.02


15.03
 
15.03


16.01
 
16.01


16.02
 
16.02


16.03
 
16.03


16.04
 
16.04


16.05
 
16.05


16.06
 
16.06


16.07
 
16.07


16.08
 
16.08


16.09
 
16.09


16.10
 
16.10


16.11
 
16.11


16.12
 
16.12


16.13
 
16.13


16.14
 
16.14


16.15
 
16.15


16.16
 
16.16


16.17
 
16.17


16.18
 
16.18


16.19
 
16.19


16.20
 
16.20


16.21
 
16.21


16.22
 
16.22


16.23
 
16.23


16.24
 
16.24


16.25
 
16.25


16.26
 
16.26


16.27
 
16.27


16.28
 
16.28


16.29
 
16.29


16.30
 
16.30


16.31
 
16.31


16.32
 
16.32, 16.99


16.33
 
16.33


17.01
 
17.01


17.02
 
17.02


30.01
 
30.01


30.02
 
30.02


30.03
 
30.03


30.04
 
30.04


30.05
 
30.05


30.06
 
30.06


30.07
 
30.07


30.08
 
30.08


30.09
 
30.09


30.10
 
30.10


30.11
 
30.11


30.12
 
30.12


30.13
 
30.13


30.99
 
30.99


31.01
 
31.01


31.02
 
31.02


32.01
 
32.01


32.10
 
32.15


32.11
 
32.16


33.01
 
33.01


33.02
 
33.02


33.03
 
33.03


33.04
 
33.04


33.20
 
33.15


33.21
 
33.16


33.22
 
33.17


33.23
 
33.18


33.24
 
33.19


33.25
 
33.20


33.26
 
33.21


33.27
 
33.22


33.28
 
33.23


33.29
 
33.24


33.30
 
33.25


33.31
 
33.26


33.32
 
33.27


33.33
 
33.28


33.40
 
33.40


33.41
 
33.41


33.42
 
33.42


33.43
 
33.43


33.44
 
33.44


33.45
 
33.45


33.46
 
33.46


34.01
 
34.01


34.02
 
34.02


35.01
 
35.01


35.02
 
35.02


35.03
 
35.03


35.04
 
35.04


35.05
 
35.05


35.06
 
35.06


35.07
 
35.07


35.09
 
35.08


35.10
 
35.09


35.11
 
35.10


36.01
 
36.01


36.02
 
36.02


37.01
 
37.01


37.02
 
37.02


37.03
 
37.03


37.04
 
37.04


37.05
 
37.05


37.06
 
37.06


37.07
 
37.07


50.01
 
50.01


50.02
 
50.02


50.03
 
50.03


50.04
 
50.04


50.05
 
50.05


50.06
 
50.06


50.07
 
50.07


50.08
 
50.08


50.09
 
50.09


50.10
 
50.10


50.99
 
50.99


51.01
 
51.001


51.02
 
51.002


51.03
 
51.003


51.04
 
51.004


51.05
 
51.005


51.06
 
51.006


51.07
 
51.007


51.15
 
51.020


51.16
 
51.021


51.17
 
51.022


51.18
 
51.023


51.19
 
51.024


51.20
 
51.025


51.21
 
51.026


51.22
 
51.027


51.23
 
51.028


51.24
 
51.029


51.25
 
51.030


51.26
 
51.031


51.27
 
51.032


51.28
 
51.033


51.29
 
51.034


51.30
 
51.035


51.31
 
51.036


51.32
 
51.037


51.33
 
51.038


51.34
 
51.039


51.35
 
51.040


51.36
 
51.041


51.37
 
51.042


51.38
 
51.043


51.39
 
51.044


51.40
 
51.045


51.41
 
51.046, 51.999


51.42
 
51.047, 51.999


51.43
 
51.048


51.44
 
51.049


51.45
 
51.050


51.46
 
51.051


51.47
 
51.052


51.48
 
51.053


51.50
 
51.065


51.51
 
51.066


51.52
 
51.067


51.53
 
51.068


51.54
 
51.069


51.55
 
51.070


51.56
 
51.071


51.57
 
51.072


51.58
 
51.073


51.59
 
51.074


51.60
 
51.075


51.61
 
51.076


51.62
 
51.077


52.01
 
52.01


52.02
 
52.02, 52.99


52.10
 
52.15


52.11
 
52.16


52.12
 
52.17


52.13
 
52.18, 52.99


52.14
 
52.19


52.15
 
52.20


52.16
 
52.21


52.17
 
52.22


52.18
 
52.23


52.19
 
52.24


52.30
 
52.35


52.31
 
52.36


52.32
 
52.37


52.33
 
52.38


52.34
 
52.39


52.35
 
52.40


52.36
 
52.41


52.37
 
52.42


52.50
 
52.55


52.53
 
52.56


52.54
 
52.57


52.55
 
52.58


52.56
 
52.59


52.57
 
52.60


52.58
 
52.61


70.01
 
70.01


70.02
 
70.02


70.03
 
70.03


70.04
 
70.04


70.20
 
70.15


70.21
 
70.16


70.30
 
70.30


70.31
 
70.31


70.32
 
70.32


70.33
 
70.33


70.99
 
70.99


71.01
 
71.01


71.02
 
71.02


71.03
 
71.03


71.04
 
71.04


71.05
 
71.05


71.06
 
71.06


71.07
 
71.07


71.08
 
71.08


71.09
 
71.09


71.10
 
71.10


71.11
 
71.11


71.12
 
71.12


71.13
 
71.13


71.14
 
71.14


71.15
 
71.15


71.16
 
71.16


71.17
 
71.17


71.30
 
71.30


71.31
 
71.31


71.32
 
71.32


71.33
 
71.33


72.01
 
72.01


72.02
 
72.02


72.03
 
72.03


72.20
 
72.15


72.21
 
72.16


72.22
 
72.17


72.23
 
72.18


72.24
 
72.19


72.25
 
72.20


72.26
 
72.21, 72.99


72.27
 
72.22


72.28
 
72.23, 72.99


72.29
 
72.24


72.40
 
72.35


72.41
 
72.36


72.42
 
72.37


72.55
 
72.50


72.56
 
72.51


72.99
 
72.99


73.01
 
73.01


73.10
 
73.15


73.11
 
73.16


73.12
 
73.17, 73.99


73.13
 
73.18


74.01
 
74.01


74.02
 
74.02


74.03
 
74.03


74.04
 
74.04


74.05
 
74.05


74.06
 
74.06


74.07
 
74.07


74.08
 
74.08


74.09
 
74.09


Ch. 76, Sch. I
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


90.01
 
90.01


90.02
 
90.02


90.03
 
90.03


90.04
 
90.04


90.05
 
90.05


90.06
 
90.06, 90.99


90.07
 
90.07


90.08
 
90.08


90.09
 
90.09


90.10
 
90.10


91.01
 
91.01


91.02
 
91.02


91.15
 
91.15


91.16
 
91.16


91.17
 
91.17


91.18
 
91.18


91.19
 
91.19


91.20
 
91.20


91.31
 
91.35


91.32
 
91.99


92.01
 
92.01


92.02
 
92.02


92.03
 
92.03


92.05
 
92.04, 92.99


92.06
 
92.05


92.07
 
92.06


92.08
 
92.07


92.09
 
92.08, 92.99


92.12
 
92.09


92.14
 
92.10


92.15
 
92.11


92.16
 
92.12, 92.99


92.20
 
92.30


93.01
 
93.01


93.02
 
93.02


93.03
 
93.03


93.04
 
93.04


93.05
 
93.05


93.06
 
93.06


93.07
 
93.07, 93.99


93.20
 
93.20


93.21
 
93.21


93.22
 
93.22


93.23
 
93.99


94.01
 
94.001


94.02
 
94.002


94.03
 
94.003


94.04
 
94.004


94.05
 
94.005


94.06
 
94.006


94.07
 
94.007


94.08
 
94.008


94.09
 
94.009


94.10
 
94.010


94.11
 
94.025


94.12
 
94.026


94.13
 
94.027


94.14
 
94.028


94.15
 
94.029


94.16
 
94.030


94.17
 
94.031, 94.999


94.20
 
94.045


94.21
 
94.046


94.22
 
94.047, 94.999


94.35
 
94.060


94.36
 
94.061


94.37
 
94.062


94.38
 
94.063


94.39
 
94.064


94.40
 
94.065


94.41
 
94.066


94.42
 
94.067


94.43
 
94.068


94.44
 
94.999


94.55
 
94.080


94.56
 
94.081


94.57
 
94.082


94.58
 
94.083


95.01
 
95.01


95.02
 
95.02, 95.99


95.03
 
95.03


95.04
 
95.04


96.01
 
96.001


96.02
 
96.002


96.03
 
96.003


96.04
 
96.004


96.05
 
96.005


96.06
 
96.006


96.15
 
96.020


96.16
 
96.021


96.17
 
96.022


96.18
 
96.023


96.25
 
96.035


96.26
 
96.036


96.27
 
96.037


96.28
 
96.038


96.29
 
96.039


96.30
 
96.040


96.31
 
96.041


96.32
 
96.042


96.33
 
96.043


96.45
 
96.055


96.46
 
96.056


96.47
 
96.057


96.48
 
96.058


96.49
 
96.059


96.50
 
96.060


96.51
 
96.061


96.52
 
96.062


96.53
 
96.063


96.54
 
96.064


96.55
 
96.065


96.56
 
96.066


96.57
 
96.067


96.58
 
96.068


96.59
 
96.069


97.01
 
97.01


97.02
 
97.02


97.03
 
97.03


97.04
 
97.04


97.05
 
97.05


97.99
 
97.99


98.01
 
98.01


98.02
 
98.02


98.03
 
98.03


98.04
 
98.04


98.05
 
98.05


98.06
 
98.06


98.07
 
98.07


98.08
 
98.08


98.09
 
98.09


98.99
 
98.99


Ch. 98, App.
 
Ch. 98, App. A


99.01
 
99.01


99.02
 
99.02


99.03
 
99.03


99.04
 
99.04


99.05
 
99.05


99.06
 
99.06


99.07
 
99.07


99.08
 
99.08


99.09
 
99.09


99.10
 
99.10


99.11
 
99.11


99.12
 
99.12


99.13
 
99.13


99.14
 
99.14


99.15
 
99.15


99.16
 
99.16


99.17
 
99.17


99.18
 
99.18


99.19
 
99.19


99.20
 
99.99


110.01
 
110.01


110.02
 
110.02


110.03
 
110.03


110.04
 
110.04


110.05
 
110.05


110.06
 
110.06


110.07
 
110.07


110.08
 
110.08


110.09
 
110.09


110.10
 
110.10


110.20
 
110.25


110.21
 
110.26


110.22
 
110.27


110.23
 
110.28


110.24
 
110.29


110.25
 
110.30


110.26
 
110.31


110.27
 
110.32


110.29
 
110.33


110.31
 
110.34


110.32
 
110.35


110.33
 
110.36


110.34
 
110.37


110.35
 
110.38


110.98
 
110.98


110.99
 
110.99


111.01
 
111.01


111.10
 
111.15


111.11
 
111.16


111.12
 
111.17


111.13
 
111.18


111.14
 
111.19


111.25
 
111.30


111.26
 
111.31


111.27
 
111.32


111.28
 
111.33


111.40
 
111.45


112.01
 
112.01


112.02
 
112.02


112.15
 
112.15


112.16
 
112.16


112.17
 
112.17


112.18
 
112.18


112.19
 
112.19


112.20
 
112.20


112.21
 
112.21


112.22
 
112.22


112.23
 
112.23


112.24
 
112.24


112.25
 
112.25


112.26
 
112.26


112.27
 
112.27


112.28
 
112.28


112.29
 
112.29, 112.99


113.01
 
113.01


113.02
 
113.02


113.03
 
113.03


113.04
 
113.04


113.05
 
113.05


114.01
 
114.01


114.02
 
114.02


114.15
 
114.15


114.16
 
114.16


114.17
 
114.17


114.18
 
114.18


114.19
 
114.19


114.20
 
114.20


114.21
 
114.21


115.001
 
115.001


115.002
 
115.002


115.003
 
115.003


115.004
 
115.004


115.005
 
115.005


115.006
 
115.006


115.007
 
115.007


115.008
 
115.008


115.009
 
115.009


115.010
 
115.010


115.011
 
115.011


115.020
 
115.025


115.021
 
115.026


115.022
 
115.027


115.023
 
115.028


115.024
 
115.029


115.025
 
115.030


115.026
 
115.031


115.027
 
115.032


115.028
 
115.033


115.029
 
115.034


115.030
 
115.035


115.031
 
115.036


115.032
 
115.037


115.033
 
115.038


115.034
 
115.039


115.040
 
115.050


115.041
 
115.051


115.042
 
115.052


115.043
 
115.053


115.044
 
115.054


115.045
 
115.055


115.046
 
115.056


115.047
 
115.057


115.060
 
115.070


115.061
 
115.071


115.062
 
115.072


115.063
 
115.073


115.064
 
115.074


115.070
 
115.085


115.071
 
115.086


115.072
 
115.087


115.073
 
115.088


115.074
 
115.089


115.075
 
115.090


115.076
 
115.091


115.077
 
115.092


115.078
 
115.093


115.079
 
115.094


115.080
 
115.095


115.081
 
115.096


115.090
 
115.110


115.100
 
115.125


115.101
 
115.126


115.102
 
115.127


115.103
 
115.128


115.104
 
115.129


115.105
 
115.130


115.110
 
115.145


115.111
 
115.146


115.112
 
115.147


115.113
 
115.148


115.114
 
115.149


115.115
 
115.150


115.116
 
115.151


115.117
 
115.152


115.118
 
115.153


115.119
 
115.154


115.120
 
115.155


115.121
 
115.156


115.122
 
115.157


115.123
 
115.158


115.124
 
115.159


115.125
 
115.160


115.126
 
115.161


115.127
 
115.162


115.128
 
115.163


115.135
 
115.175


115.136
 
115.176


115.137
 
115.177


115.138
 
115.178


115.139
 
115.179


115.140
 
115.180


115.150
 
115.195


115.151
 
115.196


115.152
 
115.197


115.153
 
115.198


115.154
 
115.199


115.155
 
115.200


115.156
 
115.201


115.157
 
115.202


115.158
 
115.203


115.159
 
115.204


116.01
 
116.01


116.02
 
116.02


116.03
 
116.03


116.04
 
116.04


116.05
 
116.05


116.06
 
116.06


116.07
 
116.07


116.08
 
116.08


116.09
 
116.09


116.10
 
116.10


116.11
 
116.11


116.12
 
116.12


116.13
 
116.13


116.14
 
116.14


116.15
 
116.15


116.16
 
116.16


116.17
 
116.17


116.18
 
116.18


116.19
 
116.19


116.20
 
116.99


130.01
 
130.01


130.02
 
130.02


130.03
 
130.03


130.15
 
130.15


130.16
 
130.16


130.17
 
130.17


130.18
 
130.18


130.19
 
130.19


130.20
 
130.20


130.21
 
130.21


130.22
 
130.22


130.23
 
130.23


130.24
 
130.24


130.25
 
130.25


130.26
 
130.26


130.27
 
130.27


130.28
 
130.28


130.29
 
130.29


130.30
 
130.30


130.31
 
130.31


130.32
 
130.32


130.33
 
130.33


130.34
 
130.34


130.35
 
130.35


130.36
 
130.36


130.37
 
130.37


130.38
 
130.38


130.50
 
130.50


130.51
 
130.51


130.52
 
130.52


130.53
 
130.53


130.54
 
130.99


131.01
 
131.01


131.02
 
131.02


131.03
 
131.03


132.01
 
132.01


132.02
 
132.02


132.03
 
132.03, 132.99


132.04
 
132.04


132.05
 
132.05


132.06
 
132.06


132.15
 
132.20


132.16
 
132.21


132.17
 
132.22


132.18
 
132.23


132.19
 
132.99


133.01
 
133.01


133.02
 
133.02


133.03
 
133.03


133.04
 
133.04


133.05
 
133.05


133.06
 
133.06


133.07
 
133.07


134.01
 
134.01


150.01
 
150.01


150.02
 
150.02


150.03
 
150.03, 150.99


150.04
 
150.04


150.05
 
150.05


150.06
 
150.06


150.07
 
150.07


150.08
 
150.08


150.09
 
150.09


150.20
 
150.20


150.21
 
150.21


151.001
 
151.001


151.002
 
151.002


151.003
 
151.003


151.004
 
151.004


151.015
 
151.015


151.016
 
151.016


151.017
 
151.017


151.030
 
151.030


151.031
 
151.031


151.040
 
151.045


151.041
 
151.046


151.050
 
151.060


151.051
 
151.061


151.052
 
151.062


151.065
 
151.075


151.066
 
151.076


151.067
 
151.077


151.075
 
151.090


151.076
 
151.091


151.077
 
151.092


151.078
 
151.093


151.079
 
151.094


151.080
 
151.095


151.081
 
151.096


151.082
 
151.097


151.083
 
151.098


151.095
 
151.110


151.096
 
151.111


151.097
 
151.112


151.098
 
151.113


151.099
 
151.114


151.100
 
151.115


151.101
 
151.116


151.110
 
151.130


151.111
 
151.131


151.112
 
151.132


151.113
 
151.133


151.114
 
151.134


151.115
 
151.135


151.117
 
151.136


151.118
 
151.137


151.119
 
151.138


151.120
 
151.139


151.121
 
151.999


151.122
 
151.140


151.123
 
151.141


151.130
 
151.155


151.131
 
151.156


151.132
 
151.157


151.133
 
151.158


151.134
 
151.159


151.135
 
151.160


151.136
 
151.161


151.998
 
151.998


151.999
 
151.999


152.01
 
152.001


152.02
 
152.002


152.03
 
152.003


152.04
 
152.004


152.05
 
152.005


152.15
 
152.020


152.16
 
152.021


152.17
 
152.022


152.18
 
152.023


152.19
 
152.024


152.30
 
152.035


152.31
 
152.036


152.32
 
152.037


152.45
 
152.050


152.46
 
152.051


152.47
 
152.052


152.48
 
152.053


152.49
 
152.054


152.50
 
152.055


152.51
 
152.056


152.60
 
152.070


152.61
 
152.071


152.62
 
152.072


152.63
 
152.073


152.64
 
152.074


152.65
 
152.075


153.001
 
153.001


153.002
 
153.002


153.003
 
153.003


153.004
 
153.004


153.005
 
153.005


153.006
 
153.006


153.020
 
153.020


153.021
 
153.021


153.030
 
153.035


153.031
 
153.036


153.032
 
153.037


153.040
 
153.050


153.041
 
153.051


153.042
 
153.052


153.043
 
153.053


153.044
 
153.054


153.045
 
153.055


153.046
 
153.056


153.047
 
153.057


153.048
 
153.058


153.049
 
153.059


153.050
 
153.060


153.051
 
153.061


153.052
 
153.062


153.053
 
153.063


153.054
 
153.064


153.055
 
153.065


153.056
 
153.066


153.057
 
153.067


153.058
 
153.068


153.059
 
153.069


153.060
 
153.070


153.061
 
153.071


153.062
 
153.072


153.063
 
153.073


153.064
 
153.074


153.065
 
153.075


153.066
 
153.076


153.067
 
153.077


153.068
 
153.078


153.069
 
153.079


153.070
 
153.080


153.071
 
153.081


153.072
 
153.082


153.073
 
153.083


153.074
 
153.084


153.075
 
153.085


153.076
 
153.086


153.077
 
153.087


153.090
 
153.100


153.091
 
153.101


153.092
 
153.102


153.093
 
153.103


153.094
 
153.104


153.095
 
153.105


153.096
 
153.106


153.097
 
153.107


153.098
 
153.108


153.099
 
153.109


153.100
 
153.110


153.101
 
153.111


153.102
 
153.112


153.115
 
153.125


153.116
 
153.126


153.117
 
153.127


153.118
 
153.128


153.119
 
153.129


153.120
 
153.130


153.121
 
153.131


153.122
 
153.132


153.135
 
153.145


153.136
 
153.146


153.137
 
153.147


153.138
 
153.148


153.139
 
153.149


153.140
 
153.150


153.141
 
153.151


153.142
 
153.152


153.143
 
153.153


153.144
 
153.154


153.145
 
153.155


153.146
 
153.156


153.147
 
153.157


153.148
 
153.158


153.149
 
153.159


153.150
 
153.160


153.151
 
153.161


153.152
 
153.162


153.153
 
153.163


153.154
 
153.164


153.155
 
153.165


153.156
 
153.166


153.157
 
153.167


153.158
 
153.168


153.159
 
153.169


153.170
 
153.180


153.171
 
153.181


153.172
 
153.182


153.173
 
153.183


153.174
 
153.184


153.190
 
153.195


153.191
 
153.196


153.192
 
153.197


153.193
 
153.198


153.194
 
153.199


153.210
 
153.210


153.211
 
153.211


153.212
 
153.212


153.213
 
153.213


153.214
 
153.214


153.230
 
153.225


153.231
 
153.226


153.232
 
153.227


153.233
 
153.228


153.234
 
153.229


153.235
 
153.230


153.250
 
153.245


153.251
 
153.246


153.252
 
153.247


153.253
 
153.248


153.254
 
153.249


153.255
 
153.250


153.270
 
153.265


153.271
 
153.266


153.272
 
153.267


153.273
 
153.268


153.274
 
153.269


153.290
 
153.280


153.291
 
153.281


153.292
 
153.282


153.293
 
153.283


153.294
 
153.284


153.295
 
153.285


153.310
 
153.300


153.311
 
153.301


153.312
 
153.302


153.313
 
153.303


153.330
 
153.315


153.331
 
153.316


153.332
 
153.317


153.333
 
153.318


153.334
 
153.319


153.350
 
153.330


153.351
 
153.331


153.352
 
153.332


153.353
 
153.333


153.354
 
153.334


153.370
 
153.345


153.371
 
153.346


153.372
 
153.347


153.373
 
153.348


153.374
 
153.349


153.375
 
153.350


153.390
 
153.365


153.391
 
153.366


153.392
 
153.367


153.393
 
153.368


153.394
 
153.369


153.395
 
153.370


153.410
 
153.385


153.411
 
153.386


153.412
 
153.387


153.413
 
153.388


153.414
 
153.389


153.425
 
153.400


153.426
 
153.401


153.427
 
153.402


153.428
 
153.403


153.429
 
153.404


153.430
 
153.405


153.431
 
153.406


153.460
 
153.420


153.475
 
153.440


153.490
 
153.455


153.491
 
153.456


153.492
 
153.457


153.493
 
153.458


153.494
 
153.459


153.495
 
153.460


153.496
 
153.461


153.497
 
153.462


153.498
 
153.463


153.499
 
153.464


153.500
 
153.465


153.501
 
153.466


153.502
 
153.467


153.503
 
153.468


153.504
 
153.469


153.505
 
153.470


153.506
 
153.471


153.507
 
153.472


153.508
 
153.473


153.509
 
153.474


153.510
 
153.475


153.511
 
153.476


153.512
 
153.477


153.513
 
153.478


153.514
 
153.479


153.515
 
153.480


153.516
 
153.481


153.517
 
153.482


153.518
 
153.483


153.519
 
153.484


153.520
 
153.485


153.521
 
153.486


153.522
 
153.487


153.523
 
153.488


153.524
 
153.489


153.525
 
153.490


153.526
 
153.491


153.540
 
153.505


153.541
 
153.506


153.542
 
153.507


153.543
 
153.508


153.544
 
153.509


153.545
 
153.510


153.546
 
153.511


153.547
 
153.512


153.548
 
153.513


153.549
 
153.514


153.550
 
153.515


153.551
 
153.516


153.552
 
153.517


153.553
 
153.518


153.554
 
153.519


153.555
 
153.520


153.556
 
153.521


153.570
 
153.535


153.571
 
153.536


153.572
 
153.537


153.573
 
153.538


153.574
 
153.539


153.575
 
153.540


153.576
 
153.541


153.577
 
153.542


153.578
 
153.543


153.579
 
153.544


153.590
 
153.555


153.591
 
153.556


153.592
 
153.557


153.593
 
153.558


153.594
 
153.559


153.595
 
153.560


153.596
 
153.561


153.597
 
153.562


153.598
 
153.563


153.610
 
153.575


153.611
 
153.576


153.612
 
153.577


153.613
 
153.578


153.614
 
153.579


153.615
 
153.580


153.616
 
153.581


153.617
 
153.582


153.618
 
153.583


153.619
 
153.584


153.620
 
153.585


153.621
 
153.586


153.622
 
153.587


153.623
 
153.588


153.624
 
153.589


153.625
 
153.590


153.626
 
153.591


153.999
 
153.999


Ch. 153, App., § 1
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 1


Ch. 153, App., § 2
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 2


Ch. 153, App., § 3
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 3


Ch. 153, App., § 4
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 4


Ch. 153, App., § 5
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 5


Ch. 153, App., § 6
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 6


Ch. 153, App., § 7
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 7


Ch. 153, App., § 8
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 8


Ch. 153, App., § 9
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 9


Ch. 153, App., § 10
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 10


Ch. 153, App., § 11
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 11


Ch. 153, App., § 12
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 12


Ch. 153, App., § 13
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 13


 
 
 




 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Date Effective
 
Code Section




D-8
 
1-2-1940
 
1-15-1940
 
10.02, 12.015


D-9
 
1-2-1940
 
1-15-1940
 
30.01, 92.03, 92.08, 92.99, 94.003, 96.004, 95.03, 114.21


D-10
 
1-2-1940
 
1-15-1940
 
51.004


D-18
 
1-27-1941
 
2-13-1941
 
70.04, 91.15—91.20


D-44
 
3-16-1942
 
3-27-1942
 
94.081


D-63
 
6-28-1943
 
6-28-1943
 
130.50—130.53, 130.99


D-77
 
9-4-1945
 
9-14-1945
 
92.10


D-114
 
7-14-1947
 
7-16-1947
 
12.036


D-122
 
9-8-1947
 
9-18-1947
 
92.06


D-145
 
3-22-1948
 
3-22-1948
 
96.005


D-156
 
7-26-1948
 
8-8-1948
 
33.15—33.27


D-170
 
3-7-1949
 
3-7-1949
 
114.21


D-193
 
9-6-1949
 
9-16-1949
 
114.21


D-200
 
11-7-1949
 
11-17-1949
 
131.01


D-206
 
12-27-1949
 
1-6-1950
 
71.10, 71.12, 71.13


D-209
 
1-14-1950
 
2-13-1958
 
51.002


D-209
 
2-14-1950
 
2-14-1950
 
52.16


D-254
 
3-26-1951
 
4-5-1951
 
94.080, 94.081


D-278
 
3-10-1952
 
3-20-1952
 
96.003


D-295
 
9-22-1952
 
10-2-1952
 
92.06


D-303
 
4-7-1953
 
6-1-1953
 
52.19


D-304
 
4-7-1953
 
6-21-1953
 
52.35, 52.36, 52.38—52.42


D-308
 
5-25-1953
 
6-4-1953
 
12.035


D-315
 
7-27-1953
 
8-6-1953
 
96.002


D-322
 
10-26-1953
 
11-5-1953
 
130.01


D-326
 
1-11-1954
 
1-21-1954
 
130.02


D-347
 
9-7-1954
 
9-17-1954
 
12.015


D-365
 
8-8-1955
 
8-18-1955
 
36.02


D-367
 
8-8-1955
 
8-8-1955
 
95.04


D-391
 
6-4-1956
 
6-14-1956
 
71.13


D-392
 
6-4-1956
 
6-14-1956
 
95.02, 95.03, 95.99


D-401
 
10-8-1956
 
10-18-1956
 
72.22


D-414
 
3-4-1957
 
3-14-1957
 
12.035


D-444
 
1-20-1958
 
1-30-1958
 
33.28


D-446
 
1-27-1958
 
2-6-1958
 
96.035—96.043


D-449
 
2-3-1958
 
2-13-1958
 
51.002—51.006


D-463
 
8-11-1958
 
8-21-1958
 
96.004


D-471
 
11-17-1958
 
11-28-1958
 
96.055—96.058, 96.060, 96.061, 96.064—96.069


D-474
 
2-2-1959
 
4-1-1959
 
52.01


D-476
 
3-9-1959
 
9-1-1959
 
72.15


D-497
 
9-28-1959
 
9-28-1959
 
72.15


D-499
 
10-19-1959
 
10-29-1959
 
72.17, 72.18


D-516
 
4-18-1960
 
4-28-1960
 
52.16


D-521
 
5-16-1960
 
5-26-1960
 
96.038


D-533
 
7-25-1960
 
8-4-1960
 
96.056


D-536
 
8-22-1960
 
9-1-1960
 
71.12, 72.16, 72.21, 72.99


D-539
 
10-3-1960
 
10-13-1960
 
113.01—113.05


D-548
 
3-6-1961
 
7-1-1961
 
12.035


D-569
 
3-26-1962
 
4-5-1962
 
33.28


D-570
 
4-23-1962
 
4-23-1962
 
33.22


D-576
 
5-21-1962
 
5-31-1962
 
52.01


D-579
 
8-6-1962
 
8-16-1962
 
33.18, 33.22


D-588
 
10-15-1962
 
10-15-1962
 
32.16


D-590
 
10-22-1962
 
11-1-1962
 
33.24


D-593
 
12-26-1962
 
1-5-1963
 
96.004


D-606
 
4-22-1963
 
5-2-1963
 
95.04


D-645
 
3-16-1964
 
3-26-1964
 
33.01—33.04


D-646
 
4-6-1964
 
4-16-1964
 
95.03


D-651
 
6-22-1964
 
6-2-1964
 
52.02, 52.99


D-660
 
7-27-1964
 
8-6-1964
 
91.35


D-665
 
9-8-1964
 
11-1-1964
 
90.01—90.09, 90.99, 130.03, 130.15—130.37, 133.01—133.07, 134.01


D-666
 
9-28-1964
 
10-8-1964
 
33.01


D-678
 
1-18-1965
 
2-1-1965
 
16.01—16.03, 16.05—16.33, 16.99


D-718
 
3-21-1966
 
3-31-1966
 
96.064, 96.066


D-725
 
4-25-1966
 
5-5-1966
 
33.25


D-731
 
7-11-1966
 
7-11-1966
 
52.61


D-752
 
10-31-1966
 
11-10-1966
 
95.04


D-766
 
2-20-1967
 
3-1-1967
 
52.59


D-815
 
1-29-1968
 
2-8-1968
 
33.15, 33.16


D-840
 
8-12-1968
 
8-22-1968
 
131.02


D-849
 
12-23-1968
 
1-2-1969
 
14.02


D-879
 
5-26-1969
 
6-5-1969
 
72.01


D-888
 
8-11-1969
 
8-21-1969
 
32.01


D-899
 
12-8-1969
 
12-8-1969
 
71.16


D-904
 
1-19-1970
 
1-29-1970
 
96.061


D-911
 
3-16-1970
 
3-26-1970
 
12.017


D-938
 
8-31-1970
 
9-10-1970
 
96.006


D-945
 
9-14-1970
 
9-24-1970
 
72.35, 72.36


D-948
 
9-14-1970
 
9-24-1970
 
112.15—112.29, 112.99


D-956
 
9-28-1970
 
10-8-1970
 
33.02


D-962
 
10-19-1970
 
10-29-1970
 
152.001—152.005, 152.020—152.024, 152.035—152.037, 152.050—152.055,
152.070—152.075


D-975
 
2-8-1971
 
2-18-1971
 
34.02


D-985
 
8-2-1971
 
8-12-1971
 
72.35


D-1008
 
12-13-1971
 
12-23-1971
 
92.05


D-1010
 
12-13-1971
 
12-23-1971
 
52.55—52.57


D-1014
 
1-3-1972
 
1-13-1972
 
13.11


D-1016
 
1-24-1972
 
1-24-1972
 
130.03


D-1017
 
4-17-1972
 
4-27-1972
 
91.02


D-1018
 
4-17-1972
 
4-27-1972
 
130.37


D-1045
 
11-13-1972
 
1-12-1973
 
151.096


D-1084
 
10-29-1973
 
10-29-1973
 
12.020


D-1086
 
10-29-1973
 
11-8-1973
 
30.08, 30.99


D-1092
 
1-21-1974
 
1-31-1974
 
74.01—74.09


D-1119
 
10-7-1974
 
10-17-1974
 
130.19


D-1120
 
10-7-1974
 
10-17-1974
 
132.06


D-1126
 
12-23-1974
 
1-2-1975
 
10.03


D-1135
 
2-17-1975
 
2-27-1975
 
12.037


D-1139
 
3-31-1975
 
4-10-1975
 
12.085—12.092


D-1154
 
6-16-1975
 
6-26-1975
 
71.11


D-1163
 
7-2-1975
 
8-7-1975
 
12.070—12.073


D-1161
 
7-14-1975
 
7-24-1975
 
12.021


D-1170
 
8-25-1975
 
9-4-1975
 
130.15


D-1183
 
4-12-1976
 
4-22-1976
 
12.020


D-1184
 
4-26-1976
 
5-6-1976
 
73.15—73.18, 73.99


D-1211
 
1-17-1977
 
1-27-1977
 
96.055, 96.060


D-1223
 
5-9-1977
 
5-29-1977
 
52.17, 52.18, 52.21, 52.22, 52.24, 72.24, 94.006, 94.007, 94.009, 112.01,
112.02, 112.25, 130.03, 131.01, 133.01, 151.096


D-1241
 
10-3-1977
 
10-13-1977
 
14.01


D-1244
 
11-14-1977
 
11-24-1977
 
16.33


D-1252
 
1-30-1978
 
2-9-1978
 
130.27


D-1255
 
3-20-1978
 
3-20-1978
 
71.14


D-1258
 
5-15-1978
 
5-25-1978
 
71.01


D-1272
 
9-5-1978
 
9-5-1978
 
130.35


D-1279
 
10-23-1978
 
11-2-1978
 
71.07


D-1289
 
1-22-1979
 
2-1-1979
 
12.070, 12.071


D-1298
 
3-19-1979
 
3-19-1979
 
132.03—132.05, 132.99


D-1301
 
5-29-1979
 
6-8-1979
 
72.23, 72.99


D-1312
 
7-23-1979
 
8-1-1979
 
70.99


D-1337
 
3-31-1980
 
4-10-1980
 
33.19, 33.21


D-1342
 
5-27-1980
 
6-6-1980
 
94.008


D-1345
 
6-9-1980
 
6-9-1980
 
92.08, 92.99


D-1357
 
11-17-1980
 
11-28-1980
 
96.001


D-1362
 
1-5-1981
 
1-15-1981
 
16.11


D-1365
 
3-23-1981
 
4-2-1981
 
132.01


D-1366
 
4-6-1981
 
4-16-1981
 
72.20


D-1376
 
7-13-1981
 
7-23-1981
 
12.055


D-1387
 
3-22-1982
 
4-1-1982
 
13.02


D-1390
 
5-10-1982
 
5-20-1982
 
94.005


D-1392
 
7-12-1982
 
7-22-1982
 
12.021


D-1416
 
11-15-1982
 
11-15-1982
 
33.03


D-1417
 
11-15-1982
 
11-25-1982
 
12.038


D-1418, § 101
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.001


D-1418, § 102
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.002


D-1418, § 103
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.003


D-1418, § 104
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.004


D-1418, § 106
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.005


D-1418, §§ 203—299.25
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.020


D-1418, § 301
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.021, 153.035


D-1418, § 302
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.036


D-1418, § 303
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.037


D-1418, § 401
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.050


D-1418, § 402
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.051


D-1418, § 403
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.052


D-1418, § 404
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.053


D-1418, § 405
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.054


D-1418, § 406
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.055


D-1418, § 407
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.056


D-1418, § 408
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.057


D-1418, § 409
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.058


D-1418, § 410
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.059


D-1418, § 411
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.060


D-1418, § 412
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.061


D-1418, § 413
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.062


D-1418, § 414
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.063


D-1418, § 415
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.064


D-1418, § 416
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.065


D-1418, § 417
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.066


D-1418, § 418
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.067


D-1418, § 419
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.068


D-1418, § 420
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.069


D-1418, § 421
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.070


D-1418, § 422
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.071


D-1418, § 423
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.072


D-1418, § 424
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.073


D-1418, § 425
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.074


D-1418, § 426
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.075


D-1418, § 427
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.076


D-1418, § 428
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.077


D-1418, § 429
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.078


D-1418, § 430
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.079


D-1418, § 431
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.080


D-1418, § 432
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.081


D-1418, § 433
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.082


D-1418, § 434
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.083


D-1418, § 435
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.084


D-1418, § 436
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.085


D-1418, § 437
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.086


D-1418, § 501
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.100


D-1418, § 502
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.101


D-1418, § 503
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.102


D-1418, § 504
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.103


D-1418, § 505
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.104


D-1418, § 506
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.105


D-1418, § 507
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.106


D-1418, § 508
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.107


D-1418, § 509
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.108


D-1418, § 510
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.109


D-1418, § 511
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.110


D-1418, § 512
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.111


D-1418, § 513
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.112


D-1418, § 601
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.125


D-1418, § 602
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.126


D-1418, § 603
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.127


D-1418, § 604
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.128


D-1418, § 605
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.129


D-1418, § 606
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.130


D-1418, § 607
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.131


D-1418, § 608
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.132


D-1418, § 701
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.145


D-1418, § 702
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.146


D-1418, § 703
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.147


D-1418, § 704
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.148


D-1418, § 705
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.149


D-1418, § 706
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.150


D-1418, § 707
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.151


D-1418, § 708
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.152


D-1418, § 709
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.153


D-1418, § 710
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.154


D-1418, § 711
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.155


D-1418, § 711.1
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.156


D-1418, § 712
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.157


D-1418, § 713
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.158


D-1418, § 714
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.159


D-1418, § 715
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.160


D-1418, § 716
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.161


D-1418, § 717
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.162


D-1418, § 718
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.163


D-1418, § 719
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.164


D-1418, § 720
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.165


D-1418, § 721
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.166


D-1418, § 722
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.167


D-1418, § 723
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.168


D-1418, § 724
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.169


D-1418, § 801
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.180


D-1418, § 802
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.181


D-1418, § 803
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.182


D-1418, § 804
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.183


D-1418, § 805
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.184


D-1418, § 901
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.195


D-1418, § 902
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.196


D-1418, § 903
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.197


D-1418, § 904
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.198


D-1418, § 905
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.199


D-1418, § 1002
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.210, 153.211


D-1418, § 1003
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.212


D-1418, § 1004
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.213


D-1418, § 1005
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.214


D-1418, § 1101
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.225


D-1418, § 1102
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.226


D-1418, § 1103
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.227


D-1418, § 1104
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.228


D-1418, § 1105
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.229


D-1418, § 1106
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.230


D-1418, § 1201
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.245


D-1418, § 1202
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.246


D-1418, § 1203
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.247


D-1418, § 1204
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.248


D-1418, § 1205
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.249


D-1418, § 1206
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.250


D-1418, § 1301
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.265


D-1418, § 1302
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.266


D-1418, § 1303
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.267


D-1418, § 1304
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.268


D-1418, § 1305
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.269


D-1418, § 1401
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.280


D-1418, § 1402
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.281


D-1418, § 1403
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.282


D-1418, § 1404
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.283


D-1418, § 1405
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.284


D-1418, § 1406
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.285


D-1418, § 1501
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.300


D-1418, § 1502
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.301


D-1418, § 1503
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.302


D-1418, § 1504
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.303


D-1418, § 1601
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.315


D-1418, § 1602
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.316


D-1418, § 1603
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.317


D-1418, § 1604
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.318


D-1418, § 1605
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.319


D-1418, § 1701
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.330


D-1418, § 1702
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.331


D-1418, § 1703
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.332


D-1418, § 1704
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.333


D-1418, § 1705
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.334


D-1418, § 1801
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.345


D-1418, § 1802
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.346


D-1418, § 1803
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.347


D-1418, § 1804
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.348


D-1418, § 1805
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.349


D-1418, § 1806
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.350


D-1418, § 1902 (1901)
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.365


D-1418, § 1902 (1904)
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.368


D-1418, § 1902
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.366


D-1418, § 1903
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.267


D-1418, § 1905
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.369


D-1418, § 1906
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.370


D-1418, § 2001
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.385


D-1418, § 2002
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.386


D-1418, § 2003
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.388


D-1418, § 2004
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.389


D-1418, § 2101
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.400


D-1418, § 2102
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.401


D-1418, § 2103
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.402


D-1418, § 2104
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.403


D-1418, § 2105
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.404


D-1418, § 2106
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.405


D-1418, § 2107
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.406


D-1418, § 2200
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.440


D-1418, § 2301
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.456


D-1418, § 2302
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.457


D-1418, § 2303
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.458


D-1418, § 2304
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.469


D-1418, § 2305
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.460


D-1418, § 2306
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.461


D-1418, § 2307
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.462


D-1418, § 2308
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.463


D-1418, § 2309
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.464


D-1418, § 2310
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.465


D-1418, § 2311
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.466


D-1418, § 2312
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.467


D-1418, § 2313
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.468


D-1418, § 2314
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.469


D-1418, § 2315
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.470


D-1418, § 2315-1
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.471


D-1418, § 2316
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.472


D-1418, § 2316.01
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.473


D-1418, § 2317
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.474


D-1418, § 2318
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.475


D-1418, § 2319
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.476


D-1418, § 2320
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.477


D-1418, § 2321
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.478


D-1418, § 2323
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.479


D-1418, § 2324
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.480


D-1418, § 2325
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.482


D-1418, § 2326
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.483


D-1418, § 2327
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.484


D-1418, § 2328
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.486


D-1418, § 2329
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.487


D-1418, § 2330
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.488


D-1418, § 2331
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.489


D-1418, § 2332
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.455, 153.491


D-1418, § 2333
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.455, 153.485


D-1418, § 2401
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.505


D-1418, § 2402
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.506


D-1418, § 2403
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.507


D-1418, § 2403.1
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.508


D-1418, § 2404
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.509


D-1418, § 2405
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.510


D-1418, § 2406
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.511


D-1418, § 2407
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.512


D-1418, § 2408
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.513


D-1418, § 2409
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.514


D-1418, § 2410
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.515


D-1418, § 2411
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.516


D-1418, § 2412
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.517


D-1418, § 2413
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.518


D-1418, § 2414
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.519


D-1418, § 2415
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.520


D-1418, § 2416
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.521


D-1418, § 2501
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.535


D-1418, § 2502
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.536


D-1418, § 2503
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.537


D-1418, § 2504
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.538


D-1418, § 2505
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.539


D-1418, § 2506
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.540


D-1418, § 2507
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.541


D-1418, § 2508
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.542


D-1418, § 2509
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.543


D-1418, § 2510
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.544


D-1418, § 2601
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.555


D-1418, § 2602
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.556


D-1418, § 2603
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.557


D-1418, § 2604
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.558


D-1418, § 2605
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.559


D-1418, § 2606
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.560


D-1418, § 2607
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.561


D-1418, § 2608
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.562


D-1418, § 2609
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.563


D-1418, § 2701
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.575


D-1418, § 2702
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.576


D-1418, § 2703
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.577


D-1418, § 2704
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.578


D-1418, § 2705
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.579


D-1418, § 2706
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.580


D-1418, § 2707
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.581


D-1418, § 2708
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.582


D-1418, § 2709
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.583


D-1418, § 2710
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.584


D-1418, § 2711
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.585


D-1418, § 2712
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.586


D-1418, § 2713
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.587


D-1418, § 2714
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.588


D-1418, § 2715
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.589


D-1418, § 2716
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.590


D-1418, § 2717
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.591


D-1418, § 2801
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.006


D-1418, § 2802
 
11-22-1982
 
1-21-1983
 
153.999


D-1425
 
4-25-1983
 
5-5-1983
 
12.037


D-1433
 
7-25-1983
 
8-4-1983
 
153.471


D-1435
 
8-8-1983
 
8-18-1983
 
153.457—153.459


D-1439
 
10-17-1983
 
10-27-1983
 
153.021, 153.507, 153.508, 153.514


D-1454
 
5-21-1984
 
5-31-1984
 
93.01—93.07, 93.99


D-1477
 
2-15-1985
 
2-25-1985
 
153.266, 153.477


D-1481
 
4-22-1985
 
5-2-1985
 
130.16, 130.30


D-1485, § 1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.001


D-1485, § 2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.002


D-1485, § 3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.003


D-1485, § 4.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.025


D-1485, § 4.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.026


D-1485, § 4.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.027


D-1485, § 4.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.028


D-1485, § 4.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.029


D-1485, § 4.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.030


D-1485, § 4.7
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.031


D-1485, § 4.8
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.032


D-1485, § 4.9
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.033


D-1485, § 4.10
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.034


D-1485, § 4.11
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.035


D-1485, § 4.12
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.036


D-1485, § 4.13
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.037


D-1485, § 4.14
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.038


D-1485, § 5.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.050


D-1485, § 5.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.051


D-1485, § 5.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.052


D-1485, § 5.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.053


D-1485, § 5.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.054


D-1485, § 5.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.055


D-1485, § 5.7
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.056


D-1485, § 5.8
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.057


D-1485, § 6.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.070


D-1485, § 6.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.071


D-1485, § 6.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.072


D-1485, § 6.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.073


D-1485, § 6.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.074


D-1485, § 7.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.085


D-1485, § 7.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.086


D-1485, § 7.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.087


D-1485, § 7.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.088


D-1485, § 7.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.089


D-1485, § 7.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.090


D-1485, § 7.7
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.091


D-1485, § 7.8
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.092


D-1485, § 7.9
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.093


D-1485, § 7.10
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.094


D-1485, § 7.11
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.095


D-1485, § 7.12
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.096


D-1485, § 8
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.110


D-1485, § 9.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.125


D-1485, § 9.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.126


D-1485, § 9.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.127


D-1485, § 9.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.128


D-1485, § 9.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.129


D-1485, § 9.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.130


D-1485, § 10.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.175


D-1485, § 10.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.176


D-1485, § 10.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.177


D-1485, § 10.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.178


D-1485, § 10.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.179


D-1485, § 11
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.180


D-1485, § 12
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.011


D-1485, § 13.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.195


D-1485, § 13.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.196


D-1485, § 13.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.197


D-1485, § 13.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.198


D-1485, § 13.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.199


D-1485, § 13.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.200


D-1485, § 13.7
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.201


D-1485, § 13.8
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.202


D-1485, § 13.9
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.203


D-1485, § 13.10
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.204


D-1485, § 14.1
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.004


D-1485, § 14.2
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.005


D-1485, § 14.3
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.006


D-1485, § 14.4
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.007


D-1485, § 14.5
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.008


D-1485, § 14.6
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.009


D-1485, § 14.7
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.010


D-1485, § 15
 
6-3-1985
 
6-13-1985
 
115.039


D-1486
 
7-15-1985
 
7-25-1985
 
96.020—96.022


D-1497
 
8-26-1985
 
9-5-1985
 
72.36


D-1498
 
8-26-1985
 
9-5-1985
 
72.37


D-1502
 
9-23-1985
 
10-3-1985
 
12.037


D-1505
 
10-14-1985
 
11-24-1985
 
12.016


D-1508
 
2-17-1986
 
2-27-1986
 
16.07


D-1509
 
3-17-1986
 
8-16-1986
 
71.17


D-1515
 
7-14-1986
 
7-24-1986
 
153.466


D-1522
 
7-28-1986
 
8-7-1986
 
12.015


D-1533
 
12-8-1986
 
12-18-1986
 
12.039


D-1534
 
12-22-1986
 
12-22-1986
 
132.20—132.23, 132.99


D-1538
 
1-5-1987
 
1-15-1987
 
12.039


D-1540
 
2-9-1987
 
2-19-1987
 
70.02, 71.17


D-1541
 
2-9-1987
 
2-19-1987
 
12.040


D-1542
 
2-9-1987
 
2-19-1987
 
153.542


D-1545
 
6-1-1987
 
6-11-1987
 
153.576


D-1549
 
6-29-1987
 
7-9-1987
 
12.018


D-1554
 
6-29-1987
 
7-9-1987
 
70.30—70.33


D-1555
 
7-13-1987
 
7-23-1987
 
70.03


D-1558
 
7-27-1987
 
8-5-1987
 
96.003, 96.004


D-1559
 
8-10-1987
 
8-20-1987
 
96.037


D-1564
 
9-28-1987
 
10-8-1987
 
153.456


D-1566
 
10-12-1987
 
10-22-1987
 
93.20—93.22, 93.99


D-1571
 
1-25-1988
 
2-4-1988
 
11.15—11.17, 11.19, 11.20


D-1573
 
3-28-1988
 
4-7-1988
 
16.19


D-1578
 
8-22-1988
 
9-1-1988
 
11.17


D-1579
 
10-17-1988
 
10-27-1988
 
153.083


D-1582
 
2-13-1989
 
7-1-1989
 
33.02, 33.04


D-1583
 
2-20-1989
 
3-2-1989
 
95.01


D-1584
 
2-20-1989
 
3-2-1989
 
13.12


D-1585
 
3-13-1989
 
3-23-1989
 
51.007


D-1587
 
3-27-1989
 
4-7-1989
 
72.19


D-1590
 
5-1-1989
 
5-11-1989
 
15.03


D-1592
 
6-19-1989
 
6-29-1989
 
16.01—16.03, 16.05, 16.06—16.33, 16.99


D-1595
 
7-31-1989
 
9-1-1989
 
151.001—151.004, 151.015—151.017, 151.030, 151.031, 151.045, 151.046,
151.060—151.062, 151.075, 151.076, 151.090—151.098, 151.155—151.161,
151.998, 151.999


D-1599
 
9-25-1989
 
10-5-1989
 
34.01


D-1606
 
1-2-1990
 
1-12-1990
 
TSO II


D-1607
 
4-2-1990
 
4-12-1990
 
TSO III


D-1617
 
8-27-1990
 
9-6-1990
 
TSO II


D-1619
 
9-24-1990
 
10-4-1990
 
TSO II


D-1620
 
10-1-1990
 
10-11-1990
 
TSO III


D-1621
 
10-1-1990
 
10-11-1990
 
153.021, 153.058, 153.086, 153.584


D-1623
 
11-19-1990
 
11-29-1990
 
37.06


D-1624
 
11-19-1990
 
11-29-1990
 
TSO III


D-1626
 
1-7-1991
 
1-17-1991
 
TSO II


D-1627
 
1-28-1991
 
2-8-1991
 
TSO II


D-1628
 
2-11-1991
 
2-21-1991
 
72.50


D-1629
 
2-18-1991
 
2-28-1991
 
TSO III


D-1630
 
2-25-1991
 
3-7-1991
 
TSO III


D-1633
 
5-13-1991
 
5-23-1991
 
TSO V


D-1634
 
6-17-1991
 
6-27-1991
 
TSO II


D-1636
 
7-5-1991
 
7-15-1991
 
11.01, 11.16


D-1637
 
7-15-1991
 
7-25-1991
 
12.035


D-1638
 
7-29-1991
 
8-8-1991
 
TSO I


D-1639
 
8-26-1991
 
8-26-1991
 
35.01—35.10


D-1634
 
9-9-1991
 
9-9-1991
 
51.066


D-1635
 
9-9-1991
 
9-9-1991
 
51.020, 51.022—51.028, 51.039—51.041, 51.047, 51.051, 51.052,
51.068—51.077, 51.999


D-1640
 
9-9-1991
 
9-9-1991
 
TSO VI


D-1643
 
9-23-1991
 
10-3-1991
 
52.42


D-1644
 
9-23-1991
 
10-3-1991
 
TSO II


D-1645
 
10-7-1991
 
10-17-1991
 
153.021


D-1647
 
11-18-1991
 
12-9-1991
 
151.030, 151.031, 151.046, 151.061, 151.076, 151.160


D-1648
 
12-9-1991
 
12-9-1991
 
TSO VI


D-1651
 
2-10-1992
 
2-10-1992
 
12.019


D-1652
 
2-10-1992
 
2-10-1992
 
151.159


D-1653
 
3-16-1992
 
3-26-1992
 
130.33


D-1654
 
4-27-1992
 
5-7-1992
 
153.021, 153.156


D-1656
 
5-4-1992
 
5-14-1992
 
153.021, 153.070


D-1657
 
5-4-1992
 
5-14-1992
 
94.004


D-1658
 
7-13-1992
 
7-23-1992
 
50.01—50.10, 50.99


D-1659
 
7-27-1992
 
8-6-1992
 
94.060—94.068


D-1660
 
7-27-1992
 
7-27-1992
 
50.08


D-1662
 
8-10-1992
 
8-20-1992
 
153.317, 153.473


D-1665
 
10-26-1992
 
11-5-1992
 
153.155


D-1666
 
10-26-1992
 
11-5-1992
 
TSO III


D-1667
 
11-2-1992
 
11-12-1992
 
TSO II


D-1668
 
11-9-1992
 
11-19-1992
 
151.130—151.141, 151.999


D-1675
 
11-9-1992
 
11-9-1992
 
150.20


D-1676
 
11-9-1992
 
11-9-1992
 
150.21


D-1679
 
11-9-1992
 
11-19-1992
 
153.021, 153.537—153.541, 153.543, 153.544


D-1680
 
11-26-1992
 
11-26-1992
 
TSO II


D-1681
 
12-21-1992
 
12-31-1992
 
90.01—90.04, 90.06—90.09, 90.99


D-1690
 
3-29-1993
 
4-8-1993
 
TSO II


D-1691
 
3-29-1993
 
4-8-1993
 
TSO II


D-1693
 
5-3-1993
 
5-13-1993
 
13.10


D-1692
 
5-13-1993
 
5-13-1993
 
TSO III


D-1696
 
6-21-1993
 
7-1-1993
 
TSO III


D-1697
 
7-26-1993
 
8-5-1993
 
132.01


D-1698
 
7-26-1993
 
8-5-1993
 
91.01


D-1699
 
9-7-1993
 
9-17-1993
 
TSO II


D-1700
 
9-13-1993
 
9-23-1993
 
130.50—130.53, 130.99


D-1706
 
10-11-1993
 
10-11-1993
 
TSO II


D-1702
 
10-18-1993
 
10-28-1993
 
115.145—115.163


D-1703
 
10-25-1993
 
11-5-1993
 
12.055


D-1707
 
1-3-1994
 
1-3-1994
 
TSO II


D-1708
 
3-7-1994
 
3-17-1994
 
72.03


D-1709
 
3-7-1994
 
3-17-1994
 
72.51


D-1710
 
3-7-1994
 
3-17-1994
 
151.134


D-1711
 
3-7-1994
 
3-17-1994
 
151.130—151.141, 151.999


D-1712
 
3-21-1994
 
3-21-1994
 
TSO II


D-1713
 
3-21-1994
 
3-21-1994
 
TSO II


D-1716
 
5-16-1994
 
5-26-1994
 
92.08, 92.99


D-1718
 
7-11-1994
 
7-21-1994
 
TSO III


D-1719
 
7-25-1994
 
8-4-1994
 
90.08


D-1721
 
8-8-1994
 
8-8-1994
 
TSO II


D-1722
 
8-8-1994
 
8-8-1994
 
TSO II


D-1720
 
8-22-1994
 
9-1-1994
 
TSO III


D-1723
 
8-22-1994
 
9-1-1994
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


D-1724
 
8-29-1994
 
8-29-1994
 
TSO II


D-1725
 
9-12-1994
 
9-22-1994
 
TSO II


D-1727
 
10-10-1994
 
10-20-1994
 
TSO III


D-1728
 
11-14-1994
 
11-14-1994
 
TSO II


D-1729
 
11-21-1994
 
12-1-1994
 
96.002


D-1730
 
11-21-1994
 
12-1-1994
 
12.036


D-1726
 
1-1-1995
 
1-1-1995
 
52.38, 52.39


D-1732
 
1-3-1995
 
1-13-1995
 
131.03


D-1735
 
2-6-1995
 
2-16-1995
 
52.36


D-1736
 
3-6-1995
 
3-6-1995
 
TSO II


D-1737
 
3-20-1995
 
3-30-1995
 
16.01—16.33, 16.99


D-1739
 
4-3-1995
 
5-1-1995
 
111.01, 111.15—111.19, 111.30—111.32, 111.45


D-1741
 
5-22-1995
 
5-1-1995
 
94.010


D-1742
 
6-5-1995
 
6-15-1995
 
TSO III


D-1749
 
7-24-1995
 
8-3-1995
 
95.02, 95.99


D-1752
 
8-21-1995
 
8-31-1995
 
72.35


D-1753
 
9-11-1995
 
9-21-1995
 
92.10


D-1754
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
TSO II


D-1755
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
TSO II


D-1756
 
11-6-1995
 
11-6-1995
 
TSO II


D-1757
 
11-6-1995
 
11-16-1995
 
TSO III


D-1758
 
1-22-1996
 
2-1-1996
 
130.22, 130.23


D-1760
 
1-29-1996
 
3-12-1996
 
97.01—97.05, 97.99


D-1759
 
2-5-1996
 
2-5-1996
 
TSO II


D-1763
 
3-4-1996
 
3-5-1996
 
16.04


D-1764
 
3-25-1996
 
4-4-1996
 
12.039


D-1765
 
5-15-1996
 
5-25-1996
 
13.10


D-1766
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
153.999


D-1767
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
95.03


D-1768
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
95.02, 95.99


D-1769
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
50.99


D-1770
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
94.045—94.047, 94.999


D-1772
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
151.998, 151.999


D-1773
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
94.999


D-1775
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
37.01—37.05, 37.07


D-1776
 
9-30-1996
 
11-11-1996
 
30.99


D-1781
 
10-14-1996
 
1-1-1997
 
52.38, 52.39


D-1780
 
11-4-1996
 
11-14-1996
 
111.17, 111.18


D-1782
 
11-4-1996
 
1-1-1997
 
51.070


D-1783
 
11-18-1996
 
11-18-1996
 
TSO II


D-1784
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
95.02, 95.99


D-1785
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
50.99


D-1786
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
94.999


D-1787
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
151.998, 151.999


D-1788
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
37.05


D-1789
 
11-18-1996
 
12-2-1996
 
72.23, 72.99


D-1791
 
1-6-1997
 
1-16-1997
 
72.23, 72.99


D-1792
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO I


D-1793
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO I


D-1794
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO VII


D-1795
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO I


D-1796
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO I


D-1797
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1798
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1799
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1800
 
1-27-1997
 
1-27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1801
 
3-17-1997
 
3-27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1802
 
3-24-1997
 
3-24-1997
 
TSO II


D-1803
 
4-7-1997
 
4-17-1997
 
TSO III


D-1804
 
5-12-1997
 
5-22-1997
 
12.036


D-1808
 
7-14-1997
 
7-24-1997
 
TSO III


D-1809
 
8-11-1997
 
8-21-1997
 
TSO III


D-1810
 
9-29-1997
 
10-9-1997
 
TSO III


D-1811
 
10-27-1997
 
10–27-1997
 
TSO II


D-1812
 
11-24-1997
 
12-4-1997
 
153.507


D-1813
 
12-8-1997
 
12-15-1997
 
13.10


D-1815
 
5-4-1998
 
5-14-1998
 
TSO III


D-1816
 
5-18-1998
 
5-28-1998
 
TSO III


D-1821
 
7-13-1998
 
7-27-1998
 
153.560, 153.582


D-1822
 
7-13-1998
 
7-27-1998
 
153.070


D-1823
 
7-13-1998
 
7-27-1998
 
153.157


D-1824
 
7-13-1998
 
7-27-1998
 
153.440


D-1825
 
8-24-1998
 
8-24-1998
 
72.15


D-1826
 
9-14-1998
 
10-1-1998
 
TSO II


D-1827
 
9-14-1998
 
9-24-1998
 
TSO III


D-1828
 
9-14-1998
 
10-1-1998
 
52.37


D-1829
 
9-14-1998
 
10-1-1998
 
52.38, 52.39


D-1830
 
9-14-1998
 
10-1-1998
 
51.070


D-1831
 
11-9-1998
 
11-19-1998
 
TSO II


D-1833
 
4-1-1999
 
4-1-1999
 
16.12


D-1834
 
4-5-1999
 
4-15-1999
 
TSO II


D-1835
 
5-17-1999
 
5-17-1999
 
TSO II


D-1836
 
6-7-1999
 
6-17-1999
 
96.055—96.058, 96.061, 96.063—96.069


D-1837
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
TSO II


D-1838
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
TSO II


D-1839
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
TSO VII


D-1841
 
7-12-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
TSO II


D-1840
 
7-22-1999
 
7-22-1999
 
TSO III


D-1843
 
8-9-1999
 
8-18-1999
 
130.03


D-1844
 
9-27-1999
 
10-7-1999
 
153.086, 153.584


D-1845
 
10-11-1999
 
10-21-1999
 
153.157


D-1846
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
TSO II


D-1847
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
TSO III


D-1848
 
11-22-1999
 
12-2-1999
 
TSO II


D-1849
 
12-6-1999
 
12-16-1999
 
TSO II


D-1850
 
12-6-1999
 
12-6-1999
 
TSO II


D-1851
 
12-20-1999
 
12-30-1999
 
TSO III


D-1852
 
1-24-2000
 
2-3-2000
 
153.538


D-1853
 
4-17-2000
 
4-27-2000
 
12.041


D-1854
 
4-17-2000
 
4-27-2000
 
TSO VI


D-1857
 
6-5-2000
 
6-15-2000
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


D-1855
 
6-15-2000
 
6-25-2000
 
151.159


D-1858
 
6-19-2000
 
6-29-2000
 
12.041


D-1859
 
6-19-2000
 
6-29-2000
 
TSO IV


D-1860
 
7-10-2000
 
7-20-2000
 
TSO II


D-1856
 
7-24-2000
 
8-3-2000
 
16.02, 16.08, 16.12, 16.13, 16.16, 16.18, 16.24


D-1864
 
8-14-2000
 
8-24-2000
 
TSO II


D-1865
 
9-11-2000
 
9-21-2000
 
70.01


D-1872
 
9-11-2000
 
9-21-2000
 
70.02, 71.14, 71.17, 72.19


D-1873
 
9-25-2000
 
10-5-2000
 
133.03


D-1874
 
9-25-2000
 
10-5-2000
 
133.01


D-1875
 
9-25-2000
 
10-5-2000
 
52.01, 52.23, 52.99


D-1877
 
10-9-2000
 
10-19-2000
 
92.06


D-1878
 
10-9-2000
 
11-1-2000
 
51.065—51.077


D-1879
 
10-23-2000
 
11-2-2000
 
11.17


D-1880
 
11-20-2000
 
11-30-2000
 
153.021, 153.087, 153.490


D-1881
 
1-2-2001
 
1-12-2001
 
130.16


D-1882
 
1-2-2001
 
1-12-2001
 
130.30


D-1883
 
1-22-2001
 
2-1-2001
 
TSO II


D-1884
 
2-19-2001
 
3-1-2001
 
151.003


D-1885
 
2-19-2001
 
3-1-2001
 
16.30


D-1886
 
2-19-2001
 
3-1-2001
 
151.130—151.141, 151.999


D-1887
 
2-19-2001
 
3-1-2001
 
153.125—153.127, 153.130


D-1888
 
3-19-2001
 
3-29-2001
 
TSO III


D-1889
 
4-16-2001
 
4-26-2001
 
TSO II


D-1890
 
5-14-2001
 
5-24-2001
 
TSO II


D-1891
 
7-16-2001
 
7-26-2001
 
98.01—98.09, 98.99, Ch. 98, App. A


D-1892
 
7-16-2001
 
7-26-2001
 
94.063


D-1893
 
8-13-2001
 
8-23-2001
 
12.015


D-1894
 
8-27-2001
 
9-6-2001
 
TSO II


D-1895
 
9-10-2001
 
9-20-2001
 
TSO II


D-1898
 
9-24-2001
 
10-4-2001
 
TSO III


D-1899
 
9-24-2001
 
10-4-2001
 
153.126


D-1901
 
9-24-2001
 
10-4-2001
 
TSO II


D-1902
 
10-22-2001
 
11-1-2001
 
TSO III


D-1903
 
11-5-2001
 
11-15-2001
 
TSO III


D-1904
 
11-5-2001
 
11-15-2001
 
98.08


D-1905
 
12-3-2001
 
12-13-2001
 
150.01—150.09, 150.99


D-1906
 
12-3-2001
 
12-13-2001
 
90.01, 90.06, 90.08, 90.99


D-1907
 
12-3-2001
 
12-13-2001
 
11.16


D-1908
 
12-3-2001
 
12-13-2001
 
130.38


D-1909
 
12-3-2001
 
12-13-2001
 
13.10


D-1910
 
12-31-2001
 
1-10-2002
 
TSO III


D-1912
 
12-31-2001
 
1-10-2002
 
153.021, 153.317, 153.347, 153.367, 153.385—153.389, 153.481


D-1911
 
1-28-2002
 
2-7-2002
 
151.003, 151.017, 151.031, 151.046, 151.061, 151.076, 151.077, 151.090,
151.095, 151.159


D-1913
 
2-25-2002
 
3-7-2002
 
13.11


D-1914
 
2-25-2002
 
3-7-2002
 
153.538


D-1915
 
2-25-2002
 
3-7-2002
 
130.02


D-1917
 
4-22-2002
 
5-2-2002
 
TSO II


D-1918
 
5-6-2002
 
5-16-2002
 
16.30


D-1919
 
5-20-2002
 
5-30-2002
 
17.01, 17.02


D-1920
 
6-3-2002
 
6-13-2002
 
153.082, 153.166, 153.440


D-1921
 
6-17-2002
 
6-27-2002
 
TSO II


D-1922
 
6-17-2002
 
6-27-2002
 
153.125


D-1924
 
7-1-2002
 
7-11-2002
 
TSO II


D-1925
 
7-15-2002
 
7-25-2002
 
TSO II


D-1926
 
7-15-2002
 
7-25-2002
 
TSO II


D-1927
 
7-15-2002
 
8-1-2002
 
51.020—51.053, 51.999


D-1928
 
7-29-2002
 
8-8-2002
 
TSO II


D-1929
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
13.10


D-1930
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
17.02


D-1931
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
TSO II


D-1932
 
8-12-2002
 
8-22-2002
 
TSO II


D-1933
 
8-26-2002
 
10-1-2002
 
51.065—51.077


D-1934
 
8-26-2002
 
9-5-2002
 
TSO II


D-1935
 
8-26-2002
 
9-5-2002
 
TSO II


D-1938
 
11-18-2002
 
11-28-2002
 
116.01—116.19, 116.99


D-1939
 
12-16-2002
 
12-26-2002
 
17.02


D-1940
 
12-30-2002
 
1-9-2003
 
153.477


D-1941
 
12-30-2002
 
1-9-2003
 
153.155


O-2
 
3-24-2003
 
4-3-2003
 
TSO III


O-3
 
5-5-2003
 
5-15-2003
 
TSO V


O-4
 
5-19-2003
 
5-29-2003
 
TSO III


O-5
 
6-2-2003
 
6-12-2003
 
150.02


O-6
 
6-16-2003
 
6-26-2003
 
72.99


O-7
 
6-16-2003
 
6-26-2003
 
34.01


O-8
 
6-30-2003
 
7-10-2003
 
TSO III


O-9
 
6-30-2003
 
7-10-2003
 
153.401, 153.440


O-10
 
8-11-2003
 
8-21-2003
 
153.021, 153.537—153.541, 153.543


O-11
 
8-11-2003
 
8-21-2003
 
50.01—50.10, 50.99


O-12
 
8-25-2003
 
9-4-2003
 
TSO II


O-14
 
9-8-2003
 
9-18-2003
 
12.015


O-15
 
12-8-2003
 
12-18-2003
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-16
 
12-8-2003
 
12-18-2003
 
52.61


O-17
 
4-5-2004
 
4-15-2004
 
TSO VIII


O-18
 
4-19-2004
 
4-29-2004
 
52.38, 52.39


O-19
 
4-19-2004
 
4-29-2004
 
TSO II


O-20
 
5-3-2004
 
5-13-2004
 
52.56


O-21
 
5-17-2004
 
5-27-2004
 
72.99


O-22
 
5-17-2004
 
5-27-2004
 
TSO II


O-23
 
6-7-2004
 
6-17-2004
 
TSO II


O-26
 
9-13-2004
 
9-23-2004
 
TSO II


O-27
 
9-13-2004
 
9-23-2004
 
TSO II


O-28
 
2-7-2005
 
2-17-2005
 
TSO III


O-29
 
2-7-2005
 
2-17-2005
 
52.42


O-30
 
2-21-2005
 
3-3-2005
 
36.02


O-31
 
2-21-2005
 
3-3-2005
 
95.02, 95.99


O-32
 
3-31-2005
 
3-21-2005
 
TSO VIII


O-33
 
4-4-2005
 
4-14-2005
 
95.03


O-34
 
5-2-2005
 
5-12-2005
 
TSO II


O-35
 
5-16-2005
 
5-26-2005
 
12.039


O-36
 
6-20-2005
 
6-30-2005
 
52.38, 52.39


O-37
 
7-25-2005
 
8-4-2005
 
TSO VIII


O-40
 
12-5-2005
 
12-15-2005
 
TSO VIII


O-41
 
12-19-2005
 
12-29-2005
 
33.02


O-42
 
1-9-2006
 
1-19-2006
 
72.50, 72.99


O-43
 
1-9-2006
 
1-19-2006
 
TSO III


O-44
 
3-6-2006
 
3-16-2006
 
TSO VIII


O-45
 
3-20-2006
 
3-30-2006
 
72.35


O-46
 
3-20-2006
 
3-30-2006
 
TSO VIII


O-47
 
5-15-2006
 
5-25-2006
 
TSO II


O-50
 
7-10-2006
 
7-20-2006
 
TSO III


O-51
 
8-7-2006
 
8-17-2006
 
16.02, 16.04, 16.07, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.18, 16.21, 16.24, 16.30


O-52
 
9-11-2006
 
9-21-2006
 
TSO II


O-53
 
10-9-2006
 
10-19-2006
 
52.38, 52.39


O-54
 
12-18-2006
 
12-28-2006
 
91.99


O-55
 
4-2-2007
 
4-12-2007
 
TSO II


O-56
 
4-2-2007
 
4-12-2007
 
TSO II


O-57
 
4-16-2007
 
4-36-2007
 
52.36


O-59
 
6-18-2007
 
6-28-2007
 
12.037


O-62
 
7-30-2007
 
8-9-2007
 
TSO II


O-63
 
7-30-2007
 
8-9-2007
 
TSO II


O-64
 
8-27-2007
 
9-6-2007
 
52.38, 52.39


O-65
 
12-3-2007
 
12-13-2007
 
52.19


O-66
 
1-7-2008
 
1-17-2008
 
TSO II


O-67
 
1-7-2008
 
1-17-2008
 
TSO II


O-68
 
3-10-2008
 
3-20-2008
 
96.023


O-69
 
5-19-2008
 
5-29-2008
 
152.056


O-70
 
5-19-2008
 
5-29-2008
 
TSO III


O-71
 
6-2-2008
 
6-12-2008
 
34.01, 34.02


O-72
 
8-25-2008
 
9-4-2008
 
111.16


O-73
 
10-6-2008
 
10-16-2008
 
TSO VIII


O-74
 
10-10-2008
 
11-16-2008
 
TSO II


O-75
 
11-24-2008
 
12-4-2008
 
TSO I


O-76
 
2-9-2009
 
2-19-2009
 
33.40—33.46


O-77
 
3-9-2009
 
3-19-2009
 
16.02


O-78
 
3-23-2009
 
4-2-2009
 
TSO VIII


O-79
 
4-6-2009
 
4-16-2009
 
TSO II


O-80
 
4-20-2009
 
4-30-2009
 
52.38, 52.39


O-81
 
4-20-2009
 
4-30-2009
 
51.070


O-82
 
6-1-2009
 
6-11-2009
 
14.30—14.45


O-84
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
TSO II


O-85
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
TSO II


O-86
 
8-24-2009
 
9-3-2009
 
TSO II


O-87
 
9-14-2009
 
9-24-2009
 
TSO II


O-88
 
9-14-2009
 
9-24-2009
 
TSO III


O-89
 
10-12-2009
 
10-22-2009
 
TSO VIII


O-90
 
11-9-2009
 
11-19-2009
 
12.037


O-91
 
11-9-2009
 
11-19-2009
 
130.51


O-92
 
11-23-2009
 
12-3-2009
 
50.09


O-93
 
12-7-2009
 
12-17-2009
 
130.52, 130.99


O-94
 
12-21-2009
 
12-31-2009
 
TSO VIII


O-98
 
2-8-2010
 
2-18-2010
 
70.03


O-99
 
5-24-2010
 
6-3-2010
 
TSO VIII


O-101
 
6-7-2010
 
6-17-2010
 
96.055—96.069


O-102
 
6-7-2010
 
6-17-2010
 
150.21


O-103
 
6-7-2010
 
6-17-2010
 
150.02


O-104
 
10-25-2010
 
11-4-2010
 
90.02, 90.05, 90.06, 90.09, 90.10, 90.99


O-105
 
11-22-2010
 
12-2-2010
 
TSO II


O-106
 
11-22-2010
 
12-2-2010
 
TSO II


O-108
 
2-7-2011
 
2-17-2011
 
TSO V


O-109
 
3-21-2011
 
3-31-2011
 
TSO II


O-110
 
3-21-2011
 
3-31-2011
 
TSO II


O-111
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
51.002, 51.003


O-112
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
96.001


O-113
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
52.16, 52.17


O-114
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
96.037


O-115
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
96.003


O-116
 
4-18-2011
 
4-28-2011
 
96.004


O-117
 
5-9-2011
 
5-19-2011
 
94.999


O-118
 
6-20-2011
 
6-30-2011
 
TSO II


O-119
 
6-20-2011
 
6-30-2011
 
94.004


O-120
 
6-20-2011
 
6-30-2011
 
94.025—94.031, 94.999


O-121
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
TSO II


O-122
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
TSO II


O-123
 
7-11-2011
 
7-21-2011
 
TSO II


O-124
 
7-25-2011
 
8-4-2011
 
92.11


O-125
 
8-8-2011
 
8-18-2011
 
TSO II


O-126
 
8-22-2011
 
9-1-2011
 
TSO IX


O-127
 
9-26-2011
 
10-6-2011
 
92.30


O-128
 
9-26-2011
 
10-6-2011
 
12.020


O-129
 
10-10-2011
 
10-20-2011
 
TSO II


O-130
 
10-10-2011
 
10-20-2011
 
TSO VIII


O-131
 
10-24-2011
 
11-3-2011
 
TSO IX


O-132
 
10-24-2011
 
11-3-2011
 
14.34, 14.36


O-133
 
1-9-2012
 
1-19-2012
 
TSO VIII


O-135
 
1-9-2012
 
1-19-2012
 
12.015


O-136
 
6-11-2012
 
6-11-2012
 
92.08, 92.30, 92.99


O-137
 
6-25-2012
 
7-5-2012
 
13.10


O-138
 
6-25-2012
 
7-5-2012
 
50.09


O-139
 
6-25-2012
 
7-5-2012
 
52.36


O-140
 
6-25-2012
 
7-5-2012
 
TSO II


O-141
 
8-27-2012
 
9-6-2012
 
70.32, 72.03, 72.35, 72.36, 72.50, 72.99


O-142
 
12-17-2012
 
12-27-2012
 
TSO II


O-143
 
12-17-2012
 
12-27-2012
 
TSO II


O-144
 
4-15-2013
 
4-25-2013
 
153.535, 153.538, 153.539, 153.541


O-145
 
5-6-2013
 
5-16-2013
 
52.36


O-146
 
5-20-2013
 
5-30-2013
 
99.01—99.19, 99.99


O-147
 
6-17-2013
 
6-27-2013
 
12.015


O-148
 
8-19-2013
 
8-29-2013
 
92.08, 92.99


O-149
 
9-9-2013
 
9-19-2013
 
153.420


O-150
 
9-9-2013
 
9-19-2013
 
TSO III


O-151
 
9-23-2013
 
10-3-2013
 
151.110—151.116


O-152
 
10-23-2013
 
11-2-2013
 
92.12


O-153
 
10-23-2013
 
11-2-2013
 
92.30


O-154
 
10-23-2013
 
11-2-2013
 
50.10


O-155
 
1-6-2014
 
1-16-2014
 
TSO III


O-156
 
2-17-2014
 
2-27-2014
 
110.01—110.10, 110.25—110.37, 110.98, 110.99


O-157
 
4-21-2014
 
5-1-2014
 
TSO VIII


O-158
 
7-21-2014
 
7-31-2014
 
52.36


O-159
 
9-22-2014
 
10-2-2014
 
TSO II


O-160
 
4-20-2015
 
4-30-2015
 
151.110—151.116


O-161
 
6-8-2015
 
6-18-2015
 
16.03, 16.04, 16.27


O-162
 
6-22-2015
 
7-2-2015
 
110.28


O-163
 
6-22-2015
 
7-2-2015
 
110.30


O-164
 
6-22-2015
 
7-2-2015
 
110.38


O-165
 
7-20-2015
 
7-30-2015
 
110.27


O-166
 
8-24-2015
 
9-3-2015
 
50.01—50.10, 50.99


O-167
 
8-24-2015
 
9-3-2015
 
52.38, 52.39


O-168
 
10-19-2015
 
10-29-2015
 
13.10


O-169
 
11-2-2015
 
11-12-2015
 
16.03, 16.04, 16.22, 16.27—16.31


O-170
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-171
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-172
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-173
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-174
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-175
 
2-22-2016
 
3-3-2016
 
TSO II


O-176
 
3-14-2016
 
3-24-2016
 
TSO III


O-177
 
3-28-2016
 
4-17-2016
 
12.037


O-178
 
5-9-2016
 
5-19-2016
 
12.019


O-179
 
5-23-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
92.11


O-180
 
5-23-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
TSO II


O-181
 
5-23-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
TSO II


O-182
 
6-6-2016
 
6-16-2016
 
151.130, 151.131, 151.133—151.140, 151.159, 151.999


O-183
 
7-11-2016
 
7-21-2016
 
34.01, 34.02


O-184
 
2-20-2017
 
3-2-2017
 
94.064, 94.065, 94.999


O-185
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
TSO II


O-186
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
TSO II


O-187
 
4-24-2017
 
5-4-2017
 
TSO II


O-188
 
5-8-2017
 
5-18-2017
 
TSO II


O-189
 
7-10-2017
 
7-20-2017
 
52.20, 52.60


O-190
 
7-10-2017
 
7-20-2017
 
71.45—71.49


O-191
 
7-24-2017
 
8-3-2017
 
110.06


O-192
 
7-24-2017
 
8-3-2017
 
96.042


O-193
 
7-24-2017
 
8-3-2017
 
14.30—14.45


O-194
 
10-9-2017
 
10-19-2017
 
TSO III


O-195
 
10-9-2017
 
10-19-2017
 
TSO II


O-196
 
11-6-2017
 
11-16-2017
 
TSO II


O-197
 
11-6-2017
 
11-16-2017
 
TSO II


O-198
 
11-20-2017
 
11-30-2017
 
152.056


O-199
 
2-5-2018
 
2-15-2018
 
TSO I


O-200
 
2-19-2018
 
3-1-2018
 
99.11


O-201
 
2-19-2018
 
3-1-2018
 
117.01—117.11, 117.99


O-202
 
4-2-2018
 
4-12-2018
 
153.420—153.428


O-203
 
5-7-2018
 
5-17-2018
 
32.15


O-204
 
8-27-2018
 
9-6-2018
 
Adopting Ordinance


O-205
 
1-7-2019
 
1-17-2019
 
110.37


O-206
 
3-4-2019
 
3-14-2019
 
92.08, 92.99


O-207
 
3-4-2019
 
3-14-2019
 
12.035


O-208
 
3-18-2019
 
3-28-2019
 
14.36


O-209
 
4-1-2019
 
4-11-2019
 
151.001, 151.002, 151.004, 151.110 — 151.117


O-210
 
5-6-2019
 
5-16-2019
 
12.039


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


