CITY CODE OF SOUTHFIELD, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Originally published 1976 
Republished 1985, 1998, 2009, 2014 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SOUTHFIELD, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Kenson J. Siver 
Mayor 
____________ 
Daniel Brightwell, Council President 
Michael A. Mandelbaum, President Pro Tem 
Donald F. Fracassi 
Tawnya Morris 
Linnie Taylor 
City Council 
____________ 
Frederick E. Zorn 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Sue Ward-Witkowski 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Irv M. Lowenberg 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Sherikia L. Hawkins, CMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This volume is a republication of the 2009 edition of the Code of the City of Southfield, Michigan, as amended through Ordinance 1567, enacted February 17, 2009. The original arrangement and the original numbering system have been retained. Obvious typographical errors and misspellings have been corrected without notation. Ordinances through Ordinance No. 1624, published April 28, 2014, have been added. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southfield, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: table of contents, prechapter section analyses, editor's notes, cross references, code comparative table and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southfield, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southfield, Michigan. 2014. 
    The following paragraphs are reprinted from the preface of the 1985 Code: 
This volume, as originally published, constituted the 1976 codification of the general ordinances of the City of Southfield, Michigan. It contained such of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature passed before October 13, 1975, as were found desirable for retention, except those expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. 
This volume, as now republished, contains ordinances passed subsequently through October 9, 1984. Future ordinances will be included in Supplements, and the date of the latest ordinance will be shown on the instruction sheet for handling supplemental pages. 
The ordinances adopted prior to October 13, 1975, were originally codified, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Municipal Codification Services, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Cross references which tie related sections of the Code together have been included. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section was derived unamended from the 1976 codification. By use of the Code Comparative Table appearing in the back of the volume, the disposition of any ordinance section can be readily found. 
The general index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be updated periodically. Upon final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical references purposes. 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Laura L. Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 902 
    AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISION AND CODIFICATION OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD ENTITLED THE SOUTHFIELD CITY CODE, 1976 EDITION, AND TO PROVIDE A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS THEREOF. 
    THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD ORDAINS: 
1.  Pursuant to Act No. 46, Public Acts of 1960, State of Michigan, the City of Southfield hereby adopts the Southfield City Code, 1976 Edition, and the printing of said Code is hereby ordered. Said Code contains all ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature, as compiled, consolidated, amended, revised, rearranged, and codified in Titles I to X, inclusive of which Code at least one complete copy has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk, and shall there remain for public use and inspection. 
2.  The provisions of the Southfield City Code, 1976 Edition, shall be effective on and after April 22, 1976, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Southfield adopted prior to October 13, 1975 and not contained in such Code are hereby repealed upon the effective date of said Code, except that the Southfield Zoning Ordinance (sometimes referred to as Chapter 45 of the Southfield City Code), being City Ordinance No. 678, as amended, which is not presently contained in said Code, is not repealed, but is continued and maintained in full force and effect. 
3.  The ordinances of the City of Southfield of a general and permanent nature contained in the Southfield City Code, 1976 Edition, are amended, repealed, revised and rearranged in the particular title of said Code set out opposite the subject pertaining to such ordinances, to which reference is hereby made, as follows: 
SUBJECT TITLE OF CODE Administration I Utilities and Services II Parks and Public Grounds III Streets and Sidewalks IV Zoning and Planning V Food and Health VI Business and Trades VII Building Regulations VIII Police Regulations IX Traffic X  
4.  This ordinance shall be effective after publication in accordance with the Charter of the City of Southfield. 
5.  Whenever any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense by the Code adopted by this ordinance or in any other ordinance of the City or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the City under authority duly invested in him or it, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any said provision of such Code or any other ordinance of the City or such rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
6.  The repeal of any other ordinance or parts thereof by this ordinance shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance or ordinances and parts thereof, and such ordinance or ordinances and parts thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such ordinances and parts thereof and of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
7.  This ordinance is hereby declared to be an emergency ordinance which is deemed to be immediately necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Southfield, and is hereby ordered to take effect upon publication. 
/s/ DONALD F. FRACASSI 
      Mayor   /s/ PAT FLANNERY 
      City Clerk   Introduced: 04/19/76 
Enacted: 04/19/76 
Published: 04/22/76 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance Number Included/Omitted Supplement Number 1626 Included 1 1627 Included 1 1628 Included 1 1629 Included 1 1630 Included 1 1631 Included 1 1632 Included 1 1633 Included 1 1634 Included 1 1635 Included 1 1636 Included 1 1637 Included 1 1638 Included 1 1639 Included 1 1640 Included 1 1641 Included 1 1642 Included 1 1645 Included 1 1647 Included 1 1648 Included 1 1651 Included 1 1652 Included 1 1653 Included 1 1654 Included 1 1655 Included 1 1656 Included 1 1657 Included 1 1659 Included 1 1660 Included 1 1661 Included 1 1662 Included 1 1663 Included 1 1664 Included 2 1667 Included 2 1668 Included 2 1670 Included 2 1671 Included 2 1672 Included 2 1674 Included 2 1675 Included 2 1676 Omitted 2 1678 Included 2 1680 Included 2 1681 Included 2 1682 Included 2 1683 Included 3 1684 Included 3 1688 Included 3 1689 Included 3 1690 Included 3 1692 Included 3 1693 Included 3 1694 Included 3 1695 Included 3 1696 Included 3  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Home Rule Charter for the city has been set out as adopted on February 24, 1958. The original arrangement, including chapter and section numbers, headings and catchlines, has been retained. Some style and capitalization changes have been made by the editor. Amendments have been inserted in their proper places with the date of the election of each amendment enclosed within parentheses immediately following the amended section. If no history note follows a section it remains unchanged from the Charter as originally adopted. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, under God, by virtue of the authority granted by the constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, in order to promote efficient self-government, do hereby ordain and establish this Home Rule Charter for the City of Southfield. 
CHAPTER I. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Name and boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation hereby created under the provisions of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, known as the "City of Southfield," is a body corporate, and shall continue a municipal corporation in perpetuity. Said municipal corporation shall embrace the following described territory in the Township of Southfield, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom, in accordance with law: 
    "Town I North, Range 10 East, Southfield Township, Oakland County, Michigan," which township is bounded on the north by Fourteen Mile Road, on the East by Greenfield Road, on the south by Eight Mile Road (also known as Baseline Road), and on the west by Inkster Road, excepting therefrom the following described territories: 
(a)  Those territories previously incorporated; 
(b)  Part of Sections 4, 5, 8 and 9, Town 1 North, Range 10 East, Southfield Township, Oakland County, Michigan, described as beginning at the north one-quarter corner of said Section 4; thence southerly along the north and south one-quarter section line to the south one-quarter corner of said Section 4 or north one-quarter corner of said Section 9; thence southerly along north and south one-quarter section line to the center of said Section 9; thence easterly along the north line of Brooks Park Subdivision to the northeast corner of said subdivision; thence southerly along the east line of said subdivision to the southeast corner of Lot 13 of said subdivision; thence westerly along the south line of Lot 13 of said subdivision to the southwest corner of said Lot 13; thence northerly 60 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 12 of said subdivision; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 12, 11, 10 and 9 of said subdivision to the southwest corner of Lot 9 of said subdivision; thence southerly 60 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 8; thence westerly along the south line of Lot 8 of said subdivision to the southwest corner of Lot 8 of said subdivision; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 8 of said subdivision to the south line of Franklin River Heights subdivision; thence westerly along the southerly line of said Franklin River Heights subdivision to southwest corner of said subdivision; thence northerly along westerly line of said subdivision to northwest corner of said Franklin River Heights subdivision located in east and west one-quarter section line of said Section 9; thence westerly along east and west one-quarter section line of said Sections 9 and 8 to the westerly line of 150 feet Telegraph Road; thence northerly along said westerly line of Telegraph Road to the northerly line of said Section 5; thence easterly along northerly line of said Section 5 and 4 to the point of beginning; 
(c)  All those portions of Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 and all those portions of the north halves of Sections 7, 8, 9 and 10 not otherwise excepted hereby; 
(d)  Part of the northeast one-quarter of Section 23 in said Township of Southfield described as follows: Beginning at a point on the east line of said section located due north from the east quarter section corner 495 feet; thence west 202 feet; thence north 165 feet; thence east 202 feet; thence south 165 feet; to the point of beginning; 
(e)  Part of the southwest one-quarter of Section 14, in said Township of Southfield, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the west line of section north 0°2'30? east 222.0 feet from the southwest corner of said Section 14; thence north 89°59'30? east 408.71 feet; thence north 0°2'30? east 159.70 feet; thence north 89°57'30? west 228 feet; thence south 0°2'30? west 20 feet; thence north 89°57'30? west 180 feet to the west line of Section 14; thence south along said west line to the point of beginning. 
CHAPTER II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2.1. - General powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the city and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan including all powers, privileges and immunities which other cities are, or may be permitted to provide in their charters by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this Charter; and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
    The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city; the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, bylaws, orders and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the general laws of the state and the provisions of this Charter. 
CHAPTER III. - REGISTRATION, NOMINATION AND ELECTION 

Sec. 3.1. - Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Southfield shall consist of one ward. The council shall by ordinance, from time to time, establish convenient election precincts in accordance with this Charter and statutes. 
Sec. 3.2. - Registration. 
    The registration of electors of the City of Southfield shall be conducted in accordance with the election laws of the State of Michigan, and no person shall be entitled to vote at any election held in the City of Southfield unless such person shall be a duly registered elector thereof. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. The general election statutes shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relative to registration and city elections except as such statutes relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 3.3. - Nomination to office. 
    Candidates for any elective office to be voted for at any municipal election held under the provisions of this Charter, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, shall be nominated at a primary election, and no other name shall be placed upon the election ballot for the election of such officers except those nominated in the manner hereinafter prescribed; provided, however, that whenever the number of candidates for nomination to any office does not exceed twice the number to be elected to that office, then in such case no primary election for the nomination of candidates for such office shall be held, and such candidates shall be deemed to be nominated to such office, and the names of such candidates for any such office shall be placed upon the election ballot to be voted for at the next regular municipal election, the same in all respects as though the said candidates had been nominated at a primary election. 
Sec. 3.4. - Nonpartisan primary election; when held . 
    The first primary election for the nomination of candidates for elective office under the provisions of this Charter shall be held on the same day upon which the biennial spring primary election of the State of Michigan is held, being the third Monday in February, 1961, and thereafter on the third Monday in February of each odd-numbered year; provided, that if the date of holding such biennial spring primary election shall be changed by statute, thereupon the date so fixed for holding such biennial spring primary election shall be used for holding the primary election for the nomination of candidates for city offices under the provisions of this Charter. 
1 See Charter Appendix, item 1. 
Sec. 3.5. - Primary election dispensed with for elective officers initially provided by Charter. 
    The initial elective officers provided for in this Charter shall be nominated by filing nominating petitions as hereinafter required and only those persons who shall have the qualifications for elective offices, as hereinafter prescribed, shall have their names placed upon the ballot for the respective elective offices at the election at which this Charter shall be voted upon. 
Sec. 3.6. - Nominating petition. 
    Each candidate for any elective office shall at the time that the statement of candidacy is filed with the clerk also file therewith a petition, placing in nomination the name of such candidate, which petition shall be signed by not less than two hundred (200) qualified and registered electors of the city. Such petition shall be verified by one (1) or more persons as to the qualifications and residence of each of the persons so signing the petition, and such petition shall be in substantially the form provided by the secretary of state for the nomination of nonpartisan officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the city clerk for distribution. 
Sec. 3.7. - Time for filing nominating petition and statement of candidacy. 
    Nominating petitions shall be filed in the office of the clerk not later than the seventh Tuesday at 4:00 p.m., preceding the date of holding a primary election pursuant to the provisions of Act 239 of the Public Acts of 1970; and shall also file a certificate of candidacy, the form of which shall be supplied by the clerk. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 3.8. - Checking of petitions. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk to check each nominating petition filed in his office within five (5) days after the date of filing, to ascertain whether or not such petition conforms with the provisions of this Charter, and if after such investigation, the clerk determines that such petition complies with the provisions of this Charter, the clerk shall thereupon attach thereto, his certificate to that effect. If, however, such petition does not conform with the provisions of this Charter, the clerk shall notify the candidate filing such petition of such fact, and the reasons for such rejection, within a twenty-four-hour period. Additional petitions may be filed within the time limit specified in section 3.7 hereof, and not thereafter. 
Sec. 3.9. - Notice of primary election. 
    Notice of primary election shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the state election law. 
Sec. 3.10. - Primary ballot form and preparation of voting machines. 
    The form, printing, numbering and distribution of ballots, or the preparation of voting machines used in any primary election shall conform as nearly as may be to the provisions of the state election law, except that no party designation or emblem shall be used in any primary election for city officers. 
Sec. 3.11. - Canvass of the returns of the primary election. 
    The board of canvassers shall meet at the council chambers at a time to be set by the clerk, on the Thursday following such primary election, and shall canvass the returns filed with the clerk, and shall determine the results thereof. Such meeting shall be public, and after the results have been determined, the same shall be published in a manner to be prescribed by the board of canvassers. The board of canvassers, after determination of the results of such election, shall certify this determination to the clerk. 
(Referendum of 11-4-03) 
Sec. 3.12. - Who are nominated. 
    When only one (1) person is to be elected to any one (1) office, then the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for nomination to that office shall be the candidates and the only candidates, whose names shall be placed upon the ballot for that office at the regular municipal election. When more than one (1) person is to be elected to any office, then the candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to that office, receiving the highest number of votes for said office, and no others, shall be placed upon the ballot as candidates for said office at the next regular municipal election. 
    In addition to the foregoing, those candidates who have filed petitions for an elective office where no primary contest is involved shall likewise be determined to be nominated. 
Sec. 3.13. - Regular election; when held . 
    The first regular election for the election of elective city officers under the provisions of this Charter shall be held on the same day upon which the biennial spring election of the State of Michigan is held, being the first Monday of April in 1961, and thereafter on the first Monday of April of each odd-numbered year; provided, that if the date of holding such spring biennial election shall be changed by statute thereupon the date so fixed for holding such biennial spring election shall be used for holding the regular election for the election of elective city officers under the provisions of this Charter. 
2 See Charter Appendix, item 2. 
Sec. 3.14. - Notice of regular election. 
    Notice of a regular election shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the state election law. 
Sec. 3.15. - Ballot for regular election. 
    The clerk shall prepare the official ballot and the voting machines for the regular election, upon which shall be placed the names of the candidates who have been duly nominated for the respective elective offices, and the printing and delivery of the ballots and the preparation of the voting machines shall be in accordance with election laws of the State of Michigan, provided, that no party designation or emblem shall be used. 
Sec. 3.16. - Inspectors of election. 
    The election commission shall appoint the members of the board of election inspectors, and the council shall fix their compensation. 
Sec. 3.17. - Oath of election inspectors. 
    The inspectors of election shall qualify under oath, as required by the election laws of the State of Michigan. 
Sec. 3.18. - Conduct of elections. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. All elections conducted under the provisions of this Charter shall be in accordance with the election laws of the State of Michigan, except as such election laws related to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 3.19. - Special elections. 
    Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of the council at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election or when required by this Charter or the statutes of the State of Michigan. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. Special elections shall be conducted in conformity with the provisions of the election laws of the State of Michigan, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 3.20. - Notice of special election. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any special election shall be given in the same manner and at the same time as provided by the election laws of the State of Michigan. 
Sec. 3.21. - Voting hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by the election laws of the State of Michigan relating to the opening and closing of polls at state elections. 
Sec. 3.22. - Canvass of the vote. 
    Immediately upon the closing of the polls, the board of election inspectors in each precinct shall count the ballots and ascertain the number of votes cast in such precinct for each of the candidates and upon each of the questions and propositions voted upon, and shall make immediate return thereof to the clerk upon blanks to be furnished by the clerk. 
Sec. 3.23. - Canvass of the returns. 
    The board of canvassers shall convene at the council chambers at a time to be set by the clerk, on the Thursday following any regular or special election, and shall canvass the results of such election, and shall determine the vote upon city questions and propositions, and shall declare whether the same have been duly adopted or rejected, and what persons have been duly elected at such election to the several city offices voted upon thereat. 
(Referendum of 11-4-03) 
Sec. 3.24. - Who elected. 
    The person receiving the highest number of votes for any office shall be deemed to have been duly elected to that office. If more than one (1) person is to be elected to any office, then the persons equal in number to the number to be elected to that office receiving the highest number of votes for that office, shall be deemed to have been duly elected to that office. Upon the completion of the canvass of the returns, the boards of canvassers shall publish the results of such canvass. 
Sec. 3.25. - Certificates of election. 
    Upon such determination, the clerk shall make in duplicate, certificates, under the corporate seal of the city, of such determination. One (1) of such certificates shall be filed in the office of the county clerk, and the other in the office of the city clerk, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk within five (5) days after such determination has been made, to furnish each successful candidate with a certificate of election, which certificate shall indicate the fact that such person has been duly elected to the office specified therein, and such certificate shall be delivered to such person within five (5) days after determination of the election as aforesaid. 
Sec. 3.26. - Qualifying. 
    All persons elected to any office of the City of Southfield, under the provisions of this Charter, shall within ten (10) days after receiving certificate of election take and subscribe to the constitutional oath of office and file the same in the office of the clerk. No person shall take office until he has qualified by taking and subscribing to said oath, and by filing any bond that may be required under the provisions of this Charter or by any of the statutes of the State of Michigan. 
Sec. 3.27. - Supplies and equipment. 
    The council shall provide all necessary voting booths, voting machines, equipment, ballot boxes and supplies for the conducting of all elections and primaries. 
Sec. 3.28. - Procedure where state and county election held at same time. 
    When any city election or primary is held on the same day as a state or county election or primary, the same election officials shall act in both the city and state or county election or primary. 
Sec. 3.29. - Election commission. 
    An election commission, consisting of the city clerk, the mayor, and the city attorney is hereby created and such commission shall have the power and it shall be their duty to supervise the conducting of all primary, regular and special elections. 
Sec. 3.30. - Board of canvassers. 
    The board of canvassers shall be appointed and serve in the manner provided by Act 65 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 3.31. - Where candidates tied. 
    If, at any regular or primary election, there shall be no choice between candidates, by reason of two (2) or more candidates having received an equal number of votes, the council shall appoint a date at which time the right to nomination or election shall be determined by lot. Notice of the time and place at which such determination shall be made shall be given to all persons interested therein at least (12) hours prior to the time at which such determination is to be made, such notice to be given by the clerk and shall be at the last or usual place of abode of the persons interested in such determination. This manner of determining by lot shall be the same as provided by the general election laws of the state for such determination in case of a tie vote for a county office. In no case, however, shall the nomination or election of any person be determined by lot without first having the ballots cast at such regular or primary election recounted and such recount shall be held at the instance of the council. 
Sec. 3.32. - Recount. 
    The provisions of the election laws of the State of Michigan shall control all proceedings in connection with a recount of the ballots cast at any election held in the City of Southfield. 
Sec. 3.33. - Filing statement of campaign expenses. 
    Every elective officer shall file such campaign expense statements and reports in the manner and at such times as required by Act 388 of the Public Acts of 1977. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 3.34. - Recall. 
    Any elected officer may be recalled from office in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER IV. - LEGISLATIVE DIVISION 

Sec. 4.1. - City council; how constituted; term of office. 
(a)  There shall be a council of seven (7) members. Subject only to limitations and exceptions provided by this Charter or other provisions of law, all powers of the city shall be vested in and exercised by the council, which shall constitute the legislative body of the city, and which shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances, and resolutions as it may deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases, where the word "council" is used in this Charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "commission", or any other term used in any state or federal law referring to municipal, legislative, or governing bodies. 
(b)  At the regular city election held in the year 1963, and at each regular city election thereafter, there shall be elected four (4) members of the council, the three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for such office shall hold their offices for a term of four (4) years, and the candidate receiving the next highest number of votes for such office shall hold his office for a term of two (2) years. All such terms of office shall commence at 8:00 p.m., on the second Monday following the city election, at which they are elected and shall end when their respective successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
(c)  The council, at its second regular meeting in November of each year, shall elect a presiding officer, to be known as council president, and shall also elect a council president pro tem. The term of each such office shall be one (1) year, unless the officer is sooner removed by a vote of at least five (5) members, in which case council shall elect a successor for the unexpired term. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79; Referendum of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 4.2. - Compensation of the councilmen . 
    Each councilman shall receive as compensation, twenty dollars ($20.00) for each regular and special meeting of the council which he attends, provided that such compensation shall not exceed in total the sum of nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00) per calendar year. 
    Such salary shall be payable quarterly, and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid to the councilmen for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the city during their term of office, provided, that the councilmen may be paid such bona fide expenses previously authorized by the council and incurred in behalf of the city, which expenses shall be itemized and certified to by the recipient and approved for payment by the council. 
3 See Charter Appendix, item 3. 
Sec. 4.3. - Regular meetings. 
    The council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next regular day which is not a holiday. 
Sec. 4.4. - Special meetings . 
(a)  Special meetings shall be called by the city clerk on the written request of the mayor, or president of the council, or any three (3) councilmen, on at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each councilman, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but any special meeting shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without such notice if all councilmen are present thereat or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
(b)  No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting; provided, however, that any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at such special meeting, if all the members present consent thereto, and all members absent file their written consent. 
4 See Charter Appendix, item 4. 
Sec. 4.5. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all council meetings. The council may, by a majority vote of those present, compel the attendance of its members, and other officers of the city at its meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein. No councilman shall vote on any question in which he has any financial interest other than the common public interest; but on all other questions, every councilman present shall be entitled to vote. On all votes which are not unanimous, upon the request of any member, the yea or nay vote of each member shall be recorded by roll call. Where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. 
Sec. 4.6. - Rules. 
    The council shall determine its own rules, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings in the English language which shall be signed by the city clerk and the president of the council. All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public. A summary of the council proceedings at each meeting shall be prepared by the city clerk and published in the official newspaper. 
Sec. 4.7. - Public health and safety. 
    Through the established departments and agencies of the city government, together with any such departments or agencies as may be created under authority of the Charter, the council shall provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property. 
Sec. 4.8. - Licenses and permits. 
    The council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses and permits may be granted, suspended or revoked and may require and exact payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses and permits as it may deem proper. 
Sec. 4.9. - Contracts and purchases. 
    The council shall approve all contracts and shall provide by ordinance, terms and conditions governing purchases and contracts. All purchases of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be by sealed, competitive bid and authorized by council. Purchases below ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made by the city administrator without specific authorization or the necessity of sealed, competitive bids or both. The council, in its discretion, shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79; Referendum of 11-7-89; Referendum of 11-13-01) 
Sec. 4.10. - Streets and alleys. 
    The council shall have power to establish and vacate, to use and to control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, whether such public places be located within or without the limits of the city, and the space above and beneath them; provided that no street or alley shall be closed until after the publication of the intent to do so in at least two (2) of the local newspapers and a notice sent, by registered mail, to all property owners of adjacent property at their last known addresses, as taken from the current tax rolls, and a reasonable opportunity has been given for the public to be heard thereon. Such power shall include but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof and the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks or streets upon or over the sidewalks or streets in the city, and the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in the sidewalks or streets, and of all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. 
Sec. 4.11. - Property rights. 
    The council shall have the power to acquire for the city by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction, or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits, and either within or without the County of Oakland, property of every type and nature which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purpose, powers, and duties of the city government established by this chapter. The council shall have the power to provide for the maintenance, development, operation, leasing and disposal of property of the city subject to any restrictions placed thereupon by law. 
Sec. 4.12. - Parks and recreational facilities. 
    The council shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance and protection of all parks and recreational facilities, together with the improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the city either within or without its corporate limits. 
    The city council shall, in its annual estimates make provisions for a parks and recreation fund, which shall not exceed 1.75 mills on the assessed valuation of the property to be assessed for city purposes, and the amount so provided shall be levied and collected each year in the same manner and at the same time as other city taxes. The proceeds of this levy may be used to support a bond issue or maintenance, or be placed in a "sinking fund" for future use. The funds above provided for shall be disbursed only on the order of the parks and recreation board, and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to draw warrants upon said fund upon the order of the said board, and it shall be his duty, as ex officio treasurer of said board, to pay such warrants. 
(Referendum of 8-8-78) 
Sec. 4.13. - Cemetery regulations. 
    The council shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance and protection of cemeteries, together with the improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the city within or without its corporate limits. All ordinances pertaining to public health and welfare in the regulation and protection of public cemeteries shall apply equally to all cemeteries within the city belonging to or under the control of, any church or religious society, or any corporation, company or association. The city may cause any bodies buried within the city, in violation of any rule or ordinance made in respect to such burials, to be taken up and reburied in such a manner as shall conform to the ordinances of the city, or to be buried elsewhere. In any cemetery established by the city, a plan for the platting, sale and perpetual care of all lots, plots and lands therein shall be provided. 
Sec. 4.14. - Trusts. 
    The council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for parks, cemetery, or other municipal purposes and shall apply the same to the execution of such trusts and for no other purposes whatsoever. All trusts established for cemetery, park or other municipal purposes shall be used and continue in accordance with the terms of such trusts. 
Sec. 4.15. - House trailers, and/or mobile homes. 
    The council may, by ordinance, provide for the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers and/or mobile homes within the city. The right of the council to so regulate any house trailer and/or mobile home shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever. 
Sec. 4.16. - Planning and zoning. 
(a)  The council shall create and maintain a city planning commission in accordance with and having the powers and duties granted by the provisions of state law relating to such commissions. The council shall also create, adopt and maintain a zoning ordinance in accordance with the provisions of state law relating to such ordinances. Insofar as may be, the provisions of such ordinance shall be coordinated with the work of the city planning commission, herein required to be appointed and maintained by the council. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members to be selected by the council, none of whom shall hold any other appointive or elective office, and the zoning board of appeals shall elect its own chairman from its membership. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 4.17. - Investigation. 
    The council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure on the part of any officer of the city to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section, shall constitute misconduct in office. If such failure shall be on the part of any employee of the city, the same shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 4.18. - Council action. 
    The council shall act only by ordinance or resolution. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter shall mean official action in the form of a motion and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this Charter or by state law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the council, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.19. - Ordinance enactment. 
    Except as herein otherwise may be provided in this Charter, the council shall have the power to adopt, continue, amend and repeal in whole or in part any existing ordinance. All legislation of the City of Southfield shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances passed by the council shall be "The City of Southfield Ordains:" Except in the case of ordinances which are declared to be emergency ordinances, no ordinances shall be finally passed by the council at the same meeting at which it is introduced. No ordinance shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered or amended shall be re-enacted, and published at length, and all ordinances, when enacted, shall be immediately recorded by the clerk in a book to be called "The Record of Ordinances," and it shall be the duty of the mayor and clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures thereon. 
    All ordinances shall be published within ten (10) days after the regular meeting of the council next following the meeting at which said ordinance was adopted, provided such ordinance shall have been passed by the council over any veto which may have been exercised by the mayor. The publication of any ordinance in full as a part of the published proceedings of the council shall constitute the publication of such ordinance as required herein. 
Sec. 4.20. - Veto. 
    The mayor shall have the power to veto all ordinances, resolutions and proceedings of the council, which veto, with his reasons therefor in writing, must be made and filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days and distributed to the council forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time of the next regular meeting of the council. The council may, only at said meeting or at any adjournment thereof, reconsider the vote by which such proceedings were passed and adopted; and if it so elects, may, only at said meetings or at any adjournment thereof, readopt such proceedings by an affirmative vote of five (5) of the members elect, in which event the mayor shall have no further right to veto, and in which event, all such proceedings, except ordinances, shall take effect on the day succeeding said meeting of the council; and ordinances so passed shall become effective when published according to law. All resolutions and proceedings, not vetoed by the mayor in this manner and within the time hereinbefore specified, shall become effective on the day succeeding the date of the next regular meeting of the council; and ordinances not so vetoed by the mayor shall become effective when published and recorded according to the law. 
Sec. 4.21. - Penalties. 
    The council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. No punishment for the violation of any city ordinance shall exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Said imprisonment may be in the county jail or city prison, or any workhouse in the state authorized by law to receive prisoners from said city. 
Sec. 4.22. - Technical codes. 
    The council may adopt any provision of state law, or any detailed technical regulations as a city ordinance or code by citation of such provision of state law, or by reference to any recognized standard code, official or unofficial; provided that any such provision of state law or recognized official or unofficial standard code shall be clearly identified in the ordinance adopting the same as an ordinance of the city. Where any recognized official or unofficial standard code is so adopted, it shall be published in the manner provided by law; and a reasonable number of copies shall be available in the office of the city clerk for inspections by the public and for distribution at reasonable cost. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 4.23. - Ordinance record. 
    All ordinances and the dates of introduction and enactment and the vote thereon, shall be recorded by the city clerk in said book called "The Record of Ordinances." Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all ordinances when enacted shall be forthwith published by the city clerk and he shall enter his certificate as to the manner and date of publication under each ordinance in the ordinance book. All ordinances may be printed and distributed at a cost to be determined by the council. 
Sec. 4.24. - Compilation of ordinances. 
(a)  Copies of all ordinances which are in effect and all amendments to this Charter shall be prepared and kept on hand in the office of the clerk available for public distribution. The clerk shall also maintain and make available for public distribution, a complete up-to-date index of all ordinances in effect. 
(b)  Whenever an existing ordinance is amended, said ordinance together with the amendment shall forthwith be compiled by the clerk so that the ordinance, as then effective, shall be available for public distribution. 
(c)  The clerk shall also maintain in his office, for use by the public, at least three (3) complete compilations of all the effective ordinances of the city property indexed. 
Sec. 4.25. - Initiative and referendum. 
(a)  An ordinance may be initiated by petition or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the council may be had by a petition, filed on or before the thirtieth day subsequent to enactment of the ordinance; as hereinafter provided. An initiatory or a referenda petition shall be signed by registered electors equal in number to ten (10) percent of those who voted at the last general city election prior to the filing of the petition, or one thousand (1,000), whichever is the greater, and before being circulated for signatures shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Any person circulating the petition shall be a registered voter in the City of Southfield. The petition shall be filed with the city clerk who shall determine within fifteen (15) days, the sufficiency thereof and so certify. When found sufficient, the city clerk shall present the petition to the council at its next regular meeting. 
(b)  Upon receiving an initiatory or a referendary petition from the city clerk, the council within thirty (30) days shall either: 
(1)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance; 
(2)  If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance, or; 
(3)  Determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
(c)  Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose or in the discretion of the council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by the majority vote of the electors voting thereon except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
(d)  The certification by the city clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition shall automatically suspend the ordinance in question pending repeal by the council or final determination by the electors, as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed by the council for a period of two (2) years, and then only by an affirmative vote of five (5) councilmen. Should two (2) or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
(Referendum of Nov. 6, 2007) 
Sec. 4.26. - Power of council over salaries and compensation. 
    The council shall have no power to change the salary or compensation of its members. The salary or compensation of all other elected or appointed officers may be fixed, reduced or increased by the council at any time, except that the salary or emoluments of any public official, shall not be changed after his election or appointment for a fixed term of office, or during his term of office. 
Sec. 4.27. - Additional powers; parking facilities; gas stations; regulation of trades; billboards. 
    The council shall also have the power to provide by ordinance: 
(a)  For the acquiring, establishing, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, including the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose, to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise the land necessary thereof; 
(b)  For regulating and restricting the locations of oil and gasoline stations in the city; 
(c)  For the regulation of trades, occupations and amusements within the boundaries of the city, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and for the prohibition of such trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city; and 
(d)  For licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of billboards within the city. 
CHAPTER V. - EXECUTIVE DIVISION 

Sec. 5.1. - Administrative officers; employees. 
    The administrative officers of the city shall be the mayor, city clerk, city treasurer, and all directors and heads of the several departments, and all members of the several commissions and boards of the city government. All other persons in the service or employ of the city shall be deemed employees. 
Sec. 5.2. - Election; appointment; terms. 
    The mayor, city clerk and city treasurer shall be selected by election from the city at large. Said elective officers shall be selected at a regular city election. The term of office of all of the said elective officers shall be for four (4) years commencing at 8:00 p.m. on the second Monday following the city election at which they are elected and ending when their respective successors have been duly elected and qualified. All other officers and members of boards and commissions, unless otherwise in this Charter provided, shall be appointed by a majority of the council. Each appointive office or member of any board or commission, unless otherwise provided in this Charter shall hold office at the pleasure of the officer or body appointing him. 
(Referendums of 5-16-72, 11-6-79) 
Sec. 5.3. - Qualifications. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible for any elective office of the city, unless he is a duly qualified and registered elector in the city and has continuously resided in the area incorporated into the city for at least one (1) year immediately prior to his appointment to such elective office or the election at which he is a candidate; and so remains through his tenure of office. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of violating any provision of the election laws of the state or of the city, or who has been convicted, as an adult, of a felony, or of any offense involving a violation of his oath of office, or who is in default to the city, shall be eligible for any city office or employment. A criminal history background check shall be conducted to determine if a person is ineligible for any city office or employment pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  Unless otherwise in this Charter specifically provided, or required by law, no person shall hold simultaneously, any elective or appointive office in the city and any other elective public office, federal, state, county, or otherwise; provided, however, that the foregoing provisions shall not be construed as to bar the appointment of any elective officer of the city from membership on the Oakland County Board of Supervisors or on any joint board or commission having representation from the city and one (1) or more units of government. 
(d)  Any person, who holds or has held any elective office of the city, shall not be eligible for appointment to a city office or employment for which compensation is paid by the city, except for a position on a city board or commission, until after one (1) year has elapsed following the term for which he was elected. No person shall be a candidate for more than one (1) office on the same ballot at the same election. 
(e)  No incumbent elective city officer shall become a candidate for any elective city office, except to succeed himself or herself, without first resigning from his or her then incumbent, elective city office. Provided, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any incumbent, elective city officer whose term of office will expire with the election at which he or she is to be a candidate for another elective city office. A person shall be deemed a candidate upon the filing of nominating petitions for such office. 
(Referendum of 11-3-92; Referendum of 11-7-89; Referendum of 11-13-01; Referendum of 11-8-05) 
Sec. 5.4. - Compensation . 
    The salary of the mayor shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per annum, that of the city treasurer and city clerk, seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per annum respectively, until such time as the council may change the same pursuant to the authority granted under section 4.26 of this Charter. Except as otherwise provided by law, or by this Charter, the salary, compensation and allowance for expenses of other administrative officers shall be fixed by the council. 
    Such salary shall be payable semimonthly and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the city during the term of office and they may be paid such bona filed [fide] expenses incurred in behalf of the city, which expenses shall be itemized and certified to by the recipient and approved for payment by the council. 
5 See Charter Appendix, item 5. 
Sec. 5.5. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall, in addition to any powers and duties otherwise provided by law, have powers and duties as follows: 
(a)  He shall execute or authenticate by his signature, such instruments as the council, this Charter, or any state or federal law shall require; he shall validate all bonds, notes, and contracts to which the city is a party, by his signature, along with that of the clerk; 
(b)  He shall appoint, with approval of the council, the city attorney, assessor and planner; 
(c)  He shall review the budget as received from the city administrator, and deliver it to the council with his recommendations; 
(d)  He shall give the council information concerning the affairs of the city and recommend such measures as he deems expedient; 
(e)  He shall, in emergencies, have the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs to prevent disorder, preserve the public peace and health, and provide for the safety of persons and property; 
(f)  He shall be the ceremonial head of the city; 
(g)  He may attend all council meetings and take part in all discussions, but he shall not have the right to vote; 
(h)  He shall be responsible for the establishment of a civil defense organization and may appoint a director; 
(i)  He shall have veto powers as provided in section 4.20 of this Charter; 
(j)  He, or his designated representative, shall act as liaison agent of the city in all matters between the city and other municipalities and political bodies. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
Sec. 5.6. - Mayor pro tem. 
    In case of vacancy in the office of mayor, or his inability to perform the duties of the office by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the president of the council shall be acting mayor; and in case, at the time, there shall be a vacancy in the office of the president of the council, or he shall be unable to perform the duties of his office, by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the president pro tempore of the council shall be acting mayor. Such acting mayor shall be vested with all the powers, and shall perform all the duties of mayor until the vacancy or vacancies aforesaid be filled, or mayor or president of the council, as the case may be, shall resume his office. In case of vacancy in the office of mayor, the council shall order a special election to fill such vacancy for the residue of the term to be held as soon as legally possible, unless it shall occur within one (1) year before the time for holding the regular election, in which event the council may, in its discretion, order such election. 
(Referendum of 11-7-72; Referendum of 11-13-01) 
Sec. 5.7. - Powers and duties of the clerk. 
(a)  The clerk shall be clerk of the council and shall attend all meetings of the council and keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language; 
(b)  He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions and actions of the council; 
(c)  He shall have power to administer all oaths required by state law, this Charter and the ordinances of the city; 
(d)  He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same; 
(e)  He shall be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City of Southfield, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this Charter; 
(f)  He shall give to the proper officials of the city ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts or agreements; 
(g)  He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the City; 
(h)  He shall classify, approve, sign and record all vouchers for payment from budget accounts; 
(i)  He shall issue and sign all licenses granted after the license fee has been paid to the city treasurer and shall register the same; 
(j)  He shall possess and exercise the powers of a township clerk so far as the same are required to be performed within the city; 
(k)  He shall certify by his signature, all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the council; 
(l)  He shall perform such other duties as are required of him by state or federal law, this Charter, and the council or the ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 5.8. - Powers and duties of treasurer. 
(a)  The treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the city, the clerk's bond and all evidence of value belonging to the city, or held in trust by the city; 
(b)  He shall receive all monies belonging to and receivable by the city, that may be collected by any official or employees of the city, including license fees, taxes, assessments, utility charges and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city, and shall in all cases give a receipt therefor; 
(c)  He shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the clerk; 
(d)  He shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county and school district and city taxes and monies as are conferred by law to enforce the collection of state, county, township and school district taxes upon real and personal property; 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by state or federal law, this Charter, ordinances of the city, or by the mayor or the council. 
Sec. 5.9. - Deputies of clerk and treasurer. 
    The clerk and treasurer may appoint their own deputies, subject to the written confirmation of the city council. Such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers, except as the same may be, from time to time, limited by their superiors or by the city council. 
CHAPTER VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION 

Sec. 6.1. - City administration. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a city administrator, and shall have authority to enter into a contract of employment therefore, providing that such contract shall not be for a term in excess of two (2) years. The council may extend the term of such contract for a similar term or terms, providing such extension or extensions shall not be made until thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the contract term of employment. 
    The administrator shall be selected upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his training and experience, and without regard to his political or religious preference. 
    The administrator shall be required to become a resident of the City of Southfield within six (6) months after appointment, or such additional time as shall be determined by the council. 
(b)  The city administrator's functions and duties shall be: 
1.  To be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the city government except the departments under the direction of the clerk, treasurer, attorney, assessor, and planner; 
2.  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
3.  To appoint, with the consent of the council, the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this Charter and to discharge such department heads with the consent of the council and to direct and supervise such department heads; 
4.  To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts, or agreements; 
5.  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
6.  To recommend an annual budget to the mayor and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the council and to keep the mayor and the council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
7.  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend council meetings with the right to take part in discussions, but not to vote; 
8.  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed by this Charter, or by ordinance, upon some other official; 
9.  To maintain a centralized system of accounting for the city, which shall conform to any uniform system required by law and by the council, and to generally accepted principles and procedure of governmental accounting, including books of accounts of assets, receipts, and expenditures. He shall prepare and submit monthly financial statements to the council; 
10.  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be required of him by ordinance, or by direction of the council. 
(c)  The city administrator may appoint a deputy city administrator with the consent of the city council. In case of a vacancy in the office of the city administrator or the inability to perform the duties of the office by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, such deputy shall possess all the powers and authority of the city administrator. 
(Referendum of 11-4-03) 
Sec. 6.2. - City attorney. 
(a)  The attorney shall be attorney and counsel for the city and shall be responsible solely to the council. He shall advise the heads of administrative units in matters relating to their official duties, when so requested and shall file with the clerk, a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)  He shall conduct for the city, all cases in all courts and before all legally constituted tribunals whenever the city is a party thereto. He shall file with the clerk, copies of such records and files relating thereto as the council may direct. 
(c)  He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, contracts, bonds and such other instruments as may be required by this Charter or by the council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)  He shall attend all meetings of the council when so directed by the council. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or the council. 
(f)  He may, with the approval of the council, delegate one (1) or more of his duties to an assistant who shall be appointed by the attorney and whose compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(g)  Upon the attorney's recommendations, or upon its own initiative, the council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist the attorney therein. 
Sec. 6.3. - Administrative departments. 
    The following administrative departments are hereby established: 
(a)  Department of law; 
(b)  Department of assessment; 
(c)  Department of civil service; 
(d)  Police department; 
(e)  Fire department; 
(f)  Department of public works; 
(g)  Department of health; 
(h)  Department of parks and recreation; 
(i)  Department of planning; 
(j)  Department of building and safety engineering; 
(k)  Department of water supply. 
    The council may create or abolish a department of health, and such other departments, boards, commissions or agencies as it may deem necessary in conformity with law and the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.4. - City assessor. 
(a)  The city assessor shall possess all the powers vested in him and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon him by law, this Charter or ordinances or resolutions of the council. 
(b)  He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter and the general laws of the state. 
Sec. 6.5. - Department of civil service. 
    In order to guarantee to all citizens a fair and equal opportunity for public service, to establish conditions of service, which will attract officers and employees of character and capacity and to increase the efficiency of the city government through improved principles of public personnel administration, there is hereby created a department of civil service, which shall be under the control and management of a commission to be known as the civil service commission. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the police department and the fire department in the City of Southfield, but that said departments shall be covered by Act 78 of the Public Acts of 1935, as amended, or as hereafter may be amended. The organization, powers, duties, and functions of the civil service commission and the civil service system shall be as follows: 
(a)  Organization: The civil service commission shall consist of three (3) member appointed by the council for terms of office of six (6) years, commencing on the third Monday in April, except that the first members appointed under this Charter shall serve for the following terms: One (1) member shall be appointed for a term expiring on the third Monday in April, 1959; one (1) member, for a term expiring on the third Monday in April, 1961; and one (1) member, for a term expiring on the third Monday in April, 1963; and thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a regular six (6) year term. The members of the commission shall be persons in sympathy with the application of merit principles to public employment. No member of the commission shall hold any other elective or appointive office of the city, nor be employed by the city in any capacity, nor be a member of any local, state, or national committee of a political party, nor be an officer or member of a committee of any partisan, political club or organization, nor be a candidate for any elective office. The system of civil service shall become effective upon the adoption of this Charter. The first appointments of members of the commission shall be made not later than thirty (30) days thereafter. The members of the commission shall receive for their services such compensation as shall be determined by the council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Two (2) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of the business of the commission. The council may remove any member of the commission, but only after serving such member with a statement in writing of the reasons for such removal and allowing such member to be publicly heard in his defense. The commissioner, whose term of office shall next expire, shall serve as chairman of the commission. The council shall also appoint an alternate member to serve on the commission for a six (6) year term with the initial term of office to commence on February 1, 2004. The alternate member shall serve in the place of a regular member who is absent. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the commission. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the commission: In order to carry out and make effective the purpose and intent of the provisions of this Charter in establishing a civil service system, the civil service commission shall: 
1.  Classify all positions in the classified civil service according to their respective duties and responsibilities; fix rates of compensation for all classes or positions; approve or disapprove disbursements for all personal services; determine by competitive performance, exclusively on the basis of merit, efficiency and fitness, the qualifications of all candidates for positions in the classified civil service, make rules and regulations covering all personnel transactions, and regulate all conditions of employment in the classified civil service. No person shall be appointed to or promoted in the classified civil service who has not been certified as so qualified for such appointment or promotion by the commission. 
2.  Prepare and/or recommend to the council, amend as necessary and administer an insurance and disability plan, a retirement plan, and a medical program. Provided, no such plan nor any amendment thereto shall become effective until approved by the council. When once approved, no such plan shall be abandoned or amended in a manner to jeopardize the rights of any employee included thereunder. 
3.  Investigate and enforce the provisions of this section of the Charter, and, through its authorized representatives or its own members, administer oaths and subpoena and compel attendance of witnesses and the production of records in connection with any matter properly before it. 
4.  Make annual reports of its activities to the council and such special requests as may be requested by the council. 
5.  Contract for such technical personnel services and advice as may be reasonably necessary to performance of the foregoing duties. 
(c)  The unclassified and classified service: The civil service of the city shall be divided into unclassified and classified service. The unclassified service shall specifically include officers elected by popular vote, persons appointed to fill vacancies in such elective offices, directors, and heads of all city departments, and all members of boards and commissions required by law or this Charter to be appointed; except that the unclassified service shall not include the chief of police and the chief of the fire department. The classified service shall comprise all other positions in the city not specifically included by this Charter in the unclassified service, including, but not limited to, all positions now or hereafter established in all of the departments, divisions, administrative offices of the city. Any board, commission, or department constituted by law a body corporate, shall be included in the classified service unless specifically excluded by the provisions of this Charter. 
(d)  Veterans' preference: The commission shall establish fair and equitable rules, not inconsistent with law, for the granting of preference points to war veterans on examination for entrance into the service. 
(e)  Status of employees upon adoption of Charter: All persons in the employ of the Township of Southfield in the classified service at the time this Charter shall become effective, if they shall so elect, shall be deemed to have regular status and shall hold similar positions in the city without examination. All other persons entering the classified service and all employees promoted after the adoption of this Charter shall obtain their positions through examinations. 
(f)  Filling of vacancies by promotion: Whenever possible, vacancies shall be filled by promotion. An appointing authority may, for the good of the service, elect to fill a vacancy by appointing a person from the open, competitive eligible list rather than from the promotional, eligible list. Any classified employee, who shall be promoted to an unclassified position, may be granted a leave by the commission for a specified period of time, not to exceed six (6) months, with the right to return to a classified position of equal status. 
(g)  Removal procedures and appeals: Any employee or officer in the classified civil service may be removed, suspended, or demoted by the appointing authority for cause, as shall be established by the civil service commission, by an order in writing, stating specifically the reasons therefor. A copy of such order shall be filed with the commission. Such employee may, within ten (10) days after presentation of such order to him, appeal from such order to the civil service commission. The commission shall, within two (2) weeks from the filing of such appeal, commence the hearings thereon, and shall thereupon hear and determine the matter and either affirm, modify, or evoke such order. The appellant shall be entitled to appear personally, produce evidence, have counsel, and a public hearing. The findings and decision of the commission shall be certified to the official from whose order the appeal is taken, and shall forthwith be enforced and followed by him. 
(h)  Soliciting for political purposes: No officer or employee in the classified civil service shall directly or indirectly make, solicit, or receive any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political party or any political purpose whatsoever. Any employee violating the provisions of this section may be removed from office by action of the civil service commission. 
(i)  Discrimination prohibited: No person in the classified civil service or seeking admission thereto shall be appointed, removed, promoted, demoted or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his race, political, or religious opinions or affiliations, except for membership in any organization which advocates the overthrow of, or disloyalty to the Government of the United States or any subdivision thereof. For the protection of vital governmental services, the council may authorize the commission to administer loyalty oaths to all employees of the city and to remove from the classified civil service, any employee who is found to be disloyal to the Government of the United States or any subdivision thereof, or who shall refuse to take such oath. 
(j)  Appropriation of funds: To enable the commission to execute these powers, the city council shall appropriate each year, sufficient funds for the purpose, but not less than one (1) percent of the aggregate annual payroll for classified employees for the preceding fiscal year. 
(Referendum of 11-13-01; Referendum of 11-4-03) 
Sec. 6.6. - Police department. 
(a)  The police department shall be in the immediate charge of the chief of police, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(b)  Police officers shall have all the powers, immunities, and privileges granted to peace officers by law for the making of arrests, the preservation of order and the safety of persons and property in the city. Any person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or court for examination or trial, without unnecessary delay. Police officers shall make and sign complaints to the proper officers and magistrates against any person known to be, or upon complaint or information, believed to be, guilty of any violation of this Charter or of ordinances of the city, or of the penal laws of the state or of the United States. For the purposes of this section, violation of this Charter or ordinances for which a penalty is provided shall be deemed to be misdemeanors. 
(c)  Any member or employee of the Police Department of the City of Southfield who is required to work more than forty (40) hours per week shall be compensated on an hourly basis for all such time, upon certification of such excess by the chief of police or such other person immediately in charge of the police department, either by payment or by added leave time, as the council may approve. 
Sec. 6.7. - Fire department. 
(a)  The fire department shall be in the immediate charge of the fire chief, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(b)  The fire department shall be responsible for the prevention and extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property against damage and accident resulting therefrom. The fire chief shall be responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's fire-fighting apparatus and property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs for the purpose of reducing the risks of fires within the city. 
(c)  The fire chief or any of his authorized subordinates, with the concurrence of the mayor or of the city administrator, or of any two (2) councilmen, may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to arrest the progress of a fire. In such case, no action shall be maintained against the city or any person therefor. If any person having an interest in such a building applies to the council within three (3) months, after the fire for compensation for damages to the building, the council shall authorize the payment of such compensation as it deems just. The council may ascertain the amount of such compensation by agreement with the owner or owners of the property, or by the appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the case of juries to appraise damages for the taking of property for public use. No compensation shall be paid on account of any loss which would probably have occurred to such building, if it had not been pulled down or destroyed. 
(d)  Employment in the fire department shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No person in the fire department, who is engaged in fire fighting or subject to the hazards thereof, shall be on duty in such employment more than twenty-four (24) hours, or shall be off duty less than twenty-four (24) hours, out of any forty-eight-hour period, thereby requiring firemen to work not more than an average of sixty-three (63) hours per week. 
2.  The provisions of the above paragraph shall not apply to the fire chief or the assistant fire chief, or to the members or employees of the fire department when required to remain on duty by the fire chief, his aides, or assistants, in cases of public necessity arising from great conflagration, riot, flood or epidemic of pestilence or disease. 
3.  Any officer, employee, or agent of the city who requires any employee, who is engaged in fire fighting or subject to the hazards thereof, save as hereinbefore excepted, to be on duty in such employment for a longer time than hereinbefore provided, or to be off duty for a lesser time than hereinbefore provided, shall be guilty of a violation of this Charter. 
(Referendum of 11-8-05) 
Sec. 6.8. - Department of public works. 
(a)  The department of public works shall be in the immediate charge of the superintendent of public works, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(b)  The department of public works shall be responsible for: 
1.  Planning, laying out, construction, maintenance, alteration, repairs, improvement and control of streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways; 
2.  Collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish; 
3.  Furnishing other services provided by the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by the council in accordance with authority granted by this Charter. 
Sec. 6.9. - Police and fire volunteer reserves. 
    In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, the city administrator shall with the approval of the city council recruit and provide for the training of volunteer reserve units to provide additional manpower to aid regular police and fire personnel when in the opinion of the administrator or his designated representative such additional manpower is necessary. 
(Referendum of 11-5-85) 
Sec. 6.10. - Department of parks and recreation. 
(a)  The parks and recreation board shall consist of five (5) resident citizens who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. The term of office of said members shall be three (3) years and they shall serve without compensation. On or before the first Monday in May, following the adoption of this Charter, the mayor shall appoint five (5) members of said board, one (1) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1959, two (2) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1960, and two (2) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1961. On the first Monday in February in each year, after the adoption of this Charter, the mayor shall appoint members of said board for a term of three (3) years to succeed the members whose terms expire on that date. 
(b)  The department of parks and recreation shall be in the immediate charge of the superintendent of parks and recreation, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(c)  The department of parks and recreation shall be responsible for the maintenance, improvement, and operation of all public parks and cemeteries, and all buildings, improvements, and equipment thereon used for park or cemetery purposes. It shall care for all shade trees located on lands which are devoted to public purposes and shall control all lawn extensions between sidewalks, street curbs, and green belts. 
(d)  The council may, by ordinance, join with school districts or other authorities or municipal units for the conduct of recreational programs, in any manner permitted by law. If a recreation board is created for such purpose, the mayor shall appoint the representative of the city thereon with the approval of the council. 
Sec. 6.11. - Planning department. 
(a)  The planning department shall be in the immediate charge of the city planner, who shall be responsible directly to the council. 
(b)  The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. In making appointment of members to the planning commission, the mayor shall appoint persons representing various sections of the city, and insofar as possible, represent different professions and occupations having an interest in the growth and development of the city. The term of office of each member of the planning commission shall be three (3) years. The terms of office of members of the commission shall begin on the first day of July nearest the date of their appointment. The terms of office of the first planning commission, appointed hereunder, shall be fixed by the mayor so that the terms of two (2) members will be for one (1) year; two (2) for two (2) years; and three (3) for three (3) years. Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The commission shall organize annually at its first meeting following the first day of January, by electing one of its members chairman, and shall meet at least once a month. 
(d)  The council shall not determine or alter zoning boundaries, or impose or amend zoning regulations, until thirty (30) days after the report on such changes or amendments has been requested from the planning commission by the council. 
(e)  The council may by ordinance, in addition to the powers and functions herein provided, delegate to the planning commission other powers and functions permitted by law, concerning city planning. 
Sec. 6.12. - Department of building and safety engineering. 
(a)  The department of building and safety engineering shall be in the immediate charge of the director of building and safety engineering, who shall be responsible to the city administrator. 
(b)  The department of building and safety engineering shall be responsible for the administration of all laws, ordinances and regulations concerning the erection, maintenance, and safety of buildings and the equipment and fixtures therein, including but not by way of limitation, electrical and plumbing codes, housing and zoning laws, and other applicable state laws. 
Sec. 6.13. - Fire and police department pension and retirement system. 
    The provisions of Act No. 345 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for the year of 1937, as now amended or as may be hereinafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference thereto, as a part of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Continuation of existing benefits and service record. 
    All benefits which may have accrued, including prior service record under the existing pension and retirement system of the Township of Southfield shall continue in full force and effect under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.15. - Transfer of funds. 
    All funds in the fire and police departments of the Township of Southfield pension and retirement system shall become available and shall be transferred over to the pension and retirement system provided for and created under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Present board to continue. 
    The fire and police department retirement board of the Township of Southfield shall become the retirement board of the City of Southfield and shall hold office until respective members' terms of office shall expire and until their successors have been selected and have qualified. 
Sec. 6.17. - Other city departments. 
    A pension and retirement system may also be established for all other city departments not covered by Act 345 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for the year 1937, as amended, and such pension and retirement system shall not be inconsistent with state law. 
Sec. 6.18. - Library board. 
(a)  The library board shall consist of five (5) resident citizens who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the council. The term of office of said members shall be three (3) years and they shall serve without compensation. On or before the first Monday in May, following the adoption of this Charter, the mayor shall appoint five (5) members of said board, one (1) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1959; two (2) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1960; and two (2) for a term expiring the first Monday in February, 1961. On the first Monday in February in each year, after the adoption of this Charter, the mayor shall appoint members of said board for a term of three (3) years to succeed the members whose terms expire on that date. 
(b)  Said library board shall have the care, custody, control and management of the public library, together with all buildings containing the same and may appoint the necessary employees therefor. 
(c)  The city council shall in its annual estimates make provision for a library fund, which shall not exceed two and two-tenths (2.2) mills on the assessed valuation of the property to be assessed for city purposes, and the amount so provided, shall be levied and collected each year in the same manner and at the same time as other city taxes. The funds above provided for shall be disbursed only on the order of the library board and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to draw warrants upon said fund upon the order of the said board, and it shall be his duty as ex officio treasurer of said board to pay such warrants. 
(d)  The library board shall have power to make and adopt such rules, bylaws and regulations for their guidance and for the government of the library and its property as they may deem expedient. 
(e)  Any person or persons desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of such library shall have the right to vest the title to the money or other personal or real property so donated in said library board, to be held and controlled by said board, when accepted in accordance with the terms of the deed, gift, or bequest of such property. 
(Referendum of 8-8-78; Referendum of 3-9-99) 
Sec. 6.19. - Department of water supply. 
(a)  The water department shall be in the immediate charge of the superintendent of water supply, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(b)  The water department shall be administered as a regular department of the city government. Until such time as the council shall establish a separate department by ordinance, sewers and sewage disposal shall be a responsibility of the water department. 
(c)  Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the city of any public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all services furnished to or rendered by other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility and the result of its operation, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the clerk. 
Sec. 6.20. - Fire and police departments; parity of compensation. 
(1)  Members of the police and fire departments having corresponding classifications, as hereinafter enumerated, and periods of service, shall receive equal annual compensation, including equal annual wages: Police chief, and fire chief; police captain, and fire captain; police lieutenant, and fire lieutenant; police sergeant, and fire sergeant; police patrolman, and firefighter; and other corresponding classifications of the police and fire departments. No disparity in such annual compensation or wages shall occur or be justified on account of differences between policemen and firemen as to average, normal, regular or customary hours of work or duty, or as to furloughs, leaves or leave days, or vacations; nor on account of the hazards or character of such work or duty; nor on account of changes in the titles of classifications, as hereinabove enumerated; nor indirectly, to avoid the intent of this section, which is to assure parity of compensation and wages to policemen and firemen. 
(2)  All charter provisions, or parts thereof, and all ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. 
(3)  This amendment is declared to be severable, and should any word, phrase, sentence, provision or subsection hereof be hereafter declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, or be disapproved by referendum, the remainder of this amendment shall not thereby be affected, but shall remain valid and in full force and effect for all intents and purposes. 
(Referendum of 4-26-66) 
CHAPTER VII. - JUDICIAL DIVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
See Charter Appendix, item 6. 

Sec. 7.1. - Establishment of court. 
    There is hereby established, under the authority of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, a court in the City of Southfield and which shall be known as "The Municipal Court of the City of Southfield." 
    However, the council of the City of Southfield is hereby directed to adopt the provisions of Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956, and any amendments thereto, and to establish the court as a municipal court and to place the same under the operation of said Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, and simultaneously to abolish the court as it is created under the said Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 of the State of Michigan, at the first opportunity to do so lawfully under any statute of amendment now existing or hereafter enacted, either by the adoption of an appropriate ordinance or ordinances, or in any other permissible manner. 
Sec. 7.2. - Nomination, election and term of office of judges. 
    At the regular city election held in the year 1961, and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall be elected on a nonpartisan basis, one (1) municipal judge and one (1) associate municipal judge whose terms of office shall begin on the fourth day of July following their election and who shall hold office for four (4) years and until their respective successors shall have been duly elected and qualified. 
    In all his official acts and in all court proceedings, the associate municipal judge shall be designated as "municipal judge." 
Sec. 7.3. - Qualifications. 
    Each of the judges of said court shall possess the qualifications and shall meet the eligibility requirements herein, in this Charter, made and provided for elective city officers and, in addition thereto, shall be an attorney in good standing, admitted to practice law in the supreme court of this state immediately preceding the date of his election or appointment to fill a vacancy, and throughout his term of office. 
Sec. 7.4. - Limitation upon law practice. 
    Neither the municipal judge nor the associate municipal judge, or their respective business partners or employees shall participate in any case in or before the court, either as attorney or of counsel for any party or witness in such case. 
Sec. 7.5. - Bond of municipal and associate municipal judges. 
    Before taking office, the municipal judge and the associate municipal judge shall each take an oath, and in addition to any security required by law to be given for the performance of his official duties, give a bond for the city in a penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the city attorney and conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of the duties of his office, and for payment to the city of all monies collected or received by such judge which, by the provisions of the laws of this state or of this Charter, he shall be required to pay into the treasury of said city. Such bonds shall be filed with the city clerk after approval by the city attorney. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 7.6. - Compensation of judges. 
(a)  Municipal judge: The municipal judge shall be paid a salary by the city to be fixed by the council of not less than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per annum and not to exceed twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per annum; provided, however, that the salary of the municipal judge shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum until such time as the council shall change the same. Such salary shall be in lieu of all fees in both civil and criminal cases to which such judge might be entitled for the provisions of this Charter, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies and taking acknowledgements or administering oaths in matters which are not connected with any suit or proceeding in said court. 
(b)  Associate municipal judge: The associate municipal judge shall receive compensation, on a per diem basis, for the actual time engaged, at the same rate as that provided for the municipal judge. Such compensation shall be paid by the city on the certificate of the clerk of the court, and shall constitute and be the only compensation payable to him, excepting that he may retain fees to which he may be entitled for the performance of marriage ceremonies and taking acknowledgments or administering oaths in matters which are not connected with any suit or proceeding in said court. 
    Until such time as the council may otherwise provide by appropriate ordinance or resolution, neither the municipal judge nor the associate judge shall be required to devote full time to the duties of their office. Provisions for vacations for the municipal judge shall be made by the council. 
Sec. 7.7. - Associate municipal judge; substitute. 
(a)  Whenever the municipal judge is absent, or, for any reason, is disqualified or unable to act in any case or matter pending in said court, or at the time the case or matter comes before him, such case or matter shall be transferred upon his order, or in case of his absence by the clerk of the court, to the associate municipal judge, without any notice to the parties in the cause, but a note of such transfer shall be entered upon the docket of the case or matter. When both judges shall have acted in any one (1) cause or proceeding, the docket shall be signed in the manner and within the time provided by law by the judge who shall have rendered final judgment in such cause or proceeding. 
(b)  In case of the absence, disability or disqualification of both the municipal judge and the associate municipal judge, any other municipal judge of any court in the County of Oakland, who is paid a salary in lieu of fees and who is an attorney at law, shall be qualified to act in the place and for such judges in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon them by law in all matters pertaining to violations of the ordinances of this city or of this Charter, under the conditions and in the manner hereinafter set forth; and such substitute judge shall, when called upon in the manner and under the conditions set forth, so act. 
    Such case or matter may be heard, or duties performed, by a substitute municipal judge upon the order of the municipal judge of this court or, in his absence, upon the order of the associate judge, or, in the absence of both of said judges, upon the order of the clerk of the municipal court, within or without notice to the parties. 
    A note of such transfer shall be entered upon the docket of the case or matter and the docket shall be signed by the substitute municipal judge in the manner and within the time provided by law. Unless the services are rendered on an exchange basis, the substitute municipal judge, in so acting, shall receive compensation at the same rate as that provided for the municipal judge for the time actually engaged. Such compensation shall be paid by the city on the certificate of the clerk of the court. 
(c)  In case the municipal judge shall be unable to hear and determine cases pending in said court without unreasonable delay, because of the volume of cases awaiting his determination, he may, with the prior concept and approval of the council, call upon and obtain the assistance of the associate municipal judge to assist him in the trial of cases and the performance of the duties imposed upon him by law in all matters criminal and civil and in all matters pertaining to violations of this Charter and of the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  The term "municipal judge of any court in the County of Oakland," as used in this section, includes the judge or an associate judge or justice of a municipal court in the County of Oakland. 
Sec. 7.8. - Jurisdiction of court. 
(a)  General jurisdiction: The court shall have and exercise within the City of Southfield and Oakland County, the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are, or may be conferred upon, or required by justices of the peace in cities and townships by statute, and shall be subject to such statutes with respect to such justices, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other justices in Oakland County as to all crimes, offenses and misdemeanors alleged to have been committed within Oakland County, whether within or without the city. The proceedings in all suits and actions before the court shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, be according to and governed by the statutes applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
(b)  Charter and ordinance cases: The court shall have authority to hear, try and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for the violation of such Charter and ordinance as in this Charter or ordinances prescribed and directed. 
(c)  Extended jurisdiction: The court shall also have jurisdiction to the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all civil matters, ex contractu and ex delicto, with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. Forthwith upon the adoption by the city of the provisions of Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, as hereinbefore, in this Charter directed, the jurisdiction on the municipal court shall be extended to the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in all civil matters, ex contractu and ex delicto, with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law, and concurrent jurisdiction in all actions of replevin wherein the value of the property involved does not exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); provided, further, however, that if a higher limit be at any time permitted by law, the municipal court shall have extended jurisdiction up to such higher amount. 
(d)  Causes where all parties are residents of the city: The court shall have exclusive jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction of courts of record excepted, in causes or proceedings where all the parties to the same reside in said city at the time of the commencement of the proceeding or cause, and in case where the original cause of action existed in favor of a plaintiff, and against a defendant, both residents of the city, and has been assigned to a nonresident of said city. This jurisdiction is granted pursuant to the provisions of section 10 of Chapter LXVI of Public Act 314 of 1915 of the State of Michigan. 
(e)  Setting aside verdicts: The court shall possess the same power and authority as the circuit courts of the state possess to set aside, upon legal cause shown therefor, the verdict or judgment in any civil cause, and grant a new trial therein, whenever a motion in writing is made and filed with the justice within five (5) days after the rendition of the verdict or judgment in said case, which motion shall briefly and plainly set forth the reasons and grounds which it is made and shall be supported by an affidavit or affidavits setting forth the facts relied upon and filed at the time of filing of said motion and a notice of the hearing of such motion with a copy of the motion and affidavits filed as aforesaid, shall be served upon the adverse party or his attorney at least two (2) days before the hearing thereof; such motion shall be determined within two (2) days after the same shall have been heard and submitted and such motion shall be submitted and heard within one (1) week after the same shall have been filed; the time for taking an appeal from judgment in case motion be not granted, shall begin to run from the time when such motion shall be overruled; in no case shall the pendency of such motion stay the issuing and levy of an execution in such case, but in case of levy under execution pending such motion, no sale of the property so levied shall be advertised or made until the final determination of such motion. 
(f)  Additional authority: The court shall have such additional jurisdiction powers and duties as may now or hereafter be conferred upon such courts by statute. 
Sec. 7.9. - Fees and costs in municipal court. 
(a)  The council shall, within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Charter, enact an ordinance establishing and fixing the fees and costs which may be taxed by the municipal court in all civil matters and in all cases for violations of the Charter or city ordinances, and fixing fees and costs not inconsistent with statute in criminal matters. Pending the enactment of such ordinance, the municipal judge shall assess costs as provided in this Charter or by state law, but shall not receive any of such costs for his own use. 
(b)  The fees in civil cases shall be collected by the municipal judge and delivered by him to the treasurer on the first and fifteenth days of each month. The costs and fines in cases arising under city ordinances or Charter provisions shall be delivered to the treasurer on the first day of each month. 
(c)  Uncollected fees and costs in state criminal cases shall be charged, presented to, and audited by the auditors of Oakland County in the same manner and in the same amounts as provided by law in the case of justices of the peace in townships. Upon allowance by the board of county auditors, such costs and fees shall be paid monthly by the County of Oakland to the treasurer of the city for the use and benefit of the city. All costs collected in state criminal cases, to which the municipal judge would be entitled, except for the provisions of this Charter, shall be paid to the treasurer of the city on the first day of each month. All other costs and all fines collected in State criminal cases shall be paid to the treasurer of Oakland County on the first day of each month. 
(d)  Failure of any municipal judge to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Sec. 7.10. - Jury trials. 
    Each period of three (3) months throughout the year beginning on the first day of February, May, August and November, respectively, is hereby designated and established as a term for trial of jury cases, and during each such term, such cases may be set for trial upon one or more certain days of each month, or as soon thereafter as such trial can be reached. A panel of jurors shall be drawn from the citizens of the city having the qualifications of electors of the city, such panel to serve at each term of such court. 
    Such selection of jurors to serve in each case, shall be made as nearly as may be, in the same manner as provided by law in circuit courts, but the trial of such cases by jury shall be otherwise conducted as provided by law for trials by jury before justices of the peace in townships, except that it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to instruct the jury as to the law applicable to the case, which instructions shall be received by the jury as the law in the case. As soon as all jury cases, set for any term, and ready for trial, shall have been disposed of, the panel of jurors called for said term shall be discharged; provided, however, that when there is no jury in attendance in the court, the municipal judge, in order to avoid hardship from delay, may in his discretion, order a jury impaneled in accordance with the method provided by law to secure a jury in trials before justices of the peace in townships. The council, may in its discretion, pass an ordinance embodying the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended, governing the selection of jurors from among the qualified electors of the city and for the conduct of trials by jury, insofar as such act provides therefor. In the event that the council shall pass such ordinance, the provisions of said Act No. 288 shall prevail over the provisions of this section, insofar as they may be inconsistent therewith. 
Sec. 7.11. - Place and conduct of court; reports. 
(a)  The council shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for conducting court. It may regulate the hours of court and make other necessary and proper rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the court which are not inconsistent with this Charter or statute. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall file with the council promptly after the end of each month, a report of the court in such manner as the council shall prescribe. 
Sec. 7.12. - Vacancies. 
    If, for any cause, a vacancy shall occur in the office of the municipal judge or in the office of the associate municipal judge, the council shall, except in case of recall, select a qualified and suitable person to serve in such office until the successor of the said municipal judge, or of the said associate municipal judge, whose office has become vacant shall be elected at the next city election and shall have qualified and assumed his office. Any person elected to fill such vacancy shall assume such office on the fourth day of July following his election and shall hold office under such election only for the residue of the term of the office in which such vacancy occurs. 
Sec. 7.13. - Docket. 
    There shall be kept at the place of holding court, a docket or dockets in the same manner required by statute. Failure of the municipal judge to make provisions for the maintenance of such a docket shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Sec. 7.14. - Court clerk. 
    The council shall provide for a clerk of the municipal court and one (1) or more deputy clerks, as may be deemed necessary by the council, whose compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
    Such clerk or clerks, if appointed, shall be by virtue of his or their office, empowered to administer oaths to persons making affidavits for writs in civil cases and to issue all processes to collect all fees in civil cases and all moneys paid into court for security for costs, bail or otherwise and to enter a record of the same in books kept for that purpose and to pay over the same to the authorities of the city or county or other persons entitled to the same, and such books of each clerk shall be audited at least once each year to ascertain that such books are correctly kept and that all moneys received have been properly accounted for. 
    Such clerk or clerks shall, before entering upon the duties of his or their office, give such bond as may be required by the council and shall perform such other duties as may be, from time to time prescribed by the council. All premiums on such bond or bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 7.15. - Court officer. 
    The city administrator, upon the request of the municipal judge and the approval of the council, may assign a police officer of the city to the court, who shall have all the duties and powers of court officers in the circuit courts of the state and shall serve in such capacity during the pleasure of the city administrator. Such officer shall receive no compensation except such as he may be entitled to as a police officer. All fees, except mileage allowance received by such officer in the performance of the duties imposed upon him in accordance with the provision of this Charter, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 7.16. - Constables. 
    The council shall appoint one (1) or more constables. Such constables shall have like powers and authority in matters of civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power to serve all processes issued for breaches of ordinances of the city. The bond of constables shall be that required of constables in townships. 
    The council is empowered and authorized to appoint one (1) or more police officers of the city to serve as constables. All fees received by any police officers serving as constables, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 7.17. - Violations bureau. 
    The council may establish by ordinance, a violations bureau within the municipal court, for the handling of violations of ordinances and regulations of the city or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such bureau. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a charge of violating any such ordinance or regulation, may within the time specified in the notice of such charge, answer at the violations bureau to the charge set forth in the notice by: paying a fine prescribed by ordinance; pleading guilty, in writing, to the charge; waiving a hearing in court, and giving power of attorney to make the plea and pay fine in court. The fine shall not be waived by the bureau. Acceptance by the bureau of the prescribed fine and power of attorney shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a bureau shall not operate to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court should he so choose. 
CHAPTER VIII. - BUDGET PROCEDURE AND GENERAL FINANCE 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
Sec. 8.2. - Budget procedure. 
    On or before the first day of March of each year, each city officer and department head shall submit to the city administrator, a proposed budget for the next fiscal year. The city administrator shall submit the budgets to the mayor on or before the first day of April, and the mayor shall submit the budget to the council at the first regular meeting in May. 
(Referendum of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget statement of city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall submit to the mayor, with each budget proposal, a budget statement, which shall explain the budget proposal and shall contain an outline and explanation of the proposed financial policies of the city relating to its current and future operations. The budget proposal shall present a complete financial plan for the next fiscal year. It shall include such information and supporting schedules as the city administrator, mayor or council may deem necessary. 
Sec. 8.4. - Budget proposal; a public record. 
    Each budget proposal, together with all supporting schedules and the budget statement, shall be a matter of public record. A public hearing at such time and place as the council shall direct, shall be held on the budget proposal each year, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one (1) week in advance by the city clerk, in at least two (2) locally circulated newspapers. A copy thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the clerk at all reasonable times. 
Sec. 8.5. - Adoption of budget. 
    At a special budget meeting to be held not later than the third week in June, the council shall, by resolution concurred in by at least five (5) members, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year. The council shall, in such resolution, make an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year and determine the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for such purposes. 
(Referendum of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 8.6. - City tax limit. 
(a)  The aggregate amount which the city may raise by general tax upon real and personal property for general city operations, shall not, in any one (1) year, exceed seven-tenths of one percent (seven (7) mills) of the assessed value of all the taxable real and personal property in the city except as otherwise permitted by law or by this Charter. 
(b)  The tax limitation herein fixed shall be subject to the provisions of law relative to the assessment and levy of taxes for the payment of principal and interest for bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city. 
(c)  In addition to the amount set forth in subsection (a) above, the city may, for fire and police protection and related services, raise an additional amount of up to three-tenths of one percent (three (3) mills) by a general tax upon the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city. 
(d)  For the purpose of maintaining the residential street system in the City of Southfield, the council shall in its estimates make provision for a residential street maintenance fund, which shall not exceed one mill on the assessed valuation of the real and personal property to be assessed for city purposes, and the amount so provided shall be levied and collected in the same manner and at the same time as other city taxes. 
(Referendum of 4-7-74; referendum of 8-7-84) 
Sec. 8.7. - Effects of adoption of the budget. 
(a)  Upon the adoption of any budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures, shall be appropriated to the respective objects and purposes named therein. 
(b)  A copy of the budget so adopted, certified by the clerk, shall be filed in the office of the clerk. A copy of the budget as adopted, or of appropriate portions thereof, shall be furnished by the clerk to the head of each administrative unit and upon request, shall be furnished at cost to interested citizens and civic organizations. 
Sec. 8.8. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred for payment during the fiscal year to which the budget applies, except pursuant to an appropriation therefor. The council may, however, transfer any unencumbered operating appropriation balance, or any portion, from one operating fund or account to another, upon the concurring vote of not less than five (5) members of the council. The disposition of any unencumbered balance remaining in any budget appropriations at the end of the fiscal year shall be determined by the council. 
Sec. 8.9. - Budget control. 
    If, when the city administrator, through the mayor, submits to the council, data showing the financial position of the city, it appears that the income of the city is less than anticipated, the council may, except as to amounts required for debt and interest charges, revise or amend the budget as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the income of the city. Public hearing thereon shall be held and notice thereof given as required by this Charter before the adoption of the budget. 
Sec. 8.10. - Contractual claims against the city. 
(a)  All contractual claims against the city shall be filed with the clerk. 
(b)  The clerk shall verify the correctness of each claim and, subject to further procedure established by the council for auditing and approving claims, he shall approve for payment, each claim so verified, if a sufficient appropriation is available for the purpose, and shall draw and sign a check or warrant therefor. A certificate of his approval shall be filed with the treasurer before he countersigns a check on the funds of the city therefor. Any officer who signs or countersigns a check on any funds of the city, except as herein provided, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter. 
Sec. 8.11. - Notice to city of claim for injuries. 
    The city shall not be liable in damages for injury to persons or property by reason of negligence of the city, its officers, or employees, or by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement, or facility of the city's or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereon, unless, within sixty (60) days after such injury occurred, the person damaged or his representative, causes to be served upon the clerk, a written notice stating that such person intends to hold the city liable for such damage. Such notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of the injury so far as known, and the names and addresses of witnesses known to the claimant. No person shall bring action against the city for damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period prescribed by law or unless he has first presented to the clerk; a claim in writing and under oath setting forth specifically the nature and extent of the injury and the amount of damages claimed. Such claim shall be presented to the council for action. It shall be a sufficient bar to any action upon any such claim that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim required by this section were not filed within the time and in the manner herein provided. 
Sec. 8.12. - Withdrawal of city funds. 
    All funds of the city drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to an appropriation by the council and by checks signed by the clerk and countersigned by the treasurer. Each check shall specify the funds or fund from which it is payable. 
Sec. 8.13. - Independent audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city at least annually, and more frequently if the council deems it necessary. The annual audit shall be made by certified public accountants employed by the council and shall be completed within sixty (60) days following the close of the fiscal year. The audit shall be made public in such manner as the council may determine. 
Sec. 8.14. - Funds for public improvement. 
(a)  The city may establish and maintain a fund or funds for the purpose of accumulating monies to be used for making, acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing authorized public improvements. Monies so accumulated may be transferred, encumbered or otherwise disposed of only for the purpose for which they were accumulated, unless another purpose is approved by a resolution concurred in by at least six (6) members of the council, after public hearing. No such monies shall be so transferred, encumbered, or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose of making, acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements. 
(b)  Whenever property is acquired for any public improvement, the cost of the property and of the proceedings required to acquire it, may be added to the cost of the improvement. 
Sec. 8.15. - Municipal borrowing. 
(a)  The council, subject to the applicable provisions of law and this Charter, may, by proper ordinance or resolution, authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and the issuance of bonds of the city or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the city for the payment of the obligation created thereby. 
(b)  The council, subject to the applicable provisions of law and this Charter, may authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments, and the issuing of bonds therefor. Such special assessment bonds shall be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and/or may be a general obligation of the city. All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls, to the extent that the same are pledged for the payment of the principal of and interest in bonds issued in anticipation of the payment thereof, shall be set apart in a separate fund for the payment of such principal and interest and shall be used for no other purpose. 
(c)  The council may, subject to law and the state constitution, authorize the issuance and sale of mortgage bonds for the purpose of acquiring owning, purchasing, constructing, or operating any public utility beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law; provided, that such mortgage bonds issued beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law, shall not impose any liability on the city but shall be secured only upon the property and revenue of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the public utility, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty (20) years from the date of sale of such public utility and franchise on foreclosure. In the event of the issuance of such bonds, there shall be created in such cases, as may be required by law, a sinking fund by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity. 
(d)  In case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the council may, subject to law, authorize the issuance of emergency bonds which shall be general obligations of the city, for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property. 
(e)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized. 
(f)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face, a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and no officer of the city shall use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, except as hereinafter provided. 
(g)  Whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or any part thereof, shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the council may, by the affirmative vote of the majority of the members elect, authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered funds, in any manner permitted by law or for the retirement of such bond issue, or if such bond issue shall have been fully retired or if any of such funds remain after such retirement, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the city. 
(h)  All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and clerk. 
(i)  A complete and detailed report of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the treasurer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "cancelled." 
(j)  A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Charter. 
CHAPTER IX. - TAXATION 

Sec. 9.1. - Power to tax. 
    In order to carry out its purposes, powers, and duties, the city may assess, levy and collect ad valorem taxes upon real and personal property. 
Sec. 9.2. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. 
Sec. 9.3. - Tax procedure. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by law. In the event of failure of any tax through defective procedure of any assessment, collection or sale, the council may provide for its reassessment, upon the property chargeable therewith in the first instance. 
Sec. 9.4. - Personal property, jeopardy assessment. 
    If the treasurer finds that any person who is or may be liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the city on tax day, intends to depart from the city or to remove therefrom personal property, which is or may be, liable for taxation, or intends to conceal himself or his property, or intends to do any other act tending to prejudice or to render wholly or partly ineffectual, the proceedings to collect the tax, unless proceedings therefor cannot be brought without delay, he shall cause notice of his findings to be given such person, together with demand for the immediate payment of the tax. 
    Thereupon, the tax shall become immediately due and payable and the treasurer shall have and exercise all the powers granted by law to township and city treasurers for the collection thereof. If the exact amount of such tax has not, at the time of such finding, been determined because the same has not been spread upon the tax roll, the treasurer shall estimate the amount of the tax upon such personal property and the estimate shall be presumed to be the amount of tax upon such property which, together with other taxes which have accrued thereon, shall become payable as hereinbefore provided. The tax so estimated by the treasurer shall upon the giving of the notice herein provided, become a lien upon the property liable for the tax. The lien shall be of the same type and legal effect as the lien upon personal property provided in section 9.18 of this Chapter. If the estimate of the treasurer is in excess of the amount of tax spread against such property upon the tax roll, he shall refund the excess upon the demand of the person from whom it was collected or his legal representative. If such person furnishes evidence satisfactory to the treasurer, by bond or otherwise, that he will duly pay the tax or taxes to which the treasurer's findings relate, then such tax or taxes shall not be payable prior to the time otherwise fixed for payment thereof. 
Sec. 9.5. - Exemptions. 
    The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended by any grant or contract to which the city shall be a party. No exemption from ad valorem taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted by state law. 
Sec. 9.6. - Assessment. 
    The assessor shall annually prepare as assessment roll of all property in the city and shall place a value in accordance with law, upon all taxable property both real and personal, in the city. The value shall be determined by the assessor in accordance with established assessment rules, techniques and procedures, and the city assessor shall have available to the public, a printed copy of the code under which the assessments are determined. The value shall be determined according to the facts existing on the date fixed by law as tax day, for the assessment of property throughout the state, for which the roll is made, and no change of the status or of the location of any such property, after that day, shall be considered by the assessor or the board of review. 
Sec. 9.7. - Assessment procedure. 
    The process of the assessment of property within the city for the purpose of taxation shall be continuous, but all assessments, as the same shall appear on the annual assessment and tax rolls of the city, shall be corrected by the assessor and shall stand as of the tax day of the year to which they apply. 
Sec. 9.8. - Time for making assessment rolls. 
    On or before the first day of the meeting of the board of review in each year, the assessor shall complete and certify an assessment roll in the manner and form required by law. In making such assessment roll, the assessor shall possess all the powers and immunities vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessment officers by law. On the date and at the time of convening of the board of review in each year, the assessor shall deliver the completed assessment roll to the board of review. 
Sec. 9.9. - Notice of change of assessments. 
    The assessor shall give notice by first class mail to each owner of property which has been added to assessment roll or the value of which has been increased or decreased on such roll. The notice shall be addressed to the owner, according to the records of the assessor's office and mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date of the convening of the board of review. 
    Neither the failure of the assessor to give notice nor the failure of a person to receive notice shall invalidate any assessment roll or any assessment thereon. 
Sec. 9.10. - Board of review. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a board of review, consisting of three (3) freeholders, each of whom shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city. No member of the board of review, during his term of office, shall be an elective officer of the city, or an appointive officer or employee thereof, nor shall he be a nominee or a candidate for elective city office. The council shall specify the term of office of the members of the board of review, and shall fix their compensation. 
(b)  The board of review shall convene at nine o'clock in the forenoon on the third Monday in March in each year at the council chambers and shall continue in session for six (6) hours during that day and each of the following three (3) days for the purpose of examining and reviewing the assessment roll of the city. The council may, by appropriate action, extend this period. On the first day of its meeting in each year, the board shall elect one of its members chairman. The board shall have all powers vested in and be charged with all duties imposed by law upon boards of review in townships. 
Sec. 9.11. - Notice of meeting of board of review. 
    The council shall provide for giving notice to the public of the time and place of the meeting of the board of review. Such notice shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the convening of the board and as often thereafter as the council deems fit. If, for any reason, the meetings of the board are not held, as in this chapter required, the council shall give such further notice as time and circumstances warrant. 
Sec. 9.12. - Notice of assessment changes. 
    The board of review shall give notice, prior to adjournment, to each owner of property according to the records of the assessor's office, whose property is added to the assessment roll by it, or the value of whose property is increased or decreased thereon by it. Neither the failure on the part of the board of review to so give notice in any particular case, nor the failure of a person to receive notice shall invalidate the assessment roll or any assessment thereon. 
Sec. 9.13. - Confirmation of assessment roll. 
    The board of review shall hold a meeting on the Monday following the date of its first session, and at that meeting, shall complete the review of the assessment roll submitted to it by the assessor and shall endorse and approve the same as provided and required by law. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such assessment roll. If, for any cause, a quorum of the board of review does not assemble, or in the event that the board fails or refuses to act during the days set for the meeting thereof, the roll, as prepared by the assessor, shall stand as if approved by the board of review, without further formality. After the review of the assessment roll has been completed, and the roll endorsed and signed as required by law, the board of review shall redeliver the roll to the assessor. 
Sec. 9.14. - Records of the board of review. 
    The assessor shall be the secretary of the board of review, shall attend its meetings with the privilege of participating therein, but without the right to vote upon any decision made by the board, shall give the board information relating to matters under consideration by it, and shall keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the board, which record shall be filed with the clerk within thirty (30) days after the adjournment of the board. 
Sec. 9.15. - Validity of the assessment roll. 
    Upon the completion of the roll and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the board of review, the same shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school and city taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law, and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general law of the state. 
Sec. 9.16. - Clerk to certify levy. 
    Within three (3) days after the council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the council determines shall be raised by general tax, together with such assessment and other lawful charges as the council shall authorize to be spread against or charged to property and persons appearing upon the roll. 
Sec. 9.17. - City tax roll. 
    Upon receiving the certification of the amount to be raised, as provided in the preceding section, the assessor shall proceed to spread the amounts of the general city tax upon the assessment roll according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth therein. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised, not more than the amount permitted by law, which added amount, when collected, shall be credited to the general funds of the city. For convenience, any city tax roll may be divided into volumes. Assessments and other lawful charges authorized by the council to be spread against or charged to property of persons upon the roll, shall also be spread and charged thereon, as directed by the council. 
Sec. 9.18. - Taxes lien on property. 
    The city taxes thus assessed against personal property shall become at once a debt due to the city from persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall, on the first day of July, become a lien upon such real property and the lien for such amounts and all interest and other charges thereon, shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior and paramount, upon all personal property of the person so assessed from and after the first day of July in each year and shall so remain until paid. Such tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal property taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy the lien except where the personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Sec. 9.19. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
(a)  After extending the taxes of aforesaid and not later than the first day in June in each year, the assessor shall certify the tax roll and shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the treasurer to collect from the several persons named in the roll, the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as tax, assessment, or charge, and granting to and vesting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on the roll, all the power and immunities granted by law to township treasurers for the collection of taxes. 
(b)  The assessor shall, at the same time, deliver to the clerk a statement showing the amount of the taxes assessed upon the roll and the clerk shall make an entry thereof in the books of his office and charge the gross amount thereof to the treasurer. 
Sec. 9.20. - Notification of taxes due. 
    The treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but upon receipt of the city tax roll by him, he shall forthwith mail a tax statement to each person in the tax roll and shall give at least six (6) days' notice of the date upon which city taxes are due, by publication in a newspaper of the city, which notice shall be sufficient demand for the payment of all taxes assessed in the city tax roll. Neither the failure on the part of the treasurer to give notice or to mail a tax statement, nor the failure of any person to receive the notice or the tax statement, shall invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or release any person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this Charter in case of nonpayment. 
Sec. 9.21. - Tax payment schedule. 
(a)  City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the fiscal year when levied. All taxes, assessments and charges on the tax roll which are paid during the month of July and August shall be collected by the treasurer without additional charge. To all taxes paid after August thirty first, there shall be added a two (2) percent penalty together with interest at the rate of one-half of one (1) percent for each month or fraction of month intervening between the first day of July and the date of payment. 
(b)  If any of the city taxes on real property on the city tax roll remain unpaid on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by the treasurer, it shall be his duty to return all such unpaid taxes on real property to the county treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which charges shall in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state, and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed until paid. 
(c)  All unpaid taxes, assessments and charges on the December tax roll shall become delinquent on March first and the tax roll shall thereupon be returned to the treasurer of Oakland County to be collected by him in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9.22. - Procedure for collection of taxes on personal property. 
    Respecting taxes levied against personal property, the treasurer shall have power to levy upon and sell at public sale, the personal property of a person refusing or neglecting to pay the tax, in the same manner provided by law and shall have the same powers respecting the property assessed and the person who is the owner or custodian thereof, as provided by law, for the collection of such taxes. 
Sec. 9.23. - State, county and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the city for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of law relative to the collection of such taxes, accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of taxes to the county treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof by the treasurer, who shall perform the duties and have the powers granted of township treasurers by law. 
Sec. 9.24. - Lien for taxes, assessments, and charges. 
    All taxes, assessments, and charges spread on tax rolls shall until paid, be a lien upon the property against which they were levied. 
Sec. 9.25. - Protection of city lien. 
    Consistent with the provisions of law, the city shall have power to acquire any premises within the city, either by purchase at any tax or other public sale, or by purchase from the state or the fee owner, when the purchase of such property is necessary to protect the lien of the city for any city taxes, assessments, and charges. The city may hold, lease, or sell the property so acquired. Any such acquisition shall be deemed for a public purpose. 
Sec. 9.26. - Special assessments. 
(a)  General power relative to special assessments: The council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any sewers, waterworks, streets, and other local or public improvements and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited. 
(b)  The council shall prescribe by general ordinance a complete special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans, and specifications therefor, estimates of cost, hearing and notice thereof, the making and confirming of special assessment rolls, the correction of errors therein, the collection of special assessments, the correction of special assessment rolls, the handling of special assessment rolls in the event of the invalidity thereof, and such other matters as are necessary concerning the making of any sewers, waterworks, streets, and other local or public improvements by special assessment. Said general ordinance shall provide as part of the special assessment procedure that if more than sixty (60) percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement shall object in writing to the original determination of necessity of the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made; except that in such instances where water and sanitary sewer improvements are deemed necessary, and upon a certification received from the Oakland County Health Department that the absence of such improvements would constitute a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents, the council may by a two-thirds vote override such written objection. 
(c)  No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining collection of any special assessment unless within thirty (30) days after confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action, stating grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty (60) days of confirmation of the roll. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79) 
CHAPTER X. - UTILITIES, FRANCHISES, PERMITS 

Sec. 10.1. - Existing franchises. 
    All franchises granted by the Township of Southfield and still in effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect in the City of Southfield in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Sec. 10.2. - Granting of public utility franchises. 
    Public utility franchises and extensions and renewals thereof or amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a term longer than thirty (30) years. 
Sec. 10.3. - Effective date of franchise. 
    Each franchise shall contain a provision requiring the franchise to take effect within one (1) year after the adoption of the ordinance granting it, provided, this provision may be omitted in the case of grants to take effect at the end of any existing franchise or of any franchise that may hereafter be granted. 
Sec. 10.4. - Irrevocable franchise. 
    An irrevocable franchise and any extension or amendment of such franchise may not be granted by the city unless it shall have received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors voting thereon, at a regular or special city election. 
Sec. 10.5. - Public hearing. 
    An irrevocable franchise may be approved for referral to the electorate, only after a public hearing has been held thereon and after the grantee named therein has filed with the city clerk, his unconditional acceptance of all the terms expressed in such franchise. 
Sec. 10.6. - Special election. 
    No special election for such purpose may be ordered by the council unless the estimated expense of holding such election has first been paid to the treasurer by the grantee. 
Sec. 10.7. - Final adoption. 
    Every ordinance granting a franchise, license or right to use the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public places within the city shall remain on file with the city clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least thirty (30) days before the final adoption thereof by the council or the approval thereof by the council for referral to the electorate. 
Sec. 10.8. - Conditions applicable to public utility franchises. 
    The city shall, with respect to any public utility franchise granted after the effective date of this Charter, whether such franchise may contain any of the following provisions or otherwise, have power to: 
(a)  Revoke the same for violation of any of its provisions, for the misuse or the nonuse thereof, for failure to comply with any provision thereof or any regulation imposed under the authority to this section; or 
(b)  Require of any utility, which may not be subject to regulation by any administrative agency of the state, proper and adequate extension of plant and services and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency. The facilities and service of any utility subject to the jurisdiction and control of, and regulation by the Michigan Public Service Commission, its successor, shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successor, but in any franchise granted to a public utility which is not subject to the jurisdiction of and regulation by the Michigan Public Service Commission, the council shall make provision for fixing and adjusting the rates and charges made by such grantee from and after the effective date of the franchise; 
(c)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(d)  Impose other valid regulations determined by the council to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public; 
(e)  Require the public utility to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, bridges and other public places by the city, and by other utilities, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable, and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor, and in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor; 
(f)  Require the utility to pay the actual cost of the maintenance or improvement of any street, alley, bridge or other public place that has become necessary by reason of any use thereof by such utility, and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from such use; 
(g)  Require the public utility to file with the city clerk, copies of any annual report made by such utility to the Michigan Public Service Commission. 
Sec. 10.9. - Revocable permits. 
    Temporary permits to public utilities, revocable at the will of the council, may be granted by the council by resolution on such terms and conditions as the council shall determine, provided, however, that no such permit shall be construed to be a franchise or an amendment to any franchise. 
Sec. 10.10. - Sale or assignment of franchise. 
    The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to use the same, unless the council shall give its consent. Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its property or franchise, nor shall it restrict the rights of the purchaser upon foreclosure sale to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and to the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 10.11. - Permits for installation of water mains, sewers and drains. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this Charter to the contrary, the council may grant permits for the installation and maintenance of water mains, sewers and drains in the streets, alleys and public places without the approval of electors, which permits may be made irrevocable unless the grantee be a private person, firm or corporation. 
Sec. 10.12. - Public utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain either within or without its corporate limits, a hospital, public utilities, including but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment and garbage disposal facilities or any of them, to the city and its inhabitants; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utilities and services, without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by the state constitution. The council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city, and others, with water, with electricity for light, heat, and power and with such other utility services as the city may provide. 
Sec. 10.13. - Utility charges. 
    The council shall by ordinance, fix the rates to be charged for, and provide for the collection of all public utility charges made by the city and for such purpose, shall have all the power granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sum due on utility bills, the utility service or services upon which such delinquency exists, may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER XI. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Supervisors . 
    The mayor shall constitute one of the supervisors of the city to represent the city on the board of supervisors for the County of Oakland. Any additional representatives on said board of supervisors to which the city may be entitled, shall be appointed by the council at its first regular meeting following each regular city election and shall hold office for a term of two (2) years. The supervisors of the city shall perform the duties required to be performed by supervisors under the general laws of the state, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. Each supervisor shall, in the performance of his duties, to the best of his ability, represent the city, its inhabitants and its government as a whole. All supervisors of the city shall be entitled to retain any compensation and mileage paid to them by the county as members of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Oakland. 
7 See Charter Appendix, item 7. 
Sec. 11.2. - Oath of office. 
    Every person elected or appointed to any city office before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to an oath of office as provided by the state constitution and by general law, which shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 11.3. - Notice of election or appointment. 
    Written notice of election or appointment of any city officer shall be mailed to him at his address in the city by the city clerk within five (5) days after the appointment is made or the vote canvassed. If within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, such officer shall not take, subscribe to and file with the city clerk, an oath of office, such neglect shall be deemed a refusal to serve and the office shall thereupon be deemed vacant, unless the council shall, within said period of ten (10) days extend the time in which such officer may qualify. 
Sec. 11.4. - Restrictions. 
    The city shall not make any contract with, or give any official position to anyone who is in default to the city. 
Sec. 11.5. - Vacancy defined. 
    In addition to other provisions of this Charter, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist when any elective officer fails to qualify within the time prescribed in section 11.3 of this Charter; a vacancy shall also exist when an officer fails to qualify within ten (10) days after his appointment, dies, resigns, is removed from office, moves his legal residence from the city, is convicted of a felony or breach of public trust, or is judicially declared to be mentally incompetent. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, vacancies in office shall be filled in the following manner: 
(a)  Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment, and shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(b)  Vacancies in elective offices shall be filled by temporary appointment by the council by majority vote of its members elect. Such appointee shall hold office and serve until a successor to fill such vacancy shall be elected at the next regular city election and qualified. The successor officer elected at said election shall hold office for the balance of the unexpired term of the officer whose vacancy is filled. In the event council fails to make a temporary appointment within sixty (60) days of the vacancy, it shall order a special election to be held as soon as legally possible to fill such vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term of said elective officer. 
(c)  If four (4) or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of councilman, the clerk shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, call for the necessary primary election and special election, to be held as soon as legally possible to fill such vacancies for the unexpired terms of the said elective officers. 
(Referendum of 11-6-79; Referendum of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 11.6. - Improper contract or use of city property. 
    No elective or appointive officer shall take any official action on any contract or other matter in which he has any financial interest other than the common public interest. No officer or employee shall devote any city property or lands to a private use. Any officer or employee violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall forfeit his office or position. 
Sec. 11.7. - Misdemeanors under Charter. 
    All offenses in this Charter declared to be misdemeanors and all violations of city ordinances shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 11.8. - Notice of publication. 
    Notices of proceedings requiring publication shall unless otherwise provided by this Charter, be published at least once in the official newspaper. The council shall annually designate the official newspaper. If, at any time, the newspapers which have been designated, cease regular publication, or are not giving satisfactory service, the council shall order the publication of such notices, proceedings, ordinances or other records, as are required to be published, in some other newspapers printed and published in the city in the English language, or if there be none, then in some other newspapers printed in the English language and circulated in the city; provided, however, that the city shall not be without official newspapers more than thirty (30) days. Where no paper is available, in lieu of publication, in the official newspaper, the council, in any particular instance, may order such notice of proceedings printed and posted in at least ten (10) public places in the city, including not less than one (1) place in each precinct. 
Sec. 11.9. - Meaning of state and city. 
    Wherever used in this Charter, the word "state" shall mean "State of Michigan," and the word "City" shall mean the "City of Southfield." 
Sec. 11.10. - Gender. 
(a)  Every word used in this Charter importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and the words "he," "him" and "his" shall be construed to also mean "she," "her" and "hers," respectively. 
(b)  Whenever used in this Charter the words "councilman" or "councilmen" shall hereafter be changed to "councilman/councilwoman" or "councilmen/councilwomen," respectively. 
(Referendum of 11-7-89) 
Sec. 11.11. - Public records. 
    All records of the municipality shall be public. 
Sec. 11.12. - Prior township ordinances and regulations. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulation of the Township of Southfield, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, in force and effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter, shall continue in full force as ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city until repealed or amended by action of the proper authorities. 
Sec. 11.13. - Effect of illegality of any part of the Charter. 
    Should any provision or section or portion thereof, of this Charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this Charter as a whole, or of any remaining portion of such provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of this Charter commission and of the electors who voted thereon, that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Charter except that specifically affected by such holding. 
Sec. 11.14. - Tense. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. 
Sec. 11.15. - Corporate seal. 
    The city council shall provide a corporate seal for the City of Southfield. 
Sec. 11.16. - Headings. 
    The Charter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be part of this Charter. 
Sec. 11.17. - Office quarters; clerical help and supplies. 
    The council shall provide such adequate quarters, supplies, equipment and clerical services as it may determine to be reasonably necessary to the efficient operation and administration of all city offices, services, departments, boards and commission. 
Sec. 11.18. - Amendments. 
    The Charter may be amended at any time by the legislative body on a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the members-elect, or by an initiatory petition in the manner provided in Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended; provided however, that in case of an initiatory petition, the circulator thereof shall be a registered elector residing in the City of Southfield. 
    Should two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative votes shall prevail as to those provisions. 
(Referendum of 11-5-85) 
Sec. 11.19. - Nepotism. 
    Except and unless relatives by blood or marriage of the mayor, city clerk, treasurer, any councilman, municipal judge, associate judge, or the city administrator, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election of such officers or appointment of such city administrator, such relatives shall be disqualified from holding any appointive office or from being employed by the city, during the tenure of office of such mayor, clerk, treasurer, councilman, municipal judge, associate municipal judge or city administrator. 
Sec. 11.20. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    Except as permitted by law, the city shall not discriminate against a person with respect to hiring, contracting, purchasing, the use of city facilities or the provision of city services on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, marital status, or disability. 
(Referendum of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 11.21. - Abstention from voting. 
    A member of council may only abstain from voting on a question in which he or she either has any financial interest other than the common public interest, or if voting on such question would raise an appearance of impropriety. The basis for the abstention shall be stated on the record. 
(Referendum of 11-6-01) 
Sec. 11.22. - Employees retirement board. 
    Effective March 31, 2003, the powers and responsibilities of the civil service commission with regard to the employee retirement plan, as set forth in section 6.5(b)2 of this Charter, shall be transferred to a board, consisting of seven (7) members, to be known as the employees retirement board. The members of the board, whose terms of office shall be established by ordinance, shall be appointed as follows: 
(a)  Three (3) of the members shall be the same members that serve on the civil service commission. 
(b)  One (1) member, excluding any Southfield Employee Retirement System member, shall be appointed by the mayor with the confirmation of the city council. 
(c)  Two (2) members shall be elected by the active employee members of the Southfield Employee Retirement System from their own number. 
(d)  One (1) member shall be elected by the retired employee members of the Southfield Employee Retirement System from their own number. 
(Referendum of 11-5-02) 
CHAPTER XII. - SCHEDULE 

Sec. 12.1. - Election on adoption of Charter. 
(a)  Date: This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified and registered electors of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, at a special election held on Monday, April 21, 1958. 
    At the said special election, the elective officers provided for in this Charter shall also be elected, in the manner as hereinafter provided. This Charter shall be adopted as the Charter for the City of Southfield if a majority of the ballots cast thereon are in favor of the adoption thereof. 
(b)  Form of ballot: The form of ballot for the submission of this Charter shall be as follows: 
OFFICIAL BALLOT 
Special election held in the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, on the 21st day of April, 1958, upon the Charter thereof, and for elective city officers thereunder. 
(Instructions: Place a cross "X" in the square before the word "no" if against the proposed Charter.) 
Shall the proposed Charter for the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, drafted by the charter commission elected on the 16th day of September, 1957, be adopted? 
? YES 
? NO 
(c)  Election commission: The Charter Commission of the City of Southfield shall be the election commission for this special election. The chairman of the charter commission shall be chairman of the election commission, and the secretary of the charter commission shall be the secretary of the election commission, and shall perform such duties in connection with the work of the election commission as are prescribed by the said commission and this Charter. 
(d)  Inspectors of election: The inspectors of election for this special election shall be those persons designated by the election commission at its meeting at which the proposed Charter is adopted by the charter commission. 
(e)  Board of canvassers: The board of canvassers for this special election shall be the members of the charter commission. The chairman of the charter commission shall be the chairman of the board of canvassers and the secretary of the charter commission shall be the secretary of the board of canvassers. The board of canvassers shall meet at the Township Hall, 26080 Berg Road, Southfield Township, Oakland County, Michigan, at 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on the Thursday following this special election, and such board shall thereupon canvass the results of said election and certify the same. 
(f)  Registration: The secretary of the charter commission shall be in charge of the registration of electors of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, in accordance with the statute in such case made and provided all residents of the territory embraced within the territorial limits of the City of Southfield, who have the qualifications of electors and who have not previously registered in order to vote in the City of Southfield, (salmon card), thereof, shall be required to register in order to vote at this special election. The secretary shall have the power and authority to select and appoint such assistants as may be required to perform the registration of the electors. Registration shall be held in each voting precinct at the polling place on such days and between such hours as the secretary of the charter commission shall designate prior to the last day for receiving registrations, which date is the twenty fourth date of March, 1958, and on which later date, registration shall be made at the Township Hall between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time. All registration records shall be delivered to the city clerk of Southfield after the holding of the special election. 
(g)  Notice of registration: The secretary of the election commission shall give notice for the board of registration of the days, hours, and places that the registration of electors will be conducted by publishing the same in the Birmingham Eccentric, The Four Corners Press and the Southfield Sun, newspapers, on the thirteenth day of March, 1958, and the twentieth day of March, 1958, said newspapers being of general circulation, in the City of Southfield, the first of said publications to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the last day for receiving registrations and by posting copies thereof in at least two (2) of the most conspicuous places in each voting precinct. 
(h)  Notice of election: The secretary of the election commission shall cause to be published, with the publication of this Charter, in the Four Corners Press, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Southfield, on the third day of April, 1958, and on the seventeenth day of April, 1958, a notice of this election and location of the polling places, that on the date fixed therefor, the question of adopting such proposed Charter will be voted on, and that the elective officers provided for in this Charter will be elected on the same date. Copies of such notice shall be posted, in at least two (2) of the most conspicuous places in each voting precinct within the proposed City of Southfield, not less than ten (10) days prior to such election. 
(i)  Voting precincts: The voting precincts and the polling places for this election shall conform as near as may be to the polling places and voting precincts now established in that portion of the Township of Southfield included in the territorial limits of the proposed City of Southfield. 
(j)  Procedure governing election: In all respects not otherwise provided for in Chapter III of this Charter, the election procedure shall be in accordance with the provisions of the other chapters of this Charter. 
Sec. 12.2. - First election of city officers. 
(a)  The first election of city officers provided for in this Charter shall be held on Monday, the twenty first day of April, 1958, in conjunction with the election of the adoption of the Charter. At such election, the voters shall be entitled to vote for not more than one (1) candidate for mayor; seven (7) candidates for councilman; one (1) candidate for clerk; one (1) candidate for treasurer; one (1) candidate for municipal judge; and one (1) candidate for associate municipal judge. 
    Terms of elective officers: All candidates, including the seven (7) members of the council elected at this election to adopt or reject this Charter shall hold their offices for a term commencing on the first Monday following the said election to adopt this Charter and ending when their respective successors have been duly elected and qualified at the regular city election held in the year 1961. 
(b)  Councilmen elected at regular city election in year 1961: At the regular city election held in the year 1961, there shall be elected seven (7) members of the council, the three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for such office shall serve and hold their offices for a term of four (4) years, and the four (4) candidates receiving the next highest number of votes for such office shall serve and hold their offices for a term of two (2) years. All other officers elected at such election shall be elected in the manner, and shall serve and hold their respective offices for such term or terms, as is provided in this Charter with respect thereto. 
    At the regular city election held in the year 1963 and at all times thereafter, all elective city officers, including members of the council, shall be nominated, elected and shall take and hold their respective offices for such term or terms as is provided in this Charter with respect thereto. 
(c)  Nomination of candidates for elective offices: Candidates for the elective offices to be voted upon at this special election shall be nominated by petition in form, manner and substance as provided for in sections 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 of this Charter, except that the petition shall be filed with the secretary of the election commission, or such other person designated by him, who shall perform all duties in connection with such nomination petitions as are required of the city clerk by this Charter, and the nomination petitions shall be filed not later than the twenty fourth day of March, 1958, at 4:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, with the secretary of the election commission, who shall make available, a supply of official petition forms as required in chapter III of this Charter, which petitions shall be made available for distribution on the twenty fourth day of February, 1958. The secretary of the election commission shall publish, in the three above-mentioned newspapers, a notice of the days permitted for filing nomination petitions, the number of signatures required and the number of persons to be elected to each office to be voted upon at said special election; other provisions of this Charter notwithstanding, the names of those candidates who shall file valid, proper and sufficient nominating petitions, and have the qualifications required for the respective office, and who have filed the statement of candidacy heretofore required in this Charter, shall be certified to the election commission to be placed upon the official ballot for such election. 
(d)  Residential requirements: The residential requirements for elective city officials to be elected at the first election of city officers to be held on the twenty first day of April, 1958, shall be deemed to have been satisfied if the officer shall have been a resident of the portion of the Township of Southfield incorporated within the territorial limits of the City of Southfield for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the election. 
(e)  Modification of form of nomination petition and statement of candidacy: The form of the nomination petition and statement of candidacy, and the attendant matters in connection therewith, shall be modified so as to comply with the requirements of this Charter. 
(f)  Other election procedure: In all other respects not otherwise provided for in this section, the procedure for the election of officers shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 12.3. - Effective date of Charter. 
    For the purpose of initiating the procedure for the election on the adoption of this Charter, and for nominating and electing the first elective city officers, the Charter shall take effect on the twenty sixth day of September, 1957. For all other purposes, this Charter shall take effect on the twenty eighth day of April, 1958, at 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, at which time the officers first elected under the provisions of the Charter shall assemble in the Township Hall, 26080 Berg Road, Southfield Township, Michigan, for the inaugural ceremonies. The meeting shall be called to order by the chairman of the charter commission and each elective city officer shall take and subscribe to his oath of office, as administered by said chairman and shall thereupon be qualified for and shall assume the duties of his office. 
Sec. 12.4. - Continuation of employment of township officers and employees. 
    After the effective date of this Charter, all appointive officers and employees of the Township of Southfield, if they shall so elect, shall respectively hold similar or corresponding offices or employment in the city until their successors are appointed and qualify, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 12.5. - Interim financial provisions. 
    The period from the effective date of this Charter to June 30, 1958, inclusive, shall constitute a special interim fiscal budget and tax period to accomplish the transition from the Township of Southfield administration to the city administration. The budget for such special fiscal year shall be prepared and adopted under the direction of the city council as expeditiously as possible after the effective date of this Charter. A public hearing on such budget shall be held upon five (5) days' published notice of the date of such public hearing. At the time of adoption of such budget, the council shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes for the interim fiscal year period, and shall provide a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon all real and personal property for such purposes. 
    Such tax levy shall not exceed three (3) mills upon the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. Such levy shall be spread on the tax roll which becomes due and payable on July 1, 1958, and the amounts of the taxes for such two (2) levies may be combined for the purpose of convenience in the spreading of the roll and preparation of the tax bills. Taxes for the interim period shall be collected in all respects as provided in this Charter for the collection of city taxes. 
Sec. 12.6. - Borrowing powers. 
    The council shall have the power to borrow money in a sum not exceeding two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) in anticipation of the collection of interim tax and the 1958 tax to provide funds from which to operate the city until tax monies shall be available thereafter. 
Sec. 12.7. - Continuation of the functions and duties of the planning commission and zoning board of the Township of Southfield. 
    Upon the effective date of this Charter, the powers provided and granted in existing ordinances and bylaws of the Township of Southfield, to the extent that such ordinances or bylaws apply to the territory embraced within the City of Southfield, are hereby adopted and shall be and remain in force and effect until the controlling ordinance or bylaws have been revised, amended or repealed by council action. The council shall appoint members to the City of Southfield Zoning Board and Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Charter on or before the first Monday of May. 
Sec. 12.8. - Township assets and liabilities. 
    As soon as practicable, the council shall take all necessary and proper action to obtain the division between the City of Southfield and the Township of Southfield, of the assets and liabilities of such township. 
Sec. 12.9. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City of Southfield under this Chapter, and to accomplish the transition from the township government to the city government, and it shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish such purpose. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
    At a regularly called meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, held on the twenty fourth day of February, 1958, at 8:00 p.m. of said day, the following action was taken: 
    It was moved by Commissioner Swanson and supported by Commissioner Costello that the following resolution be adopted: 
    RESOLVED: that the Charter Commission of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed Charter for the City of Southfield, and the Secretary of the Charter Commission be and he hereby is directed to transmit a copy of this Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval, in accordance with the Statute in such case made and provided, and to cause this proposed Charter to be published in THE FOUR CORNERS PRESS on the 3rd day of April, 1958, when so approved: 
Carried by the following vote: 
Ayes: Costello, Dohany, Flannery, Hollywood, Swanson, Swem, Walton, Wuerfel. 
Nays: None. 
ABSENT: Maloney 
    The chairman of the charter commission declared the resolution adopted and requested the members of the charter commission to authenticate said resolution and also the copy of the Charter to be presented to the Governor of the State of Michigan by affixing their signatures thereto: 
Thomas M. Costello C. Hugh Dohany Patrick G. Flannery John J. Hollywood Donald L. Swanson Eugene Swem J. Leo Walton R. F. Wuerfel  
    After affixing their respective signatures as aforesaid, the meeting adjourned, subject to the call of the chairman. 
STATE OF MICHIGAN )  SS: COUNTY OF OAKLAND )  
    Thomas M. Costello, Secretary, of the Charter Commission of the City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, being first duly sworn, deposes and says that, at the election held in the Township of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, on September 16, 1957, the following persons were duly elected members of the Charter Commission for the City of Southfield, Oakland, Michigan, namely: Thomas M. Costello, C. Hugh Dohany, Patrick G. Flannery, John J. Hollywood, Philip A. Maloney, Donald L. Swanson, Eugene Swem, J. Leo Walton and Robert F. Wuerfel, and that the annexed and foregoing Charter was duly adopted by the foregoing resolution, which is a true and accurate copy thereof, and that the said charter commission directed that the said Charter be submitted to the qualified electors of the City of Southfield in accordance with the requirements of this Charter and the statutes of the State of Michigan in such case made and provided. 
THOMAS M. COSTELLO 
Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Southfield 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me, a notary public in and for said state and county, this 24th day of February, 1958. 
CLARA LANE 
Notary Public 
Oakland County, Michigan 
My Commission expires August 15th, 1958. 
Approved: G. Mennen Williams, Governor, 3/19/58 
CHARTER APPENDIX 
1., 2. 1970 PA 239, § 1; MCLA 168.644g 
Terms of office, extension (M.S.A. 6.1644(7)) 
    Sec. 644g. (1) A term of office shall not be shortened by the provisions of sections 644a to 644l. An officer scheduled by prior law to be elected at a time other than in November of an odd-numbered year shall not be elected on the date scheduled but shall continue in office until a successor takes office pursuant to the first odd year general election following that date. 
    (2) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any officer required to be elected at the odd-year general election, who by law is elected for a term of an odd number of years shall be elected hereafter for a term of one (1) year longer than provided by law. 
    (3) In home rule cities where the charter provides for the election of city officers at a time other than in November of odd-numbered years and provides that members of the governing body are not all to be elected in the same year, the governing body by ordinance adopted prior to April 1, 1971, may alter the length of terms now provided by charter to provide that the city may continue to elect part of the governing body at each election. A term shall not be extended beyond January following the first odd-numbered year election at which the officer would be elected pursuant to charter. A term shall not be for more than four (4) years. 
3. 1972 PA 8, § 1; MCLA 117.5c 
Officers compensation commission; creation; powers 
    In place of a charter provision existing on December 31, 1972, establishing the salaries or the procedure for determining salaries of elected officials, the governing body, may establish by ordinance the procedure described in this section, in which case the restriction contained in a charter provision with respect to changing salaries during term shall be inapplicable. 
4. 1976 PA 267, § 5; MCLA 15.265 
Notice of public meetings 
    Sec. 5. (1) A meeting of a public body shall not be held unless public notice is given as provided in this section by a person designated by the public body. 
    (2) For regular meetings of a public body, there shall be posed within ten (10) days after the first meeting of the public body in each calendar or fiscal year a public notice stating the dates, times, and places of its regular meetings. 
    (3) If there is a change in the schedule of regular meetings of a public body, there shall be posted within three (3) days after the meeting at which the change is made, a public notice stating the new dates, times, and places of its regular meetings. 
    (4) For a rescheduled regular or a special meeting of a public body, a public notice stating the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be posted at least eighteen (18) hours before the meeting. The requirement of eighteen-hour notice shall not apply to special meetings of subcommittees. 
    (5) A meeting of a public body which is recessed for more than thirty-six (36) hours shall be reconvened only after public notice, which is equivalent to that required under subsection (4) has been posed. If either house of the state legislature is adjourned or recessed for less than eighteen (18) hours, the notice provisions of subsection (4) are not applicable. Nothing in this section shall ban a public body from meeting in emergency session in the event of a severe and imminent threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public when two-thirds of the members serving on the body decide that delay would be detrimental to efforts to lessen or respond to the threat. 
1976 PA 267, § 8; MCLA 15.268; Closed meetings 
    A public body may meet in closed session only for the following purposes: 
(a)  To consider the dismissal, suspension or disciplining of, or to hear complaints or charges brought against a public officer, employee, staff member, or individual agent, when the named person requests a closed hearing. 
(b)  To consider the dismissal, suspension, or disciplining of a student when the public body is part of the school district, intermediate school district, or institution of higher education which the student is attending, when the student or the student's parent or guardian requests a closed hearing. 
(c)  For strategy and negotiation sessions connected with the negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement when either negotiating party requests a closed hearing. 
(d)  To consider the purchase or lease of real property up to the time an option to purchase or lease that real property is obtained. 
(e)  To consult with its attorney regarding trial or settlement strategy in connection with specific pending litigation, but only when an open meeting would have a detrimental financial effect on the litigating or settlement position of the public body. 
(f)  To review the specific contents of an application for employment or appointment to a public office when the candidate requests that the application remain confidential. However, all interviews by a public body for employment or appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to this act. 
5. See item 3. 
1968 PA 236, § 992B; MCLA 600.992B 
6. Municipal courts, retention in certain cities (M.S.A. 27A.9928) 
    Sec. 9928 (1) The district court shall not function nor shall district judges be elected in any district of the third class in which one (1) or more cities which maintain municipal or police courts and which contain, individually or in the aggregate, more than fifty (50) percent of the population of the district elect to retain their municipal or police courts by resolution adopted by their respective governing bodies within seven (7) days after the effective date of this section. 
    (2) Municipal and police courts retained under the provisions of this section shall perform all duties and powers which by law may be performed by justices of the peace and the circuit court commissioners. 
    (3) The jurisdiction of such municipal or police courts is limited to their respective cities except that where the district contains one (1) or more townships such courts shall exercise the same jurisdiction and powers in such townships as they exercise in their respective cities. 
    (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a city shall not establish a municipal or police court after July 1, 1968. 
    (5) The city clerks of cities adopting resolutions under this section shall file copies of such resolutions with the court administrator within thirty (30) days after the adoption of such resolutions. 
    This act is ordered to take immediate effect. Approved June 17, 1968. 
7. 1968 PA 153, § 1; MCLA 46.401 
Board of supervisors; apportionment; initial plan, filing deadline; nominating petitions and litigation in 1968 
    Sec. 1. On or before May 15, 1967, and in subsequent years within sixty (60) days after the publication of the latest United States official decennial census figures, the county apportionment commission in each county of this state shall apportion the county into not less than five (5) nor more than thirty-five (35) county supervisor districts as nearly of equal population as is practicable and within the limitations of section 2. In counties under seventy-five thousand (75,000), upon the effective date of this act, the boards of supervisors of such counties shall have not to exceed thirty (30) days into which to apportion their county into supervisor districts in accordance with the provisions of this act. If at the expiration of the time as set forth in this section a board of supervisors has not so apportioned itself, the county apportionment commission shall proceed to apportion the county under the provisions of this act. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the initial plan for apportionment of the boards of supervisors shall be filed not later than 4:00 p.m. June 25, 1968. In any county in which a plan is not filed by 4:00 p.m. on June 25, 1968, seven (7) supervisors shall be elected at large in 1968 for one-year terms. In 1968 only, the deadline for filing nominating petitions or filing fees shall be 4:00 p.m. July 2, 1968. Because of the necessity of ensuring orderly election procedures for the year 1968, in no event will litigation affect, alter, change, amend or delay any apportionment plan adopted under this act insofar as 1968 supervisor elections are concerned. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the disposition of amendments to the Charter which are subsequent to its original enactment. 
Referendum 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter  4-26-66 6.20  5-16-72 5.2 11- 7-72 5.6  4- 7-74 8.6  8- 8-78 4.12, 6.18 11- 6-79 3.7, 3.30, 3.33, 4.1, 4.9, 4.16, 4.22, 5.2, 5.5       Rpld 6.9, 9.26, 11.5,       Rpld 11.10  8- 7-84 8.6 11- 5-85 6.9, 11.18 11- 7-89 4.9, 5.3, 11.10 11- 3-92       Added 5.3(e)  3- 9-99 6.18 11- 7-00 4.1 11- 7-00 8.2 11- 7-00 8.5 11- 7-00 11.5 11- 7-00       Added 11.20 11- 6-01       Added 11.21 11-13-01 4.9 11-13-01 5.3 11-13-01 5.6 11-13-01 6.5 11- 5-02       Added 11.22 11- 4-03 3.11 11- 4-03 3.23 11- 4-03 6.1 11- 4-03 6.5 11- 8-05 5.3(b) 11- 8-05 6.7(b) 11- 6-07 4.25(a)  
Title I - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities and services, tit. II; parks and public grounds, tit. III. 

CHAPTER 1. - ADOPTION, CONTENTS AND INTERPRETATION 
    An ordinance to provide for the exercise of certain municipal powers of the City of Southfield and for the health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the city, and to provide penalties for the violation of the provisions thereof. 
    The City of Southfield ordains: 

Sec. 1.1. - Publication and distribution of Code. 
    Publication of the within codification of the ordinances of the City of Southfield is hereby directed. One hundred (100) copies of the Code shall be published in loose-leaf form and shall be distributed as follows: 
Officer No. Copies Mayor ..... 1 Each councilman ..... 1 Clerk ..... 2 City administrator ..... 1 Director of public service ..... 1 Attorney ..... 1 Treasurer ..... 1 Assessor ..... 1 City engineer ..... 1 Health officer ..... 1 Chief of police ..... 2 Chief of fire department ..... 1 Superintendent of parks and recreation ..... 1 Director of the department of building and safety engineering ..... 1 District judges ..... 3  
The remaining copies shall be held by the city clerk for distribution or sale as directed by the city council. The clerk shall keep one (1) of the copies of the Code assigned to him available for public inspection during office hours. 
Sec. 1.2. - Amendment procedure. 
    This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)  To amend any section: 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION _____ (or SECTIONS _____ AND _____) OF CHAPTER _____ OF TITLE _____ OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD. 
(2)  To insert a new section, chapter or title: 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (_____ NEW SECTIONS, A NEW CHAPTER, or A NEW TITLE, as the case may be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS, CHAPTER or TITLE) SHALL BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION _____ (SECTIONS _____ AND _____) OF CHAPTER _____ OF TITLE _____ (or proper designation if a chapter or title is added) OF SAID CODE. 
(3)  To repeal a section, chapter or title: 
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION _____ (SECTIONS _____ AND _____), CHAPTER _____, TITLE _____, (as the case may be) OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SOUTHFIELD. 
Sec. 1.3. - Publication and distribution of amendments. 
    Amendments to the Code shall be published as required by the Charter of the City of Southfield and not less than one hundred (100) copies of each amendment shall be published in loose-leaf form suitable for insertion in the loose-leaf copies of this Code. The city clerk shall distribute such copies to the officers of the city having copies of the Code assigned to them. Each officer assigned a copy of the Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each copy of the Code shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by each officer having custody thereof upon expiration of his term of office to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1.4. - Contents of Code. 
    This code contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Southfield and includes ordinances dealing with municipal administration, utilities and services, parks and public grounds, streets and sidewalks, zoning and planning, food and health, businesses and trades, building, electrical, heating and plumbing regulations, police regulations and traffic regulations, and excludes ordinances granting franchises and special privileges, establishing sewer and other public improvement districts, providing for the construction of particular sewers, streets or sidewalks, or for the improvement thereof, and for the construction and improvement of other public works, authorizing the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds, and ordinances relating to the compensation to be paid particular officers and employees as distinguished from any ordinance establishing a general compensation plan. Ordinances establishing voting precincts shall not be deemed part of this Code. 
    The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as repealing or in any way affecting Ordinance 678, as amended, or as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. References in this Code to chapter 45 shall be deemed to refer to Ordinance 678 until Ordinance 678 or a zoning ordinance which supersedes Ordinance 678 is added to this Code. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature in effect on the effective date of this Code are hereby repealed except as otherwise provided herein; provided, however, that any sections or parts of any such ordinance which are not permanent and general in nature as herein defined and which are severable from the remainder of such ordinance are saved from repeal. Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1.5. - Short title. 
    This Code may be known and cited as the "Southfield City Code." 
Sec. 1.6. - Responsibility. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act. 
Sec. 1.6A. - Attempts. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the attempt to commit such act as defined and proscribed in this section. Any person who shall attempt to commit any offense prohibited by this Code, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution thereof, when no other express provision is made by this Code for the punishment or sanction of such attempt, shall be subject to the following punishment or sanction: 
(1)  If the offense so attempted to be committed is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, the person convicted of such attempt shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than forty-five (45) days, or by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and costs of prosecution, or by both such fine and imprisonment; but in no case shall the fine exceed one-half of the maximum fine established for the completed offense. 
(2)  If the offense so attempted to be committed is a civil infraction or civil offense proscribable by a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs of prosecution of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the person found responsible for such attempt shall be responsible for a civil infraction or civil offense, proscribable by a civil fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and costs of prosecution of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), but in no case shall the fine exceed one-half of the maximum fine established for the completed offense. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 1.7. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Code and any amendment thereto, shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Southfield. 
(2)  City. The word "city" means the City of Southfield. 
(3)  Conjunctive, disjunctive. Conjunctive and disjunctive words may be interchangeable to effect the purpose of any provisions. 
(4)  Council, city council. The words "council" and "city council" mean the Council of the City of Southfield. 
(5)  County. The word "county" means the County of Oakland. 
(6)  Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to females and to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations. 
(7)  Health officer shall mean the Oakland County Health Department and its officers. 
(8)  Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
(9)  Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
(10)  Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person or persons. 
(11)  Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
(12)  Officers. The several officers' titles mean such officers of the city, or their respective deputies or agents. 
(13)  Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
(14)  Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
(15)  Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any title, chapter or section of this Code shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title, chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference. 
(16)  Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
(17)  Public place. The words "public place" mean any street, alley, park, cemetery, public building or any place of business or assembly open to the public or frequented by the public. 
(18)  Seal. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the word "seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a wafer or wax. 
(19)  Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
(20)  State. The word "state" means the State of Michigan. 
(21)  Sundays, legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
(22)  Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as including the future as well as the present or past. 
(23)  Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means Eastern Standard Time or the time officially in force in the city. 
(24)  Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in this Code as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, sections and subsections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(25)  Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
(26)  Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
(27)  Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
Sec. 1.8. - Officers; acts required; performance, authority. 
    Whenever any act is required to be done pursuant to the provisions of this Code by any designated officer or official of the city and such officer or official has not been appointed, such act shall be performed by the city administrator. Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the city, such act may be performed by any city employee duly authorized to perform that act by such officer or official. 
Sec. 1.9. - Computation of time. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given shall not be counted in computing the time. The last day if it is Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday shall not be counted, in which event the period of time runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
Sec. 1.10. - Repeal of repealing ordinance; effect. 
    Whenever a title, chapter or section of this Code or any part thereof is repealed by a subsequent ordinance, such title, chapter or section of this Code or part thereof so repealed shall not be revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1.11. - Saving clause. 
    The repeal of any title, chapter or section of this Code or part thereof shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such title, chapter or section of this Code or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and such title, chapter or section of this Code or part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
Sec. 1.12. - Title of officer to include deputy or subordinate. 
    Whenever by the provisions of this Code any officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of such officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. 
Sec. 1.13. - Single lot assessments. 
(1)  When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of this Code and is not of that class required to be prorated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material, and service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, together with a notice of assessment proceedings, shall be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed whose name appears on the last local tax assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes that has been reviewed by the local board of review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of the owners or parties listed on that roll. 
(a)  The account shall specify the sum due and payable to the city in payment of the expense, without penalty, within thirty (30) days of the date of the account, and shall further specify the sum due and payable upon expiration of thirty (30) days as hereafter provided. If the account is not fully paid within the initial thirty-day period, a ten (10) percent penalty on the amount due shall be assessed by the city and paid by the property owner. 
(b)  The notice shall provide the name, address and telephone number of the individual at the city designated by the city administrator having responsibility and authority to answer questions, correct errors, and resolve disputes regarding the account within the thirty-day period. 
(2)  Should any owner or party in interest in the property to be assessed find any inaccuracy, irregularity, error, or question in the account or in the notice of assessment proceedings described in subsection one above, the owner shall be entitled to appeal to the individual designated in subsection (1)(b) above. If requested by the owner, the individual designated in subsection (1)(b) above shall schedule a hearing and provide the owner or interested party with an opportunity to be heard in regard to the account or proceedings. Action to assess the account to the single lot or parcel shall be stayed until such time as a written finding and order is issued and given to the owner or interested party initiating the appeal. The individual designated in subsection (1)(b) above may order any correction, cancellation, or modification in the account that he or she determines to be substantiated by the facts disclosed at the hearing. 
(3)  On or before December 31 of each year the individual designated in subsection (1)(b) above shall report all accounts to the city assessor that are thirty (30) or more days delinquent. 
(4)  The assessor shall prepare an assessment roll or rolls covering all such charges reported under subsection (3) above. Such roll or rolls shall be filed with the clerk who shall advise the council of the filing of the same, and the council shall thereupon schedule a hearing for the fourth Monday in the month of April for the confirmation of the assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven (7) days before the council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints from any owner or interested party. If for any reason a quorum of council members is not present at the meeting on the fourth Monday in April, the roll shall be considered for confirmation at the next regular meeting of the council at which a quorum is present. 
(5)  Such assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by section 1.237 of the Code. Such assessment shall be added by the treasurer to the next general city tax roll or general county and school tax roll, as shall be convenient, and shall thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1311, § 1, 11-26-90; Ord. No. 1585 , §§ 1, 2, 6-19-11) 
Cross reference- Special assessments for street improvements, § 1.221 et seq. 
Sec. 1.14. - Notice. 
(1)  Unless a specific method of service is required by another statute or ordinance, notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating a nuisance or any other act, the expense of which, if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, may be served: 
(a)  By serving the notice in the same manner as service of summons and complaint in a civil matter as provided by Michigan Statute or the Michigan Court Rules. 
(b)  By sending a copy of the notice to the owner at his or her last known address by enclosing the notice in a sealed envelope with first class postage fully prepaid, addressed to the owner, and depositing the envelope and its contents in the United States mail. Service in this manner is complete at the time of mailing. 
(c)  If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five (5) days. 
(2)  Any person who shall remove, deface, mutilate, conceal or alter an official notice posted under the authority of subsection (1)(c) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 11-26-90) 
Cross reference- City water utility, § 2.31 et seq.; city sewer service, § 2.101; sidewalks, § 4.61 et seq.; housing code, § 8.141 et seq.; building code, § 8.201 et seq.; nuisances, § 9.1 et seq. 
Sec. 1.15. - Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
Sec. 1.16. - Severability. 
    It is the legislative intent of the council, in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
Sec. 1.17. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance Code shall take effect in accordance with the ordinance enacting it. 
Sec. 1.18. - Enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise specified in this Code, the responsibility for enforcing all provisions of this Code shall be with the city police department. 
CHAPTER 2. - VOTING PRECINCTS 

Sec. 1.31. - Precincts established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act 271, Public Acts of 1955, State of Michigan, as amended, and in accordance with section 3.1 of the Charter, the official precinct boundaries for the precincts for voting in elections conducted by and within the city shall be established by ordinance. Such ordinances shall be deemed special ordinances and shall not be published as a part of this Code. 
Charter reference- Duty to establish election precincts, § 3.1. 
Cross reference- Elections, § 1.381 et seq. 
Note- The city has adopted Ordinance No. 1494 which establishes new boundaries for its voting precincts and reducing the number of precincts from fifty (50) to forty-three (43). The ordinance was introduced and enacted as an emergency ordinance on March 17, 2003, and will become effective upon publication of this summary. A true copy of Ordinance No. 1494 may be inspected and obtained at the Southfield City Clerk's Office, 26000 Evergreen Road, Southfield, MI 48076. 
CHAPTER 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Sec. 1.91. - Division of administrative service. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of a head as listed opposite such office or department, under the supervision of such board, commission or other authority as may be prescribed by the Charter or this Code. 
Office or department Official head Office of clerk City clerk Office of treasurer City treasurer Office of director of public safety Director of public safety Department of police Police chief Department of fire Fire chief Department of public service Director of public service Department of building and safety engineering Director of building and safety engineering Department of parks and recreation Superintendent of parks and recreation Department of planning City planner Department of health Health officer Department of law City attorney Assessing department Director of assessments  
    The administrative officers of the city shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed in the Charter and in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 942, § 1, 7-18-77) 
ARTICLE I. - CLERK, ASSESSOR, TREASURER AND CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 1.92. - Clerk, assessor, treasurer and city administrator. 
    The clerk, assessor, treasurer and city administrator shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such offices in the Charter, this Code and the statutes of the state. 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of clerk, § 5.7; city treasurer, §§ 5.8, 5.9; city administrator, § 6.1; city assessor, § 6.4. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF REVIEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Time for making assessment rolls, § 9.8; board of review, § 9.10; notice of meeting of board of review, § 9.11. 

Sec. 1.93. - Delivery of roll. 
    On or before the first day of the meeting of the board of review in each year the assessor shall complete and certify an assessment roll in the manner and form required by the Charter. On the date and at the time of convening the board of review in each year, the assessor shall deliver the completed assessment roll to the board of review. The roll shall not be removed from the meeting place of the board of review while the board of review is in session, and when the board of review is not in session, the roll shall be returned to the office of the assessor of the city for safekeeping. 
Sec. 1.94. - Meetings. 
    The board of review shall convene at 9:00 a.m. on the first Monday in March in each year at the city civic center. The city council may provide by resolution that further meetings for that year shall be held at another location within the city. The board of review shall continue in session for a minimum of six (6) hours during that day for a minimum of six (6) hours on each of the following three (3) days, for the purpose of examining and reviewing the assessment roll of the city. The city council may extend the period for reviewing the assessment roll, but the review of assessments by the board of review shall be completed on or before the first Monday in April. All business conducted by the board of review shall be at meetings of the board of review held in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. On the first day of its meeting in each year, the board of review shall elect one of its members chairman for the year. 
Sec. 1.95. - Terms. 
    The terms of office of the members of the board of review shall be as follows: One (1) shall terminate on June 30, 1964; one (1) shall terminate on June 30, 1965; and one (1) shall terminate on June 30, 1966. Commencing July 1, 1964, the term of office of any member thereafter appointed shall be three (3) years unless such appointment shall be to fill a portion of an unexpired term. If the appointment is to fill a portion of an unexpired term, the term of such member so appointed shall expire at the end of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 1.96. - Compensation. 
    The compensation of the members of the board of review shall be as set by the council from time to time by resolution. 
Secs. 1.97-1.100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Police department, § 6.6. 
Cross reference- Police regulations, tit. IX; city constables, § 9.401 et seq.; traffic, tit. X. 

Sec. 1.101. - Department of police. 
    The department of police shall be headed by the chief of police who shall be the commanding officer of the police force. He shall direct the police work of the city and be responsible for the enforcement of law and order. 
Sec. 1.102. - Functions of police department. 
    The police work of the city shall consist of the following functions: 
(1)  The operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigation and the general maintenance of law and order; 
(2)  The maintenance of the central complaint desk at central police headquarters, the maintaining and supervising of police records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification, custody of property and the operation of detention quarters; 
(3)  The investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor traffic and vice, and the preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal cases and offenses in violation of the ordinances of the city; 
(4)  The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the handling of cases in which women are involved, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community agencies interested in crime prevention; 
(5)  The control of traffic, traffic education programs, school patrols and coordination of traffic violation prosecutions. The maintenance and erection of traffic signs and the painting of street and crosswalk lanes shall be a joint responsibility of the police department and the department of public service; 
(6)  City parking lots and meter operation and control. 
Sec. 1.103. - Department rules. 
    The chief of police may prescribe rules for the government of police officers of the city, which shall be entered in a book of police department rules and orders and may be amended or revoked by the police chief. Such rules may establish one (1) or more divisions within the police department, each of which divisions may be charged with performing one (1) or more of the functions of the police department enumerated in section 1.102. Any such division shall be supervised by a qualified officer of the police department, who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the police department assigned to the particular division supervised by him. It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to comply with such rules and orders while effective. 
Sec. 1.104. - Acting chief. 
    The chief of police shall not leave the city without notifying the city administrator in cases of necessity arising from emergency. In case of the absence from the city of the chief of police, or his disability or inability from any cause to act as chief of police, the city administrator shall designate and appoint some other members of the police department to act as chief among such absence or disability. 
Sec. 1.105. - Monthly reports. 
    The chief of police shall report monthly to the city council all arrests made by the department, the disposition of persons arrested, and the number of persons remaining in confinement for ordinance violations, and such other information as the city council shall require. 
Secs. 1.106-1.115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1314, § 1, adopted November 26, 1990, repealed former §§ 1.106-1.110 in their entirety. The aforesaid sections were concerned with lost property, and derived from the Code of 1976. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department, § 6.7. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 

Sec. 1.116. - Department of fire. 
    The department of fire shall be headed by the fire chief, who shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to it, and the conducting of an educational fire prevention program. 
Sec. 1.117. - Department rules. 
    The fire chief shall adopt rules and regulations for the government of the department which shall be entered in a book of fire department rules and which may be changed and repealed by the fire chief. Such rules and regulations shall designate the chain of command for the department so that in the absence or disability of the chief, the responsibility for the operation of the department shall immediately and automatically be vested in the next ranking officer or member of the department present. 
Sec. 1.118. - Department equipment. 
    The fire chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property and equipment used by the fire department. 
Sec. 1.119. - Enforce fire laws. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire chief to enforce all state laws and provisions of this Code governing the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage and use of explosives and flammables; 
(3)  The maintenance of fire alarm systems, both automatic and private, and all fire-extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and use of fire escapes; 
(5)  The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards in all buildings and structures; 
(6)  The maintenance and adequacy of fire exits from factories, schools, hotels, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work or congregate for any purpose. 
Sec. 1.120. - Other duties. 
    The fire chief shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Investigate the origin, cause and circumstances of all fires. 
(2)  Issue all orders necessary for the enforcement of state laws and provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Require and supervise from time to time fire drills from all schools and educational institutions as required by law. 
Secs. 1.121-1.124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 1.125. - Creation of office. 
    There is hereby created the office of director of public safety who shall be in immediate charge of the police department, fire department and civil defense department of the city and who shall be directly responsible to the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 942, § 2, 7-18-77) 
Sec. 1.126. - Appointment; compensation. 
    The director of public safety shall be appointed by the city administrator with the consent of the council. His compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 942, § 2, 7-18-77) 
Sec. 1.127. - Function. 
    The director of public safety shall have full and complete administrative control over the fire, police and civil defense departments. 
(Ord. No. 942, § 2, 7-18-77) 
Secs. 1.128-1.130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

Sec. 1.131. - Department of public service. 
(1)  The department of public service shall consist of the director of public service and such employees as the director of public service shall deem necessary and appoint, subject to section 6.5 of the Charter. 
(2)  The director of public service shall be appointed in accordance with section 6.1 of the Charter, and shall be responsible directly to the city administrator for the management and operation of the department. 
(3)  The director of public service shall be responsible for all matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of the physical properties of the city which are not assigned by Charter or this Code to other city officers. 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 6.8. 
Sec. 1.132. - Organization and functions. 
    The department of public service shall be divided into the following divisions: 
(1)  Highway division: Shall have charge of the maintenance of all improved and unimproved street surfaces, bridges, cleaning of improved streets, removal of snow, and such other problems of maintenance and service as may be required of the division by the director of public service. 
(2)  Water division: Shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of the city water distribution system including supervision of construction of water mains, service connections, installation and repair of meters and meter readings. 
(3)  Sewer division: Shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of the city sanitary sewer system, including supervision of construction of sanitary sewers, service connections, pumping stations and related appurtenances. 
(4)  Sanitation division: Shall have charge of the collection and disposal of refuse from residential units within the city. 
(5)  Public buildings and equipment division: Shall have charge of the maintenance of all public buildings and motorized equipment not assigned by the Charter or this Code to other city departments. 
(6)  Engineering division: Shall perform all engineering services for the department and for such other departments of the city as may from time to time be required. 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish, § 2.1 et seq.; city water utility, § 2.31 et seq.; city sewer service, § 2.101 et seq.; streets, § 4.1 et seq. 
Secs. 1.133, 1.134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND SAFETY ENGINEERING 

Sec. 1.135. - Department of building and safety engineering. 
    The department of building and safety engineering shall be headed by the director of the department of building and safety engineering. He shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work done under the provisions of the heating, electrical, plumbing and building codes of the city and the safety inspection of all premises, including structures thereon, and the enforcement of zoning and housing regulations of the city. 
Charter reference- Department of building and safety engineering, § 6.12. 
Cross reference- Zoning regulations, ch. 45; housing code, § 8.141 et seq.; building code, § 8.201 et seq.; electrical code, § 8.401 et seq.; plumbing code, § 8.451 et seq. 
Secs. 1.136, 1.137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 1.138. - Department of parks and recreation. 
    The department of parks and recreation shall be headed by the superintendent of parks and recreation. This department shall have charge of the control and regulation of the planting of trees and of the planting, development, maintenance, management and operation of parks, boulevards, recreation facilities and all city cemeteries. It shall also have all powers and duties expressed in the Charter. 
Charter reference- Department of parks and recreation, § 6.10. 
Cross reference- Park regulations, § 3.1 et seq.; tree regulations, § 3.21 et seq.; city cemeteries, § 3.51 et seq.; recreation, amusements and games, § 7.251 et seq. 
Secs. 1.139, 1.140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 1.141. - Planning department. 
    The planning department shall be headed by the city planner who shall be responsible to the city council. He shall make the necessary studies and surveys of matters relating to city growth and development, advise the council as to the implementation of the city plan, furnish technical advice and assistance in planning and zoning matters and furnish such information and data to the city planning commission as it may require in the performance of its duties and functions. 
Charter reference- Planning department, § 6.11. 
Cross reference- Zoning and planning, tit. V. 
Sec. 1.142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OFFICIAL SEAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Council to provide corporate seal, § 11.15. 

Sec. 1.143. - Custody of seal. 
    The official seal of the city shall be in the custody of the city clerk, who shall be responsible for the safeguarding of such seal. 
Sec. 1.144. - Use of seal. 
    The official seal of the city shall be used whenever authorized by the city council. Copies, facsimiles or reproductions of such seal may be used by the clerk, the mayor and the city council in connection with the exercise of the duties of their respective offices. Any other use of the seal, or a copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof, is hereby prohibited unless express permission is given for such use by the city council. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEPUTIES 

Sec. 1.145. - Appointment. 
    The mayor may appoint a deputy assessor and a deputy planner with the consent of the city council. In case of a vacancy in the office of the city assessor or city planner, or the inability to perform the duties of the office by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the powers and authority of their superior officer. Such deputies shall be paid a salary as the city council may from time to time determine. 
ARTICLE XII. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 

Sec. 1.146. - Organization. 
(1)  The department of human resources shall be in the immediate charge of the director of human resources, who shall be responsible directly to the city administrator. 
(2)  The department of human resources shall be administered as a regular department of the city government. The responsibility of the department of human resources shall include youth employment-manpower, Southfield-Lathrup Youth Services and the parent-youth guidance commission, all of which shall operate as divisions under the department of human resources. 
(3)  The department of human resources through the above-mentioned divisions and the Special Help Program shall be responsible for upgrading the human condition of city residents of every age. Services provided through this department include, but are not limited to: employment counseling and aid in job placement; individual and group counseling for persons or families; counseling and short-term aid for people with financial difficulties; home visits to shut-ins, senior citizens and others with particular problems requiring special care; and a referral source to departments and agencies which can provide needed services for clients. 
(4)  The parent-youth guidance commission shall be governed by a commission of citizens appointed by the city council under chapter 4 of this Code. It is the duty of this commission to promote programs designed to prevent delinquency and neglect among the youth of the community (See chapter 4). 
(5)  An advisory board known as the Southfield-Lathrup Youth Services Advisory Board is constituted for the purpose of giving professional and community direction and input to the Youth Services and Youth Employment-Manpower Divisions. This board is made up of representatives of sponsoring agencies, namely the city council, the Southfield-Lathrup School Board and the Lathrup Village City Council, as well as citizens representing the various helping professions and the community at large. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 1.151 et seq. 
CHAPTER 4. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Southfield-Lathrup Youth Services Advisory Board, § 1.146; unemployment compensation appeal board, § 1.264 et seq.; administrative civil service commission, § 1.338; City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board, § 3.75 et seq.; historic designation advisory board, § 5.603; historic district commission, § 5.604; mechanical code board of appeals, § 8.258; board of electrical examiners, § 8.423; plumbing code board of appeals, § 8.458; cable communications commission, § 12.10 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.151. - General provisions. 
    All boards and commissions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code shall be continued and the members serving thereon shall remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed. 
Sec. 1.152. - Vacancies. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment. 
Sec. 1.153. - Compensation. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as members thereof. 
Sec. 1.154. - Residency requirements. 
(1)  All persons who are appointed or reappointed to any board or commission, now existing or hereafter created, with the exception of the parent-youth guidance commission as provided for in sections 1.165 through 1.168 of this Code, shall be a bona fide resident of the city or must establish such residency in the city within six (6) months after receiving such appointment. A "bona fide resident" shall be deemed to be a person having actual and physical domicile within the city; where such person normally eats, sleeps, and maintains his/her normal and customary personal and household effects. 
(2)  Upon any member of a board or commission failing to establish and/or maintain bona fide residency within the city as provided herein, such member's office shall thereby be deemed vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment. 
(3)  Persons appointed or reappointed to a board or commission which is formed jointly between Southfield and another public entity may be residents of either the city or such other public entity. 
(4)  Upon a specific finding by the city council that a nonresident person proposed to be appointed or reappointed to a board or commission possesses certain expertise, experience or technical skill which would promote or enhance the best interests of the city, the city council may, by an affirmative vote of at least five (5) members, waive or modify the condition of residency with respect to such person. 
(5)  All members serving on any board or commission on the date this section shall become effective, who are not bona fide residents of the city, may remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed, but may not be reappointed unless they establish and maintain residency within the city as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 1, 8-24-87; Ord. No. 1259, § 1, 1-23-69) 
Secs. 1.155-1.160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARTER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Civil service commission, § 6.5; recreation board, § 6.10; planning commission, § 6.11; fire and police department retirement board, § 6.16; library board, § 6.18. 

Sec. 1.161. - Charter boards and commissions. 
    The civil service commission, the board of appeals, the parks and recreation board, the planning commission, the fire and police department retirement board, and the library board shall be organized and have the powers and duties as prescribed by law and the Charter. 
Secs. 1.162-1.164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1560 , § 1, published June 3, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 1.165-1.168, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to the parent-youth guidance commission, and derived from Ord. No. 1548, adopted May 14, 2007. 

Secs. 1.165-1.170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOUTHFIELD HOUSING COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Housing code, § 8.141 et seq.; fair neighborhood practices, § 9.381 et seq. 

Sec. 1.171. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended, there is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the Southfield Housing Commission. 
Sec. 1.172. - Membership; appointment; terms; compensation. 
    The housing commission shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the city administrator. The term of office of the members of the commission shall be five (5) years. Members of the first commission existing under this article shall be appointed for the terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years and five (5) years respectively, and annually thereafter one (1) member shall be appointed for the term of five (5) years. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 1.173. - Powers and duties. 
    The housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as heretofore or hereafter amended, and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the intention of this article to vest in the housing commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
Sec. 1.174. - Meetings; rules; record; quorum; officers and employees. 
    The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A president and vice-president shall be elected by the commission. The commission may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The commission shall prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the appointing authority, fix their compensation. The commission may from time to time as necessary employ engineers, architects and consultants. 
Sec. 1.175. - Funds for operation. 
    Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be provided by the city council, but the commission shall as soon as possible reimburse the city for all monies expended by it for the commission from revenue received from the sale of bonds. 
ARTICLE V. - SOUTHFIELD LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Compensation of councilmen, § 4.2; compensation of mayor, § 5.4. 

Sec. 1.176(1). - Creation. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act 8 of the Public Acts of 1972 for the State of Michigan amending Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, there is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the Southfield Local Officers Compensation Commission. 
Sec. 1.176(2). - Membership. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall consist of seven (7) members who are registered electors of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city council. All first members shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of Ordinance 771. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. 
Sec. 1.176(3). - Terms of office. 
    The term of office of members of the local officers compensation commission shall be seven (7) years, except that of the members first appointed, one (1) each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6) and seven (7) years. 
Sec. 1.176(4). - Powers and duties. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salaries of the city council, the city clerk, the city treasurer and the mayor, which determination shall be the salaries of these local elected officials, unless the city council by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the city council shall reject such salaries. The determination of the commission shall be effective thirty (30) days following their filing with the city clerk, unless rejected by the city council as indicated in this section. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to local elected officials, in addition to salary, shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
Sec. 1.176(5). - Meetings; quorum. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in 1972 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the commission members constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. "Session days" mean any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 1.176(6). - Change of procedure. 
    One (1) year after the effective date of Ordinance 771, the procedure for establishing the compensation of local elected officials may be changed by a Charter amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1.176(7). - Referendum. 
    Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of Ordinance 771, a petition for a referendum on such ordinance may be filed in accordance with the procedure provided in the Charter. If such a petition is duly certified in accordance with the terms of the Charter any determination by the commission shall not be effective until the ordinance has been approved by the electors. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOUTHFIELD PUBLIC ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 1.177. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public welfare and to serve the public interest, convenience, and enjoyment through the promotion of the arts in the city, by establishing physical works of art in public places throughout the city. It is further determined that the promotion of public art can help to build the economy of the city through promotion of tourism and economic development, enhance the city's character and identity, promote the cultural heritage and artistic development of the city, expand the opportunities for residents to experience public art, and improve the lives of its citizens through the humanization and individualization of public spaces and structures. In furtherance of these goals, the city council has determined the need to form a public arts commission to advocate for, promote and participate in the establishment, selection and installation of public artwork in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1630 , § 1, 11-30-14; Ord. No. 1674 , § 1, 5-4-17) 
Sec. 1.178. - Creation. 
    For the purposes herein provided, there is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the public arts commission ("the commission"). 
(Ord. No. 1630 , § 1, 11-30-14; Ord. No. 1674 , § 1, 5-4-17) 
Sec. 1.179. - Membership. 
(a)  The public arts commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, six (6) of whom shall be appointed by the city council, and the remaining five (5) shall be appointed by the mayor, with confirmation thereof by the city council. All members of the commission shall be appointed on the basis of demonstrated experience and knowledge of the arts. Insofar as possible, members of the commission shall represent and include a landscape architect, a registered architect of the state of Michigan, a visual arts educator, an art gallery owner or operator, an urban designer, an art fundraiser, and three (3) members who are either a recognized visual artist, art collector, or art curator. At least two (2) members of the commission shall be residents of the city. The remaining members and ex-officio members may or may not be residents of the city. 
    The terms of office of members of the commission shall be three (3) years, except that initial members of the commission shall be appointed for staggered terms with three (3) members appointed for one (1) year terms, three (3) members appointed for two (2) year terms, and three (3) members appointed for three (3) year terms. 
(b)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation and may be removed for cause by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  The commission shall elect a chairperson, secretary, and treasurer at its first meeting every year, which shall be held in January. At least five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The commission may adopt by-laws to outline the proper conduct and order of their meetings and the duties of the officers. 
(d)  The commission shall hold such regular meetings as it deems necessary and advisable; however, it shall generally hold at least one (1) meeting each month. 
(e)  The city planner, city parks and recreation landscape architect, and city librarian shall serve as ex-officio (non-voting) members of the commission. The city planner will serve as the city staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1630 , § 1, 11-30-14; Ord. No. 1674 , § 1, 5-4-17) 
Sec. 1.180. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The commission shall be responsible for developing and implementing a public art program within the city so as to provide for the acquisition, placement, and display of works of art within public areas of the city. "Works of art" shall mean all forms of visual arts, including, but not limited to: 
  Sculpture - in any material or combination of materials; 
  Painting - all media, including portable and permanently affixed works, such as murals and frescoes; 
  Photography; 
  Mosaics; 
  Mixed media - any combination of forms or media including collage; 
  Water features and fountains; and 
  Streetscape and landscape features and elements, including signage, lighting, benches, clocks, kiosks, and planters. 
(b)  Specifically, the commission shall: 
(1)  Encourage and stimulate citizens, developers, landowners, contractors and architects to provide and support displays of works of art for public enjoyment; 
(2)  Develop and promulgate a comprehensive public art plan for the city. The plan will list long term objectives of the commission in carrying out its purpose as established herein; establish criteria for the selection of artists and works of art; create a list of potential locations throughout the city for the placement of works of art and develop standards for the placement thereof; develop a list of priorities for the funding of various public art projects throughout the city; identify the existing inventory of public works of art; and create standards and guidelines for public accessibility and safety. Upon completion of the plan, the commission shall present same to the city council for review and approval; 
(3)  Reinforce the city's placemaking goals by commissioning works of art that are distinctive, yet particularly reflect and promote the city's identity or the identity of individual neighborhoods or business districts within the city; 
(4)  Ensure that public works of art are compatible in scale, material, form and content with their intended surroundings; 
(5)  Assure that within the overall public art program reasonable diversity is attained in style, scale, media, and materials represented; 
(6)  Establish guidelines for site selection , maintenance programs for ensuring the structural integrity and aesthetic quality of the site and any work of art, including the removal of any work of art; 
(7)  Raise funds for the acquisition and installation of public works of art through the application of grants, private sponsorships, donations, and other fund-raising strategies; explore the establishment of a subcommittee whose primary focus will be to undertake and promote a capital fund-raising campaign in support of the commission's purposes hereunder. All funds raised will be held by and in the name of the city, but will be held in a trust account entitled "public art fund." 
(8)  Identify opportunities for acquisition of public works of art to be situated within the city; 
(9)  Develop a process for the solicitation, acceptance and placement of public works of art by the city; 
(10)  Develop relationships with artists, galleries, museums, art professionals, architects, community members, other governmental entities, businesses and the city planning department to establish public works of art priorities in the city; 
(11)  Create and implement a community education and outreach program regarding public art; 
(12)  Collaborate with city staff through the city planner and private project development within the city to promote and enhance the inclusion of public works of art within the development, where appropriate; 
(13)  Promote community identity through public works of art within neighborhood and business districts; 
(14)  Promote the economic vitality of the city through a broad range of public art projects; 
(15)  Submit to the city council on a least a quarterly basis a written report detailing the activities, accomplishments, and a description of how such activities have achieved the objectives of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1630 , § 1, 11-30-14; Ord. No. 1674 , § 1, 5-4-17) 
CHAPTER 5. - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1110, § 1, enacted September 28, 1982, is set out herein as ch. 5. Former ch. 5 contained similar subject matter and was derived from the 1976 codification. 

Sec. 1.181. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the city civil defense and emergency preparedness ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.182. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide protection and recovery from natural and man-made disaster within the city; to provide for an office of civil defense and emergency preparedness; to provide for the appointment of its director; and to prescribe the powers and duties of the mayor, the city council, the administrator and the director of civil defense; and to otherwise provide local implementation of the Emergency Preparedness Act (P.A. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.402 et seq.)) 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.183. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Civil defense shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which the military and city forces are primarily responsible for protection against and to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by natural disaster. 
(2)  Civil defense director shall mean a person appointed pursuant to section 1.184 to coordinate emergency planning and services within the city who also administers federal and state disaster preparedness and assistance programs at the city. In the absence of an appointed person, it shall mean the mayor or the mayor's designated representative. On and after July 1, 1987, the civil defense director shall be known as the "emergency management division director." 
(3)  Civil defense and disaster control plan shall mean a comprehensive civil defense and disaster control plan adopted by resolution of the council. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved it shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. 
(4)  Civil defense volunteer shall mean any person who serves without compensation in the civil defense organization. 
(5)  Disaster shall mean an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or man-made cause, including fire, flood, snow, ice, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the disaster. 
(6)  Disaster relief forces shall mean all agencies of state, county and municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under Act 390, Public Acts of 1976 or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this chapter. 
(7)  District coordinator shall mean the state police district emergency services coordinator or his authorized representative. 
(8)  Homeland security and emergency preparedness shall, on and after December 1, 2013, replace the phrase "civil defense and emergency preparedness" whenever found in this chapter. 
(9)  Homeland security and emergency preparedness director shall, on and after December 1, 2013, replace the phrase "civil defense director" whenever found in this chapter. 
(10)  State of disaster shall mean a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Act 390, Public Acts of 1976, which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82; Ord. No. 1235, § 1, 8-31-87; Ord. No. 1615 , § 1, 12-15-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 1.184. - Office of civil defense and emergency preparedness. 
    An office of civil defense and emergency preparedness is hereby created and organized as provided in this section: 
(1)  The office shall be within the executive division, established by the mayor, who may appoint its director, as provided by section 5.5(h) of the Charter. The functions described under this chapter shall be determined to be executive in nature as part of that Charter division. 
(2)  There shall be five (5) deputy directors with responsibility for financial services, law enforcement, fire control, engineering services and health and medical services, appointed by the mayor, with approval of the council. These shall, so far as possible, be additional duty assignments to existing city employees, and it is the intent of this chapter that civil defense disaster and emergency preparedness assignments shall be as nearly consistent with normal duty assignments as possible. 
(3)  Such employees, equipment and facilities of the city designated by the city administrator to participate in the civil defense activity. 
(4)  Civil defense volunteers, including persons and private agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.185. - Powers and duties of the mayor and council. 
(1)  The mayor and city council may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this chapter and Act 390, Public Acts of 1976. 
(2)  The mayor shall appoint, with the approval of council, the civil defense director. 
(3)  If a disaster occurs in a county or municipality and is beyond the control of local public or private agencies, the mayor may request the governor to declare that a state of disaster exists therein, utilizing the procedure set forth in P.A. 390 of 1976, as amended. The director of the department of state police or his authorized representative may order the disaster forces of the city to aid the community. The mayor shall comply with the order of the director and cooperate with the director in matters of emergency preparedness. Upon a declaration of a state of disaster by the governor, the mayor, or in the absence or inability of the mayor to serve, the mayor pro tem, with the approval of the council, is hereby empowered and has the authority to: 
(a)  As soon as may be practicable, convene the city council to perform its legislative functions as the situation may demand; 
(b)  Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for disaster purposes; 
(c)  Provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster; 
(d)  Assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property or equipment of the municipality relating to fire fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, police, transportation, construction and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the municipality; 
(e)  In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
[(4)  Reserved.] 
(5)  In the event a disaster occurs which has not yet been declared a state of disaster by the governor, and the disaster is deemed by the mayor and council to be beyond the control of the city, the mayor shall instruct the director of the civil defense to contact the district coordinator to perform those duties prescribed by section 14 of P.A. 390 of 1976. 
(6)  The council shall have the power to terminate the state of disaster if not ultimately declared by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.186. - Powers and duties of the city administrator. 
(1)  The duties of the city administrator shall consist of the following: 
(a)  The city administrator, at the direction of the mayor and/or council, and through the civil defense director, shall maintain general supervision over the planning and administration for the civil defense organization and the execution of the civil defense and disaster plans through the civil defense director. He shall coordinate the civil defense activities and make emergency assignments of civil defense duties and civil defense forces in order to meet situations not covered in the normal duties of such forces. 
(b)  The city administrator may take steps to ensure that all necessary action to conduct tests of the civil defense and natural disaster plans are taken. 
(c)  When a state of emergency has been declared, the city administrator, through the civil defense director, shall assemble and utilize civil defense forces and prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. 
(d)  The city administrator shall designate a line of succession among his department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this subsection in the event of his absence or inability to serve. 
(e)  The city administrator shall keep the mayor and city council informed of the administration, organization and planning of the office of civil defense and emergency preparedness. 
(2)  The city administrator is hereby authorized to exercise the powers granted to the mayor and/or council in section 1.183, either in the absence or inability to serve of the mayor and mayor pro tem or where delay in the exercise of such powers would be contrary to the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.187. - Civil defense director authority, responsibility. 
(a)  The director shall have the authority and responsibility conferred upon his/her office by P.A. 390 of 1976, as from time to time hereafter amended. The director shall perform his functions under the direction and supervision of the city administrator. 
(b)  The director may appoint disaster relief workers in numbers and upon terms and conditions specified by resolution of the city council. Appointed disaster relief workers shall have the powers, duties, rights, privileges, immunities and compensation as prescribed in section 11, P.A. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.511). 
(c)  The director shall: 
1.  Prepare plans and programs for the civil defense of the city, sponsor and direct such plans and programs, and advise the mayor and the city administrator of the status of civil defense; 
2.  Review and coordinate the civil defense activities with city departments, with neighboring communities, and with the state and the federal government; 
3.  Study and develop civil defense measures designed to afford adequate protection of life and property, including but not limited to the best methods of treating the effects of attacks, shelter designs and materials for protective covering or construction, and equipment or facilities and effecting the standardization thereof to meet civil defense requirements; 
4.  Conduct or arrange for training programs for the instruction of appointed civil defense and emergency preparedness personnel and other interested persons in the organization, operation and techniques of civil defense; 
5.  Publicly disseminate appropriate civil defense and emergency preparedness information by all appropriate means authorized by the city council; 
6.  Familiarize himself with the provisions of the Federal Civil Defense Act, January 12, 1951, C. 1228, 64 Stat. 1245 (title 50, appendix, section 2251, USC), as amended; 
7.  Establish and maintain, with authority of the city council, a military affiliate radio station (MARS) or an amateur radio station, under the rules and regulations of the commission created under the Communications Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 1064 (47 USC, section 151), as amended; 
8.  Appoint, employ, remove or provide, with or without compensation, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel and other disaster workers, with the prior approval of the city council, under the authority of section 10(1)(d), P.A. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.410(1)(d)). Personnel appointed under this section may receive training by participation in formal mock disaster exercises and by serving as volunteers in crime prevention, traffic control and similar programs or tasks which augment city fire, police and recreation functions; 
9.  Develop or cause to be developed mutual aid agreements with other public or private agencies within the state for reciprocal aid and assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted, consistent with the state emergency preparedness plan and program, subject to approval by the city council, as authorized by section 10(2) of P.A. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.410(2)), as amended; 
10.  In the event a disaster occurs which has not yet been declared a state of disaster by the governor, and the disaster is deemed by the mayor or the city council to be beyond the control of the county or municipality, the director shall immediately contact the state police emergency services division district coordinator or his authorized representative as required by section 14(1) of P.A. 390 of 1976, as amended, (MCL 30.414(1)); 
11.  Be responsible for public relations, information and education regarding all phases of civil defense; 
12.  Be responsible for the development of a civil defense and disaster control plan, and upon adoption, shall be responsible for such implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it on a current state of readiness at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.188. - Conduct of persons. 
    Each person within the city shall conduct himself and manage his affairs and property in ways that will reasonably assist and will not unreasonably detract from the ability of the state, the city, and the public to successfully meet a disaster. This obligation includes appropriate personal service and the use or restriction of the use of property in time of a disaster. This chapter neither increases or decreases these obligations but recognizes their existence under the state constitution of 1963, the statutes and the common law. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 1.189. - Interference unlawful. 
    A person who willfully disobeys or interferes with the implementation of a rule, order or directive issued by the governor pursuant to section 5 of P.A. 390 of 1976, as amended (MCL 30.405) upon declaration of a disaster being effectuated by a disaster relief worker or peace officer acting under the provisions of this chapter and P.A. 390 of 1976 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 9-28-82) 
CHAPTER 6. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Single lot assessments, § 1.13. 

Sec. 1.221. - Definitions. 
(1)  The term "cost" as used in this chapter, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, shall include the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
(2)  The term "local public improvement" as used in this chapter shall mean any construction of or improvement upon public property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity of such improvement, including specifically but not by way of limitation the construction of sewers, waterworks and streets. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 1.222. - Authority to assess. 
    The entire cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 1.223. - To initiate special assessment projects. 
    Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution of the council, on its own initiative or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners whose aggregate property in the special assessment district was assessed for not less than sixty (60) percent of the total assessed value of the privately owned real property located therein, in accordance with the last preceding general assessment roll; provided, however, that in the case of special assessments for paving or similar improvements which are normally assessed on a frontage basis against abutting property, such petitions shall be signed by the owners of not less than sixty (60) percent of the frontage of property to be assessed. 
Sec. 1.224. - Petition requirements. 
(1)  Initiatory petitions shall contain, in addition to the signatures of the owners, a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof. 
(2)  Such petitions shall be verified by the affidavit of one (1) or more of the owners or by some person or persons with knowledge that the signers are such owners and that such signatures are genuine. 
(3)  Petitions shall be addressed to council and filed with the city clerk. Petitions containing the signatures as required by section 1.223 shall be mandatory upon the council. 
(4)  All petitions shall be circulated and signed on blank forms furnished by the city. 
(5)  All petitions shall be referred by the city clerk to the city administrator. The city administrator shall check the petitions to determine whether they conform to the foregoing requirements and shall report his findings to the city council. 
Sec. 1.225. - Survey and report. 
    Before the council shall consider the making of any local public improvement, the same shall be referred by resolution to the city administrator directing him to prepare a report which shall include preliminary plans and estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment district or districts and such other pertinent information as will permit the council to consider the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until such report of the city administrator has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the council for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement. 
Sec. 1.226. - Determination on the project; notice. 
    After the city administrator has presented the report required in section 1.225 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the council, and the council has reviewed such report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited; determination of benefits received by affected properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected; placing the complete information on file in the office of the clerk where the same may be found for examination; and directing the clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, such publication and mailing to be made at least fourteen (14) full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. 
Sec. 1.227. - Objections to improvement. 
    If, at or prior to such meeting of the council, not less than sixty (60) percent of the number of owners of private real property to be assessed for any improvement shall object in writing to the original determination of necessity of the property improvement, the improvement shall not be made, except that in such instances where water and sanitary sewer improvements are deemed necessary, and upon a certification received from the Oakland County Health Department that the absence of such improvements would constitute a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents, the council may by a two-thirds vote override such written objection. 
(Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 4-28-86) 
Sec. 1.228. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided, that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in section 1.226. If the determination of the council shall be to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the preliminary plans, assessment district and estimates of cost, directing the engineer to prepare construction plans and specifications, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination, and report the same to the council for confirmation. The council shall approve construction plans and specifications prior to the meeting to review the special assessment roll, as provided in section 1.233. 
Sec. 1.229. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from construction plans and specifications for a local public improvement, as approved by the council, shall be permitted by any official or employee of the city without authority of the council by resolution; provided, however, that minor changes as authorized by the city administrator may be made without such approval. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation, other than minor changes authorized by the city administrator, shall be certified by the clerk and attached to the original plans on file in his office. 
Sec. 1.230. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    The council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary plans, estimates of cost and publication of notices, shall be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of the same shall have been levied. 
Sec. 1.231. - Special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the estimate of the city administrator as approved by the council. 
Sec. 1.232. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such special assessment roll, he shall file the same with the clerk for presentation to the council for review, confirmation and certification by it. 
Sec. 1.233. - Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections in writing. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council, by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll and direct the clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, such publication and mailing to be made at least fourteen (14) full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
Sec. 1.234. - Changes and corrections in assessment roll. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll and, at such meeting or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct such roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul such assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with such special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the clerk, and directing the clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten (10) days, therein commanding the treasurer to levy the various sums and amounts appearing on a special assessment roll for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by the council. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 1.238. 
Sec. 1.235. - Special assessment, when due. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon certification by the director of public works of completion of the local public improvement to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 1.236. - Partial payments, when due. 
    The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed twenty (20) in number, the first installment being due upon certification by the director of public works of completion of the local public improvement. On all special assessments wherein the local public improvement is completed between July 1 and December 31 of any year, the second installment shall be due on the following July 1, and the remaining installments shall be due on July 1 of each succeeding year. On all special assessments wherein the local public improvement is completed between January 1 and June 30 of any year, the second installment shall be due July 1 of the following year, and the remaining installments shall be due July 1 of each succeeding year. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not in excess of that authorized by law, commencing on completion of the local public improvement and payable on the due date of each installment; the full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If special assessment bonds are sold, MCL 141.153 shall apply. Each owner shall have sixty (60) days from the date of completion of the local public improvement to pay the full amount of the assessment, or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or penalty. Following such sixty-day period, the assessment or first installment thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent, and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments, or unpaid first installments thereof, as are provided in the Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until sixty (60) days after the due date thereof, after which time such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on the installments shall be collected as are provided in the Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. 
    After the city treasurer has received the certification of completion of the local public improvement from the director of public works, he or she shall notify by mail each property owner on the roll that the roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give such notice or of such owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment thereon nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 1.237. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon from the date of confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for county and school taxes, and by the charter for city taxes, until paid, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a lien. If special assessments or installments thereof remain delinquent as of February 28, they shall be returned delinquent, with interest, penalties and charges added, to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as are city, county and school taxes. 
Sec. 1.238. - Additional assessments, refunds. 
    The city administrator shall, after the completion of each local public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment; provided, however, that no such additional pro rata assessment shall exceed fifteen (15) percent of the original assessment. If the amount of the special assessment roll for any local public improvement as confirmed by the council proves larger than the actual cost thereof as compiled by the city administrator and certified to the council as required by this section by more than five (5) percent of the amount of such special assessment roll as confirmed, the council shall make a refund of the entire amount of the excess thereof pro rata according to the original assessments, such refund to be made to the owner of the property as shown by the current tax rolls of the city on the date that the council orders the refund. Should the amount of the special assessment roll as confirmed by the council prove larger than the actual cost of the local public improvement as certified by the city administrator to the council by less than five (5) percent of the amount of such special assessment roll as confirmed, the council shall transfer such excess to the general funds of the city. 
Sec. 1.239. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
Sec. 1.240. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local public improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 1.241. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining collection of any special assessment unless within thirty (30) days after confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action, stating grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty (60) days of confirmation of the roll. 
Sec. 1.242. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment; provided, however, that if the local public improvement shall have been completed prior to the time that proceedings for the reassessment shall have been commenced, the provisions of section 1.227 shall not apply to the proceedings for reassessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
Sec. 1.243. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one (1) project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs; provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same. 
CHAPTER 7. - UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION 

Sec. 1.251. - Unemployment compensation system. 
    There is hereby established an unemployment compensation system and benefit plan for employees of the city to be administered by the administrative civil service commission of the city. This plan is established pursuant to Act No. 170 of the Public Acts of 1958, as amended, of the State of Michigan. 
Sec. 1.252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Average weekly wage with respect to a base period of employment, shall be the amount determined by dividing total wages for credit weeks earned by the number of such credit weeks chargeable to the city as employer. 
(2)  Base period means the period of fifty-two (52) consecutive calendar weeks ending with the day immediately preceding the first day of an individual's benefit year. 
(3)  Benefit year with respect to any individual means the period of fifty-two (52) consecutive calendar weeks beginning with the first calendar week with respect to which the individual, who does not already have a benefit year in effect, files a claim for benefits under this chapter, provided that the individual has earned wages of at least twenty-five dollars and one cent ($25.01) in fourteen (14) or more calendar weeks within the base period. Such weeks are called credit weeks. 
(4)  Benefits means the money payments payable to an eligible and qualified individual, as provided in this chapter, with respect to unemployment. 
(5)  Personnel director. All references to personnel director in this chapter shall refer to the deputy city administrator/staff services or his (her) designate. 
(6)  Unemployed. An individual shall be deemed unemployed with respect to any week during which he performs no services and with respect to which no remuneration is payable to him, or with respect to any week of less than full-time work if the remuneration payable to him is less than his weekly benefit rate. 
(7)  Wages means remuneration paid for employment but shall not include any employee payment for life or health insurance, pension, equipment allowance or similar payment. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 1.253. - Benefit rates. 
    Benefit payments shall begin with the effective date of unemployment and shall be calculated according to the following rules: 
(1)  When a determination, redetermination or decision is made that benefits are due an unemployed individual, such benefits shall immediately become payable and continue to be payable to the unemployed individual subject to the limitations imposed by his monetary entitlement, as long as he continues to be unemployed and to file claims for benefits, until: 
(a)  The determination, redetermination or decision is reversed; or 
(b)  A determination, redetermination or decision on a new issue holding the individual disqualified or ineligible is made; or 
(c)  A new separation issue arises resulting from subsequent work. 
(2)  Benefits shall be paid in person or by mail through the personnel director in accordance with rules promulgated by the administrative civil service commission. 
(3)  The weekly benefit rate, amount of weekly benefit payment and duration of same shall be determined on a basis which the administrative civil service commission shall establish, which basis shall be equivalent to the basis provided by section 27 of Act No. 104 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, as amended, and as set forth in the MESA weekly benefit rate table in effect at the time an employee is laid off. 
(4)  Employees shall be entitled to three (3) weeks of benefits for each four (4) credited weeks earned working for the city up to a maximum of twenty-six (26) weeks for thirty-four (34) earned credited weeks, provided that the claimant has worked at least thirty-four (34) weeks in the fifty-two (52) weeks preceding the week in which the claimant applied for benefits. The minimum duration shall not be less than ten and one-half (101/2) weeks if the claimant worked fourteen (14) weeks and earned at least twenty-five dollars and one cent ($25.01) in each week. 
(5)  Any change in the rate of regular benefits and their duration that would be mandatory to meet the requirements for equivalency with the Michigan Employment Security Act shall become effective on the same day to change the method of determination of benefits as provided in this section. 
(6)  The dependency class category of a laid-off employee shall be determined as stipulated and provided by the Michigan Employment Security Act. A dependent shall be as defined by the Michigan Employment Security Act and once established such dependency class cannot be reduced in the benefit year unless such reduction is directly related to a change in the Michigan Employment Security Act. 
(7)  Employees who earn or receive remuneration during a week in which the employee would ordinarily be eligible for benefits: 
(a)  When such remuneration is equal to less than one-half (1/2) the weekly benefit rate such employee shall receive full benefits. 
(b)  When such remuneration is equal to or in excess of one-half (1/2) the weekly benefit rate such employee shall receive one-half benefits. 
(c)  When such remuneration is equal to or in excess of the weekly benefit rate the employee shall receive no benefits. 
Sec. 1.254. - Authorization of payment. 
    Payment of unemployment benefits shall be based on a certification from the personnel director to the director of management information services. Such certification shall contain all information necessary for payment. A record of the benefits received by each individual shall be maintained by the personnel office. 
Sec. 1.255. - Employees covered. 
    Except as provided by section 1.256, employees covered by this unemployment compensation system shall consist of the employees in the classified civil service of the city as defined by the Charter and by the rules and regulations of the administrative civil service commission; full-time employees of the fire department; sworn police officers; exempt service employees all of the city. 
Sec. 1.256. - Employees and persons not covered. 
    Employees not covered by this unemployment compensation system shall be: 
(1)  Elected officials and all appointees to boards and commissions; 
(2)  Persons providing contractual service to the city as specialists, independent contractors or employees thereof; 
(3)  Employees who are or were at the time of their employment by the city, students enrolled on a regular basis in high school, college, graduate school or any other school in which their primary status is clearly that of a student or any persons hired as students; 
(4)  Seasonal, temporary, part-time and intermittent employees as defined in this subsection or as may be amended from time to time by the administrative civil service commission. 
(a)  Seasonal: Any employment for a specific seasonal activity not normally performed during the remainder of the year. Such appointment shall not exceed the length of the seasonal program for which the employee was hired. 
(b)  Temporary: Any employment based upon appointment to a nonregular position not to exceed six (6) months. Such appointments shall be in the nature of extra help to accommodate a cyclical workload or temporarily increased workload or extended absence of a career employee. 
(c)  Part-time: Any employment involving an average of less than forty (40) hours per week or less than would normally be worked by regular employees. 
(d)  Intermittent: Any employment in which the person appointed works on an as-needed or call-in basis. Such work shall not involve regularly scheduled hours nor shall hours worked exceed twenty (20) per week. 
(5)  Service performed by an individual where compensation is derived at least fifty (50) percent from federal funds received under a specific federal program for which an application was made and whose employment is terminated due to discontinuance of the federal building. 
(6)  Service by a student under the age of eighteen (18) regularly attending either a public or private school below the college level and the employment was part-time or within the vacation period of the school, or a part of the school curriculum. 
Sec. 1.257. - Eligibility for benefits. 
    A claimant to be eligible for benefits must be unemployed, as defined, and must make a claim for benefits in the manner prescribed by the personnel director and further must: 
(1)  Be able and available to perform full-time work which he is qualified to perform by past experience or training, and of a character generally similar to work for which he has earned wages; and 
(2)  Be in compliance with registration and reporting requirements; and 
(3)  Be seeking work. 
Sec. 1.258. - Disqualifications. 
    A claimant is disqualified from receiving benefits if the personnel director finds that an individual is unemployed due to an ineligible termination or separation as specified in section 1.259, has left his work voluntarily or has accepted permanent full-time work with another employer, or has failed when directed to return to his customary work. 
Sec. 1.259. - Ineligible terminations and separations. 
    An employee shall not be eligible for benefits under the unemployment compensation system established by this chapter, if the unemployment shall result from: 
(1)  Retirement under the current retirement systems or any future retirement systems covering the employee's position; 
(2)  Discharge or suspension for misconduct connected with one's work, for intoxication while at work, for absence due to imprisonment, or for an act of assault, theft or sabotage connected with his work; 
(3)  Resignations, including resignations in lieu of discharge; 
(4)  Leaves of absence for any reason, whether voluntary or involuntary; 
(5)  Temporary separations made at the request of the employee; 
(6)  Participation or direct interest in a labor dispute including any strike, unauthorized work stoppages or other concerted action. 
Sec. 1.260. - Payment of and restrictions on benefits. 
    Benefits shall be paid weekly at a time and place fixed by the administrative civil service commission. All beneficiaries must report weekly to the personnel office on designated days for weekly benefit checks and determination of continuing eligibility. For continuing eligibility, a beneficiary must be actively seeking work, and must be registered with the Michigan Employment Security Commission. No beneficiary who shall refuse any reasonable bona fide offer of employment shall receive any benefits after such refusal. 
Sec. 1.261. - Rules and procedures. 
    Rules and procedures including any necessary forms shall be established by the administrative civil service commission to administer the unemployment compensation system. The personnel director or his designee may bring suit in the name of the city to recover any moneys paid upon a fraudulent or untrue application or claim. 
Sec. 1.262. - Determinations. 
    The personnel director or his designee shall promptly make a determination after an application for benefits is filed whether the claimant is a covered individual eligible and qualified to draw benefits based upon the available information. The issuance of each benefit check shall be considered a determination that the claimant receiving the check was a covered individual eligible and qualified for benefits. Where a claimant refuses work or fails to apply for work or in any other way is or becomes disqualified or ineligible for benefits, the personnel director or his designee shall promptly make a written determination of such disqualification or ineligibility and shall send the claimant notice thereof. 
Sec. 1.263. - Redeterminations. 
    Upon the written request of any claimant within fifteen (15) days following any determination or decision respecting qualification, eligibility or rate of benefits, the personnel director or his designee shall promptly review the prior determination and, if necessary, may order a hearing thereon. Upon review with or without hearing, the personnel director or his designee shall issue a redetermination affirming, modifying or reversing the prior determination and stating the reasons therefor. Such redetermination shall be final unless an appeal is filed as provided in section 1.264. 
Sec. 1.264. - Appeal board. 
    There is hereby established an unemployment compensation appeal board, to consist of the three (3) members of the administrative civil service commission. It shall be the duty of the board to review determinations and decisions of the personnel director pertaining to this unemployment compensation system provided that a claim of appeal is filed within fifteen (15) days of such decision or determination. The appeal must be filed, in writing, with the personnel office. The time to file a claim of appeal shall not begin until an employee has been notified in writing of his right to appeal. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 1.151 et seq. 
Sec. 1.265. - Appeal board powers and duties. 
    The unemployment compensation appeal board may on its own motion affirm, modify, set aside or reverse any decision or order on the basis of the evidence previously submitted in such case, or direct the taking of additional evidence, or may permit any of the parties to such decision or order to initiate further appeals before it. The appeal board shall promptly notify parties of its findings and decisions and its reasons therefor but may omit the giving of any reasons if the previous order, decision or determination is affirmed without any alteration or modification. 
Sec. 1.266. - Procedure; reports; record of proceedings on appeal; transcripts of testimony. 
    The manner in which appeals to the unemployment compensation appeal board shall be presented, the reports thereon required from the interested party or parties, and the procedure governing such appeals shall be in accordance with rules prescribed by the appeal board. A full and complete record shall be kept of all proceedings in connection with an appeal. Staff, space and such clerical service as is needed shall be provided by the personnel director to the appeal board. 
Sec. 1.267. - Extension of time. 
    Whenever the last day of the period to apply for redetermination or to appeal any decision, determination or redetermination regarding unemployment compensation falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, such period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
Sec. 1.268. - Finances. 
    Financing shall be accomplished through the unemployment compensation system fund, herewith established to account for related revenue and expenditures, including payment of unemployment benefits. The city administrator shall annually recommend to the city council appropriations to be made for this activity. 
Sec. 1.269. - False statements. 
    Any person who shall make a false statement or representation knowing it to be false, or knowingly and willfully with intent to defraud fails to disclose a material fact, to obtain or increase a benefit or other payment under this chapter, either for himself or any other person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 1.270. - Catchline headings. 
    The catchline headings of the sections of this chapter shall in no way be considered to be a part of the respective sections or of this chapter but are inserted herein for purposes of convenience. 
CHAPTER 8. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1470, § 1, enacted December 17, 2001, amended ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 1033, enacted May 27, 1980; and Ord. No. 1295, enacted January 8, 1990. 
Charter reference- Council approval required for contracts and purchases, § 4.9. 

Sec. 1.271. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Administrator is the administrator of the city. 
(2)  City purchasing agent or agent is the purchasing agent of the city, and the same authority extended to the agent shall be extended to the city administrator. 
(3)  Contractual services shall include, but not be limited to, personal services; all telephone, gas, water, electricity, and power services; towel and cleaning services; insurance; leases for all grounds, building, office or other space required by the using agencies; and the lease, rental, repair, or maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other city-owned personal property. 
(4)  Professional services shall include services which involve extended analysis, the exercise of discretion and independent judgment in their performance, and an advanced, specialized type of knowledge, expertise, or training customarily acquired either by a prolonged course of study or equivalent experience in the field; and thus, are unique and not subject to price competition in the usual sense. 
(5)  Supplies shall mean and include all supplies, materials, and equipment. 
(6)  Using agency is any department, agency, commission, board, or other unit in the city government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 1.272. - City purchasing agent. 
(1)  The city administrator may enter into contracts on behalf of the city without the specific authorization of council and without the necessity of formal competitive bidding for purchases less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter. 
(2)  The position of city purchasing agent is hereby created and established. The city purchasing agent shall perform all duties with respect to purchases required by Charter and this Code, and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.273. - Appointment; powers; duties. 
(1)  Position specifications. The purchasing agent shall be designated by the city administrator with the approval of the city council. The council may establish by resolution a bond in the amount to be set by council for the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Scope of purchasing authority. The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city and in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this chapter and such rules and regulations as the purchasing agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation for the purchasing department and such other rules and regulations as shall be established by the administrator and the city council. 
(a)  Exceptions prohibited. The authority of the agent to negotiate all purchases for all using agencies shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using agency. 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or officers to order the purchase of any supplies or services, or make any contract, within the purview of this chapter other than through the purchasing department, and any purchase or service ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall not be approved by the city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(3)  Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in subsection (2) above and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this chapter, the agent shall: 
(a)  Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at least expense to the city. 
(b)  Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. Establish and amend when necessary all rules and regulations authorized by this chapter. 
(d)  Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(e)  Cooperation with the city administrator. Cooperate with the city administrator so as to secure for the city maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting. 
(f)  Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations, misuse city bid lists or specifications or specifications for purposes other than intended by the city, or fail to deliver quantities or qualities as bid or required, as irresponsible bidders; and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of time, upon approval from the city administrator and/or city council. 
(g)  Standardization. To adopt as standards the number, qualities, sizes, and varieties of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.274. - Laboratory facilities. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of the laboratory and engineering facilities and the technical staffs thereof in connection with its work of preparing and adopting standards and written specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.275. - Consultation with using agencies. 
    The purchasing agent shall conduct with the heads and other officials of the using agencies to determine their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards which meet the needs of the majority of such agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.276. - Requisitions and estimates. 
    All using agencies, through the department head or his appointee, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services as prescribed for and in the purchasing manual. 
(1)  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from filing in the same manner with the agent at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(2)  Revisory power in agent. The agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost; but revision as to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.277. - Purchases or contracts under ten thousand dollars. 
    Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, or services, the cost of which is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), may be made by the city administrator or purchasing agent; but such purchases shall, where practicable, be based on at least three (3) competitive quotations. The purchasing agent may solicit quotations verbally by telephone, or by telefacsimile, or may contact prospective vendors by written communication. Any or all quotations may be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.278. - Purchases or contracts of ten thousand dollars or more. 
    Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, construction project or contract obligating the city, where the amount of the city's obligation is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be authorized by the city council and shall be by sealed competitive bid and shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Such expenditure shall be made the subject of a written contract when directed by the city council. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs. 
(2)  The purchasing agent shall solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to him by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids. Bids are also to be solicited by newspaper advertisement, unless otherwise directed by the city council. If the bids are not solicited by newspaper advertisement, then notice thereof shall be posted in the city hall. 
(3)  The purchasing agent may, unless otherwise directed by the council, prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The purchasing agent may require and fix the amount of the performance bond and in the case of construction contracts, the amount of the labor and materials bond and maintenance and guarantee bond to be required of the successful bidders. 
(4)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids, in the presence of the purchasing agent or his designate and at least one (1) other city official, preferably the member of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The bids shall be examined and tabulated and reported to the council with the recommendation of the city administrator. After tabulation, all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. In lieu of the procedure for opening bids specified in this section, the city council may direct that bids be opened at a city council meeting. 
(5)  The city council shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements. 
(6)  If required by the city council, the contractor shall at the time the contract is executed by him file a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to the city, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors, and materialmen as well as all just debts, dues, and demands incurred in the performance of such work and shall file a performance bond when one is required. The contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the purchasing agent, and agree to save the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence. 
(7)  All proposals and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within fifteen (15) days after he has been notified, or to file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his proposal may be forfeited to the city and the city council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next qualified bidder. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.279. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
    Competitive bidding shall not be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the subject of the contract is not competitive in nature and/or no advantage to the city would result from requiring competitive bidding, and the city council, upon written recommendation of the city administrator, authorizes execution of a contract without competitive bidding; 
(2)  In the employment of professional services; 
(3)  Where the city council shall determine that the public interest will be best served by contracting with or through another unit of government; 
(4)  In the employment of maintenance and/or service to electrical, mechanical, and electronic equipment; 
(5)  Where the urgency of the need is determined to be of an emergency nature by the city administrator and time requirements imposed for receipt of competitive, sealed bids would be detrimental to the best interest of the city. Such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. Subsequent reports regarding such expenditures shall be submitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.280. - Petty expenditures revolving fund. 
    The petty expenditures revolving fund heretofore established is hereby continued in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). All purchases of incidentals and automotive fuel not in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) each, made by the heads of using agencies with the approval of the agent, shall be paid from the petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(1)  Accounting. Periodically, accounting shall reimburse the actual expenditures for each using agency so made out of the petty expenditures revolving fund of the city treasurer, based upon its review of the petty cash expenditures documentation. 
(2)  Rules and regulations. The agent shall promulgate rules and regulations for use of the petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 1.281. - Personal property. 
(1)  All agencies shall submit to the agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped. The agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. The agent shall submit to the city administrator a description of all surplus equipment which he requests be disposed of under the provisions of this section. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. 
(2)  Items determined to be of surplus nature, i.e., those items deemed of no further use to the city and/or which are obsolete, worn out, or scrapped shall be subject to disposal in the following manner: 
(a)  An item with market value at time of disposal less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be disposed of with the approval of the city administrator. 
(b)  An item with market value at time of disposal of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be disposed of with the approval of the council by the best and most efficient means in the judgment of the agent, taking into account such factors as storage and handling costs and advertising. 
(Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 12-17-01) 
CHAPTER 9. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1491, enacted February 24, 2003, amended ch. 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1307, enacted August 13, 1990; Ord. No. 1323, enacted June 24, 1991; Ord. No. 1350, enacted June 22, 1992; Ord. No. 1356, enacted December 14, 1992; Ord. No. 1384, enacted September 18, 1995; Ord. No. 1442, enacted January 25, 1999; Ord. No. 1451, enacted December 6, 1999; Res. No. 05-02, enacted June 10, 2002; Ord. No. 1476, enacted June 17, 2002; and Ord. No. 1485, enacted December 19, 2002. 
Charter reference- Fire and police department pension and retirement system, § 6.13; continuation of existing benefits and service record, § 6.14. 

Sec. 1.311. - Employee retirement system; effective date. 
    The city employee retirement system, heretofore established pursuant to section 6.5(b)(2) of the Charter, is hereby continued. The effective date of the retirement system is July 1, 1965. Unless otherwise provided herein, all provisions relating to the Tax Reform Act of 1986 shall be effective July 1, 1989, all provisions related to the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the Uniform Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, and all provisions related to the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000 shall be effective January 1, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.312. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the city employee retirement system ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.313. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
(1)  Accumulated contributions shall mean the sum of (a) all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member, plus (b) all single-sum contributions made by the member and credited to his or her individual account, together with regular interest thereon. 
(2)  Actuarial equivalent shall mean a benefit of equivalent value when computed on the actuarial assumption basis specified in section 1.343. 
(3)  Board shall mean the employees retirement board as established in section 11.22 of the City Charter. 
(4)  City shall mean the City of Southfield, Michigan, and shall include its several departments, commission, boards and agencies. 
(5)  City council or council shall mean the city council of the City of Southfield, Michigan. 
(6)  Commission shall mean the administrative civil service commission of the city. 
(7)  Compensation shall mean the salary or wages paid an employee for personal services rendered to the employer including (a) vacation pay and holiday pay, (b) sick leave pay while absent from work, (c) longevity pay, (d) items of deferred compensation as provided by the city, (e) for nonunion employees hired prior to June 1, 2005, payment in consideration of unused vacation accumulation, up to a maximum of two (2) times the annual benefit, (f) for nonunion employees hired on or after June 1, 2005, payment in consideration of unused vacation accumulation up to a maximum of one hundred (100) hours and (g) items of a similar nature as provided by administrative rule and regulation. Compensation for purposes of retirement shall not include (a) remuneration for overtime services, (b) allowances for clothing, equipment, travel and similar items, (c) reimbursement for expenses incurred, (d) payment in consideration of unused sick leave accumulations, (e) salary, wages or other items which are the basis of benefits under another retirement program, excluding F.I.C.A., (f) items of a similar nature as provided by administrative rule and regulation, (g) for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, for purposes of applying the limitations of section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation paid or made available during such limitation years shall include any elective deferral (as defined in section 402(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of the employee and which is not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of sections 125 or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code, and (h) for limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2001, for purposes of applying the limitations described herein, compensation paid or made available during such limitation years shall include elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of section 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. For purposes of section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation shall mean compensation actually paid during the limitation year and the limitation year shall be the retirement system year or such other consecutive twelve-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the retirement system. The annual compensation of each employee taken into account in determining benefit accruals in any retirement system year beginning after December 31, 2001, shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Annual compensation means compensation during the retirement system year or such other consecutive twelve-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the system (the determination period). In determining benefit accruals in years beginning after December 31, 2001, the annual compensation limit for determination periods beginning before January 1, 2002 shall be one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for any determination period beginning in 1996 or earlier; one hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000.00) for any determination period beginning in 1997, 1998, or 1999; and one hundred seventy thousand dollars ($170,000.00) for any determination period beginning in 2000 or 2001. The $200,000.00-limit on annual compensation shall be adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
(8)  Court shall mean the 46th District Court. 
(9)  Credited service shall mean personal service rendered to the employer and credited to a member to the extent provided in this chapter (see section 1.316). 
(10)  Eligible spouse shall mean the spouse of a member by legal marriage at the time of the member's retirement. 
(11)  Employee shall mean any person regularly employed in the service of the employer as a career employee. 
(12)  Employer shall mean the city or the 46th District Court. 
(13)  Final average compensation shall mean one-sixtieth of the sum of a member's compensation during the period of sixty (60) consecutive months of credited service producing the highest sum, which period of sixty (60) consecutive months shall be within the period of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive months of credited service immediately preceding retirement or termination of membership, whichever comes first. Effective July 1, 1998, for employees hired prior to June 1, 2005 "final average compensation" shall mean one thirty-sixth of the sum of a member's compensation during the period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months of credited service producing the highest sum, which period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months shall be within the period of sixty (60) consecutive months of credited service immediately preceding retirement or termination of membership, whichever comes first. 
(14)  Management group employee shall mean an appointed employee who is not a member of the classified civil service, and, for purposes of this chapter, the city clerk and the city treasurer. 
(15)  Member shall mean any employee who is included in the membership of the retirement system in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(16)  Regular interest shall mean five (5) percent per annum, or such other rate or rates as determined from time to time by the council, compounded annually. 
(17)  Retirement system or system shall mean the city employee retirement system created and established by Ordinance 388, as from time to time amended and continued. 
(18)  Standard form of (normal, early, deferred or disability) pension shall mean a monthly amount payable as provided in this chapter, as of the first day of each calendar month in which the retired member is living. 
(19)  [Other terms.] As used in this chapter, the masculine gender shall include the feminine and words of the singular number with respect to persons shall include the plural, and vice versa. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 1.314. - Membership in retirement system. 
(1)  Subject to subsection (3) of this section, each eligible employee shall become a member of the retirement system beginning with his or her date of hire as an employee. 
(2)  Subject to subsection (3) of this section and effective on and after April 23, 1984, every employee of the 46th District Court (hereinafter "court"), who was first hired by the court prior to January 1, 1984, may make an irrevocable written election, within thirty (30) days following April 23, 1984, to become a member upon the commission's determination that he or she has completed at least six (6) full months of service with the court. Effective July 1, 1980, every judge of the court may, at his or her option, become a member and shall be entitled to receive benefits as provided in this chapter. Court employees who elect to become members pursuant to this subsection (2) shall receive credited service in the same manner as other members. 
(3)  The following persons shall not be eligible for membership in the retirement system: 
(a)  Any employee classified by the city as a non-career or seasonal employee; 
(b)  Any person whose services are compensated on an independent contractual or fee basis, with the exception of persons funded through the Federal Job Training Partnership Act of 1983, who elect to become members hereunder on or before December 30, 1983; 
(c)  Any employee of the police and fire departments subject to the provisions of Act 78 of Public Acts of 1935, as amended; 
(d)  The mayor and all members of the council during their terms of office; 
(e)  Any person who is included by law in any other pension or retirement system by reason of his or her compensation paid by the city, except the Federal Social Security Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Program, or its successor. 
(f)  Any judge of the 46th District Court who was first elected or appointed on or after March 31, 1997, to the extent that such membership is precluded by state law. 
(4)  Management group employees hired or elected after August 1, 2007, may, within sixty (60) days of their employment, irrevocably elect to opt out of participation and membership in the retirement system and to instead participate in another city-sponsored retirement plan. The election must be in writing and filed with the retirement system and the human resources department. Employees electing to opt out of the retirement system will not be eligible for re-enrollment at a future date. 
(5)  Nonunion employees hired on or after June 1, 2005, but prior to August 1, 2007, who at the time of employment were provided participation in the city's defined contribution plan, shall have until November 1, 2007 to irrevocably opt out of membership in the retirement system and continue participation in the city's defined contribution plan. 
(6)  Should any legal impediment which excludes a person from the retirement system be removed according to law, such person will be permitted to participate in the retirement system upon written request to the board for a redetermination of membership status. If the board shall determine that the impediment has been removed, the person may become a member of the system as of the date the impediment was removed. Any person whose membership in the retirement system is established pursuant to this subsection shall be entitled only to those benefits which are in effect on or after the date the impediment was removed. This provision shall be effective as of April 23, 1984. 
(7)  Any employee or person who is aggrieved by a determination of his or her membership status may appeal such determination, in writing, to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1534, § 1, 2-27-06; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.315. - Termination of membership; restoration of credited service. 
    Should any member who has less than ten (10) years of credited service cease to be employed in a position covered by the retirement system, for any reason except retirement, he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member and his or her credited service at that time shall be forfeited by him or her. In the event a member is reemployed in a position covered by the system, he or she shall again become a member. All credited service previously forfeited shall be restored upon the completion of thirty (30) months of continuous service following such reemployment, provided he or she returns to the system the amount, if any, of accumulated contributions withdrawn from the system, together with regular interest thereon, within that period of time, and as determined by the board. Any pension to which a reemployed member shall be entitled shall be computed according to the provisions of this chapter as this chapter was in force at the time the member last ceased to be employed prior to his or her current reemployment unless the member has completed thirty (30) months of continuous service following such reemployment, in which case any pension to which the member shall be entitled shall be computed according to the provisions of this chapter as this chapter was in force at the time such member last ceased to be employed prior to his or her retirement. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.316. - Service credit. 
    The board shall fix and determine by appropriate rules and regulations the amount of service to be credited to any member, provided that: 
(1)  Service rendered prior to April 28, 1958, shall not be recognized for any purposes of the retirement system. 
(2)  Credit for service rendered on or after April 28, 1958, and prior to July 1, 1965, shall only be used for the purpose of determining the member's eligibility to retire pursuant to sections 1.319, 1.320 or 1.321 and not for the purpose of computing the amount of his or her benefits. 
(3)  For nonunion members hired on or after June 1, 2005, and prior to August 1, 2007, credit for service rendered during this period shall only be used for the purpose of determining the member's eligibility to retire pursuant to section 1.319, 1.320 or 1.321 and not for the purpose of computing the amount of his or her benefits, unless the member elects to purchase this service credit in accordance with subsection (5). 
(4)  For a member who was a person elected to office of clerk or treasurer after June 1, 2005, unless the person was serving as clerk or treasurer or was a member of the system on June 1, 2005, credit for service rendered prior to August 1, 2007, shall only be used for the purpose of determining the member's eligibility to retire pursuant to sections 1.319, 1.320 or 1.321 and not for the purpose of computing the amount of his or her benefits, unless the clerk or treasurer elects to purchase this service credit in accordance with section (5). 
(5)  Nonunion members elected or hired after June 1, 2005, but prior to August 1, 2007, who at the time of employment were provided participation in the city's defined contribution plan, shall have until November 1, 2007 to elect to purchase their total service rendered to the employer from June 1, 2005 to August 1, 2007. Service not purchased shall be treated in accordance with subsections (3) and (4). The city will obtain an actuarial calculation which specifies the total cost of such purchase. Employees electing to purchase said service shall cause to be transferred to the retirement system a portion of their account balance in the defined contribution plan that equals the total actuarial cost of such purchase on or before November 1, 2007. Should such balance be less than the determined purchase cost, the employee shall transfer the entire defined contribution plan balance and shall pay whatever additional amount as may be necessary to equal the total cost of such purchase. The board may develop rules and procedures regarding this purchase of service that are not addressed herein. 
(6)  The provisions of subsections (3) and (5) herein shall not apply to a 46th District Court employee hired prior to September 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.317. - Military service credit. 
    If an employee who, while employed by the employer, was called to or entered any armed service of the United States, and who has been or shall be on active duty in such armed service during time of war or period of compulsory military service, such armed service actually required of him or her shall be credited to him or her in the same manner as if he or she had served the employer without interruption, provided that: 
(1)  He or she reenters the employ of the employer, in a position covered by the retirement system, within ninety (90) days from and after termination of such armed service actually required of him or her; and 
(2)  In no case shall any member be credited with more than five (5) years of service for all such armed service rendered by him or her. In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited any member, the board shall have the final power to determine such period. During the period of such armed service and until his or her return to the employ of the employer in a position covered by the system, his or her contributions to the system shall be suspended and his or her accumulated contributions shall continue to be credited with regular interest. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement system to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credited with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.318. - Duty disability service credit. 
(1)  In the event a member, while employed by the employer, becomes incapacitated for duty as a result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of an actual performance of duty in the employ of the employer, and workers' compensation is paid on account of the member's incapacity arising out of and in the course of employment with the employer, the member shall have such period of incapacity credited to him or her as credited service in the same manner as if the member had served the employer without interruption, provided that the member: 
(a)  Reenters the employ of the city in a position covered by the retirement system within ninety (90) days from and after termination of such incapacity; and 
(b)  Repays to the retirement system all amounts of accumulated contributions the member withdrew therefrom at the time he or she became or during the period he or she was incapacitated, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment; and 
(2)  In case of doubts as to the period to be so credited any member, the board shall have the final power to determine such period. During the period of such incapacity and until his or her return to the employ of the city in a position covered by the system, his or her contributions to the system shall be suspended, and his or her accumulated contributions shall continue to be credited with regular interest. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.319. - Normal retirement. 
(1)  Any member hired prior to June 1, 2005, who (a) has attained sixty-five (65) years and has five (5) or more years of credited service; (b) has attained age sixty-two (62) and has twenty (20) or more years of credited service; (c) has attained age fifty-seven (57) and has twenty-five (25) or more years of credited service; or (d) is a nonunion member and the sum of his or her age and credited service, including fractional years thereof, equals or is greater than eighty-two (82), shall be eligible for normal retirement. 
(2)  Any member hired on or after June 1, 2005, who (a) has attained age sixty-five and has ten (10) or more years of credited service; (b) has attained age sixty-two (62) and has twenty (20) or more years of credited service; or (c) has attained age fifty-seven (57) and has twenty-five (25) or more years of credited service, shall be eligible for normal retirement. 
(3)  Any member desiring to retire shall file a written application with the board, on a form furnished by the board. Such application shall specify the member's date of normal retirement. Upon such application for retirement, the member shall be retired as of the date set forth in the application, and the member shall be entitled to a pension as provided in section 1.322. 
(4)  In accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder, which are incorporated herein by reference, a member's retirement benefit shall be distributed to him or her not later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of: 
(a)  The calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (701/2) years; or 
(b)  The calendar year in which the member retires. 
(5)  Distributions from the retirement system will comply with the requirements of Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder, including requirements regarding the beginning date for distributions and the period over which a member's interest in the retirement system will be distributed. 
    A member's interest in the trust must begin to be distributed by the later of (i) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the member attains the age of seventy and one-half (701/2), or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year the member retires. With respect to distributions under the plan made for calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, the plan will apply the minimum distribution requirements of IRC § 401(a)(9) in accordance with the regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9) that were proposed in January 2001, notwithstanding any provision in the plan to the contrary. This amendment shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year beginning before the effective date of final regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9) or such other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(a)  Effective date. The provisions of this subsection will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(b)  Precedence. The requirements of this subsection will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(c)  Requirements of treasury regulations incorporated. All distributions required under this subsection shall be determined and made in accordance with the treasury regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(d)  TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, other than paragraph (c), distributions may be made under a designation made on or before January 1, 1984 in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that relate to section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
TIME AND MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION 
(e)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date. 
(f)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
1.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the plan, distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (701/2), if later. 
2.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the plan, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
3.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
4.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this paragraph (f) will apply, other than paragraph (f)1., as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of paragraph (f) and paragraphs (k), (l) and (m), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date (or, if paragraph (f)4. applies, the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under paragraph (f)1.). If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under paragraph (f)1.), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(g)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with paragraphs (h) through (m) of this subsection. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the IRC and the treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the IRC will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the IRC and the treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT TO BE DISTRIBUTED EACH YEAR 
(h)  General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
1.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one (1) year; 
2.  The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than the period described in paragraphs (k) through (m); 
3.  Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted. 
(i)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under paragraphs (f)1. or 2. is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., bimonthly, monthly, semiannually, or annually. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(j)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR MINIMUM DISTRIBUTIONS WHERE MEMBER DIES BEFORE DATE DISTRIBUTIONS BEGIN 
(k)  Member survived by designated beneficiary. Except as provided in the adoption agreement, if the member dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be distributed, beginning no later than the time described in paragraphs (f)1. or 2., over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
1.  Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the member's death; or 
2.  If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(l)  No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(m)  Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. If the member dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins, and the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without regard to paragraph (f)1. 
(n)  Death of member while performing qualified military service. In the case of a death occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a member dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in Code § 414(u)), the survivors of the member are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) provided under the plan as if the member had resumed and then terminated employment on account of a non-duty related death. For these purposes, the member shall be entitled to service credit under the plan for the period of qualifying military service. 
DEFINITIONS 
(o)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q & A-4, of the treasury regulations. 
(p)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to paragraph (f). 
(q)  Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the single life table in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations. 
(r)  Required beginning date. The date specified in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1531, § 1, 1-30-06; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07; Ord. No. 1611 , § 1, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 1.320. - Early retirement. 
    Any member who (a) has attained age fifty-seven (57) and has twenty (20) or more years of credited service, or (b) has attained age sixty (60) and has ten (10) or more years of credited service, may retire upon written application filed with the board, on a form furnished by the board. Such application shall specify the member's date of early retirement, which may be any day prior to the member's sixty-fifth birthday. Upon such early retirement, the member shall be entitled to a pension as provided in section 1.322. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.321. - Vested deferred pension. 
(1)  Should any member who has ten (10) or more years of credited service cease to be employed in a position covered by the retirement system for any reason except his or her retirement, such member shall be entitled to a vested deferred pension, payable at age sixty-five (65), based on his or her final average compensation and credited service as of the date of termination and computed according to the provisions of section 1.322 as the section was in force at the time of such member's separation from covered employment, provided that the member does not withdraw his or her accumulated contributions from the retirement system. Any member entitled to a vested deferred pension in accordance with this section may elect to have his or her monthly pension begin on the later of: 
(a)  His or her sixtieth birthday; and 
(b)  The date a written application is filed with the board. 
    Any vested deferred pension which, pursuant to a member's election, begins prior to the first day of the calendar month following the member's sixty-fifth birthday, shall be reduced in accordance with the second sentence of subsection 1.322(3). 
(2)  Any member who has twenty (20) or more years of credited service and ceases to be employed in a position covered by the retirement system for any reason other than his or her retirement shall be entitled to a vested deferred pension beginning on his or her sixty-second birthday; any member who has twenty-five (25) or more years of credited service and ceases to be employed in a position covered by the retirement system for any reason other than his or her retirement shall be entitled to a vested deferred pension beginning the first day of the calendar month next following his or her fifty-seventh birthday. Any nonunion member hired prior to June 1, 2005 who has ten (10) or more years of credited service and ceases to be employed after January 1, 2003, in a position covered by the retirement system for any reason other than his or her retirement shall be entitled to a vested deferred pension beginning on the date on which the sum of his or her age and credited service, including fractional years thereof, equals eighty-two (82). Such pensions as provided in this subsection, shall not be reduced under subsection 1.322(3), shall be based on the member's final average compensation and credited service as of the date of the termination of his or her employment and shall be computed according to the provisions of subsection 1.322(2) as the section was in force at the time of such member's separation from covered employment, provided that the member does not withdraw his or her accumulated contributions from the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03, Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.322. - Standard form of pension; amount. 
(1)  The standard form of pension, whether for normal, early, deferred or disability retirement, shall consist of an amount payable as of the first day of each calendar month in which the retired member is living; provided, however, that should the retired member die before he or she has received in pension payments an aggregate amount equal to his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the time of retirement, the difference between his or her accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of pension payments received by him or her shall be paid to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the city. If there be no such designated person or person surviving the retired member, such difference shall be paid to his or her estate. In the event that the retired member was a member who retired on or after July 1, 1998, or had elected an optional form of pension, as provided in subsection 1.323(2), then such option shall be honored, and the return of such accumulated contributions, less aggregate amount of pension payments received, shall not be applicable. 
(2)  Upon a member's retirement, he or she shall receive a standard form pension equal to two (2) percent of his or her final average compensation multiplied by his or her credited service (in years and fractional years) which shall be paid for life with the provision that if the retired member's death occurs before one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments have been made, such remaining standard form of pension shall be commuted to a single sum and paid to such person or persons and in such shares as the retired member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board, or if there be no such designated person or persons surviving the retired member, to the estate of the last survivor among the retired member and the designated person or persons. For members hired on or after June 1, 2005, the maximum pension shall be seventy (70) percent of the member's final average compensation. Effective January 1, 2003, upon retirement, a nonunion member hired prior to June 1, 2005, shall receive a standard form of pension equal to two and one-half (2.50) percent of his or her final average compensation multiplied by his or her credited service (in years and fractional years), which shall be paid for life with the provision that if the retired member's death occurs before one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments have been made, such remaining standard form of pension shall be commuted to a single sum and paid to such person or persons and in such shares as the retired member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board, or if there be no such designated person or persons surviving the retired member, to the estate of the last survivor among the retired member and the designated person or persons. The standard form pension shall be subject to subsection (3) of this section, and the member shall have the right to receive his or her pension under an option as provided in section 1.323 in lieu of a standard form of pension. 
(3)  If a member elects early retirement in accordance with section 1.320 or early commencement of his or her vested deferred pension in accordance with subsection 1.321(1), his or her standard form of pension shall be reduced. If any member retires based upon attaining age sixty (60) with ten (10) or more years of credited service, as provided in section 1.320 or 1.321(1), his or her pension calculated in accordance with subsection (2) above shall be reduced one-half of one (0.005) percent multiplied by the number of complete calendar months the date he or she elects his or her pension to begin precedes the first day of the month coincident with or immediately following the date he or she would reach age sixty-five (65). If a member retires on or after reaching age fifty-seven (57) with twenty (20) or more years credited service, as provided in section 1.320, his or her pension provided in subsection (2) of this section shall be reduced by one-half of one (0.005) percent multiplied by the number of complete calendar months the date he or she elects his or her pension to begin precedes the date he or she would reach age sixty-two (62). 
(4)  The de facto operation of the Retirement System, since July 1, 1998, consisted of a defined benefit plan (commonly referred to as a pension plan) and a defined contribution plan (commonly referred to as an annuity plan) which have been treated by the city as two (2) separate qualified plans under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The board will continue the two (2) plans within the Retirement System and take action which may be required by Internal Revenue Service rules and regulations and the tax laws to maintain the qualified status of the plans under section 401(a) or any other applicable section of the Internal Revenue Code. The defined contribution plan and the defined benefit plan together will provide the total retirement benefit payable from the Retirement System in accordance with the Retirement System Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 1-30-06; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.323. - Pension options; survivor pension. 
(1)  Under such rules and regulations as the board shall adopt, a member may elect to receive an optional form of pension in lieu of his or her standard form of pension. The amount of such optional form of pension shall be determined in accordance with subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  The board shall make available the following optional forms of pension in lieu of the standard form of pension: 
(a)  Option A, joint and one hundred (100) percent survivor pension. A member who elects option A shall receive a reduced monthly pension payable during his or her lifetime, with the further provision that such reduced monthly pension shall be payable following the death of the member during the remaining lifetime, if any, of the member's eligible spouse. The monthly amount of the option A pension shall be the actuarial equivalent of the standard form of pension to which the member would otherwise be entitled. 
(b)  Option B, joint and 50 percent survivor pension. A member who elects option B shall receive a monthly pension calculated as a standard form of pension payable during his or her lifetime, with the further provision that fifty (50) percent of such monthly pension shall be payable following the death of the member during the remaining lifetime, if any, of the member's eligible spouse. 
(3)  Upon the death of any member while an active employee on or after the date he or she acquires ten (10) or more years of credited service his or her eligible spouse shall automatically become eligible to receive a pension computed according to subsection 1.322(2), which shall not be reduced under subsection 1.322(3), in the same manner as if the member had retired the day preceding the date of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might not have satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement as provided in section 1.319. Effective July 1, 1998, for a nonunion member without an eligible spouse, such pension shall be for one hundred twenty (120) months commuted to a single sum and paid to such person or persons and in such shares as the member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the city, or if there be no such designated person or persons surviving the member, to the estate of the last survivor among the member and the designated person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.324. - Nonduty disability defined; nonduty disability pension; amount. 
(1)  Upon application to the board by a member or his or her department head, such member with ten (10) or more years of credited service who becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the employer as a result of causes occurring not in his or her actual performance of duty may be retired; provided, that a physician selected by the board, after medical examination of the member, certifies to the board that the member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty in the employ of the employer, and that such disability will probably be permanent. Under provisions of this section the employer may, upon proper certification by a physician selected by the board, elect to place the member in another classification wherein the member shall be subject to the conditions in effect governing that classification. 
(2)  Upon his or her retirement on account of disability, as provided in subsection 1.324(1) a member shall receive a pension computed according to subsection 1.322(2), which shall not be reduced under subsection 1.322(3), subject to subsection (3) of this section. Prior to the date of his or her retirement, the member may elect to receive his or her pension under an option provided in section 1.323 in lieu of the standard form of pension. 
(3)  Any benefit which may be paid or payable on account of the disability of a member under any employer-financed salary continuation plan, sickness and accident insurance, long-term disability plan, workers' compensation or other similar program, except benefits under the Federal Social Security Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Program or its successor, shall be offset against and payable in lieu of any pensions payable from the retirement system on account of the same disability. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.325. - Duty-connected disability; retirement benefits; amount; lump-sum settlement; eligibility; records. 
(1)  In the event a member becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the employer as a result of causes directly related to his or her actual performance of duty while an employee, such member may be retired by the city; provided, that a physician selected by the board, after examination of the member, certifies to the board that the member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty and that such disability will probably be permanent. Under provisions of this section, the employer may, upon proper certification by a physician selected by the board, elect to place the member in another classification wherein the member shall be subject to the conditions in effect governing that classification. 
(2)  In the event that a member is certified as totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (1) of this section as a result of a duty-connected injury and, further, that the employer does not exercise its option or is unable to place the member in another classification due to the nature of the disability, then the member shall be entitled to full retirement benefits as if he or she would have actively in the employ of the employer until age sixty (60); provided, that at the time of total and permanent disability eligibility the member had not previously attained age sixty (60). 
(3)  The monthly equivalent of any benefits, including lump sum settlements, which may be paid or payable on account of a duty-connected disability to any member under any salary continuation plan, sickness and accident insurance, long-term disability plan, workers' compensation or other similar program, except benefits under the Federal Social Security Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Program or its successor, which benefits are financed in whole or in part by the employer, shall be offset against any payable in lieu of any pensions payable under the retirement system on account of the same disability. 
(4)  If a disability retirant becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business or employment, his or her disability pension shall not exceed the difference between his or her annual rate of compensation at the time of his or her retirement and his or her annual pay and earnings from such occupation, business or employment. The disability retirant shall make all income and/or earnings records available to the board upon request for verification of eligibility. The board may, upon failure to so comply or falsification, terminate retirement payments. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.326. - Disability retirement; physical examination. 
    The board may require any member who is retired according to the provisions of section 1.324 or section 1.325 to submit to an examination conducted by a physician selected by the board, which examination may be required not more than once annually. If it appears to the satisfaction of the board that the member's disability has been removed, the member may be required to return to work. Should the member refuse to return to work or to submit to the aforesaid physical examination, the disability pension payments shall cease. Any member who is aggrieved by the application of the provision of this section shall have a right of appeal by application therefor, in writing, to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.327. - Benefit levels; effective date. 
(1)  The benefit levels as provided in this chapter, including disability benefits, shall be effective only for members retiring on or after thirty (30) days following April 23, 1984. 
(2)  All retired members and beneficiaries of retired members being paid a monthly pension on July 1, 1998, shall have their pensions permanently increased. Beginning January 1, 1999, each such retired member and beneficiary shall be paid a monthly pension increased by the percentage change in the annual average consumer price index from the calendar year a monthly pension first became payable to the retired member or beneficiary, as the case may be, to 1998. As used in this subsection, the term "consumer price index" means the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), U.S. City Average, all items, 1982-84=100. Optional forms of pensions shall be based on retired members' increased pensions. 
(3)  All retired members and beneficiaries of retired members being paid a monthly pension on December 31, 2002, shall receive an additional pension payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month, effective January 1, 2003. This payment shall be made until such time as the payment is modified or terminated at the sole discretion of the council. 
(4)  Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits which any employee or member would otherwise receive under the retirement system. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement system to the contrary, benefits and contributions shall be limited in accordance with section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(6)  The benefit provisions of this plan for employees of the 46th District Court as of the effective date of this chapter shall be as set forth in the plan for nonunion members. Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement system to the contrary, court employees hired prior to September 1, 2005, shall be eligible for those retirement benefits granted to nonunion members hired prior to June 1, 2005. Court employees hired on or after September 1, 2005, shall be eligible for those retirement benefits granted to nonunion members under the terms of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07) 
Sec. 1.328. - Members' contributions. 
(1)  Each active member shall contribute an amount to the retirement system as required by city council resolution, the commission, and applicable collective bargaining agreements. The contributions of nonunion members and employees of the 46th District Court made on or after June 1, 2005 shall be contributed to the retirement system in accordance with section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code as provided in subsection (3). 
(2)  The officer or officers responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the contributions provided for in this section to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so long as he or she is a member of the system. The member's contributions provided for in this section shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member is thereby changed. Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this section. Payment of the member's compensation less such deduction shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by the member during the period covered by such payment, except as to the benefits provided by this chapter. When deducted, each of the contribution shall be paid to the retirement system and shall be credited to the member's individual account from whose compensation such deduction was made. 
(3)  Employer pick-up arrangement. This subsection is enacted effective April 15, 2007 pursuant to section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code and shall be applicable to nonunion members and members of those collective bargaining units who have negotiated with the city for the inclusion of this section in its applicable current collective bargaining agreement. An employer pick-up arrangement is established whereby a percentage of employee contributions to the retirement system shall be paid by the city in lieu of contributions by the employees. The terms and conditions of the employer pick-up arrangement shall be in accordance with the provisions of 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, related treasury regulations, and other applicable law. Upon implementation, solely for the purpose of compliance with section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, the city shall pick up a percentage of member contributions required by the retirement system for all compensation earned by the member after implementation. The provisions of this subsection are mandatory, and the member shall have no option concerning the pick-up or to receive the contributed amount directly instead of having them paid by the city to the retirement system. In no event may implementation occur other than at the beginning of a pay period. Member contributions picked up under the provisions of this subsection shall be treated as city contributions for purposes of determining income tax obligations under the Internal Revenue Code; however, such picked up member contributions shall be included in the determination of the member's gross annual compensation for all other purposes under federal and state laws. Member's contributions picked-up under this subsection shall continue to be designated member contributions for all purposes of the retirement system and shall be considered part of the member's compensation for purposes of determining the amount of the member's contribution. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07; Ord. No. 1570 , § 1, 8-9-09) 
Sec. 1.329. - Regular interest. 
    The city shall allow and credit regular interest to the members' contributions to the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.330. - Refund of member's contribution. 
(1)  Should an employee cease to be a member before he or she has satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 1.319, and is not otherwise entitled to apply for a pension, he or she shall be paid his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the retirement system upon his or her demand in writing on forms furnished by the board. 
(2)  Effective July 1, 1998, for those members hired prior to June 1, 2005, upon the commencement of such member's monthly pension pursuant to section 1.319, 1.320, 1.321, 1.324 or 1.325, or upon the commencement of the monthly pension of a member's eligible spouse or nominated beneficiary pursuant to section 1.323(3), he or she shall be paid the member's accumulated contributions standing to the member's credit in the retirement system which were made prior to June 1, 2005, together with regular interest thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-30-07; Ord. No. 1570 , § 1, 8-9-09) 
Sec. 1.331. - Death before retirement. 
    Should a member die before his or her retirement becomes effective and no pension is or becomes payable on account of his or her death, his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the retirement system at the time of his or her death shall be paid to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there be no such designated person or person surviving such member, his or her accumulated contributions shall be paid to his or her estate. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.332. - Rules for refunds. 
(1)  Payments of accumulated contributions, as provided in sections 1.330 and 1.331, may be made according to such rules and regulations as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
(2)  This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the Retirement System to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(a)  Definitions. 
1.  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities). 
2.  Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
3.  Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, or an eligible domestic relations order under Act 46 of the Public Acts of 1991, as amended, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. 
4.  Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(b)  If a distribution is one to which sections 401(a)(11) and 417 of the Internal Revenue Code do not apply, such distribution may commence less than thirty (30) days after the notice required under section 1.411(a)-11(c) of the Income Tax Regulations is given, provided that: 
1.  The board clearly informs the member that the member has a right to a period of at least thirty (30) days after receiving the notice to consider the decision of whether or not to elect a distribution (and, if applicable, a particular distribution option); and 
2.  The member, after receiving the notice, affirmatively elects a distribution. 
(3)  This subsection shall apply to distributions made after December 31, 2001. 
(a)  For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section, an eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to account separately for amounts transferred into such plan from the retirement system. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, or an eligible domestic relations order under Act 46 of the Public Acts of 1991, as amended. 
(b)  For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that agrees to account separately for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 1-30-06) 
Sec. 1.333. - Title to contributions. 
    A member shall have no right, title or interest in the contributions made by him or her except as is specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS AND FINANCING 
Sec. 1.334. - Employer contributions. 
    The liabilities of the retirement system shall be determined annually under accepted actuarial principles and shall be financed by annual employer contributions to the retirement system appropriated by the city council, such contributions to be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) set forth below: 
(1)  The appropriations for members' current service shall be a percentage of their annual compensation which will produce an amount which, if paid annually by the employer during their future service, will be sufficient at the time of their retirement to provide the pension reserves not financed by members' future contributions for the portions of the pensions to be paid them based upon their future service; and 
(2)  The appropriations for members' and retired members' accrued service shall be a percentage of the annual compensation of members which will produce an amount which, if paid annually by the employer over a period of years to be determined by the city council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded accrued service liabilities. 
Upon termination of the retirement system or upon complete discontinuance of contributions under the retirement system, the rights of all members to benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance, to the extent then funded, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.335. - Deficiency in funds. 
    If the amount appropriated in the budget in any fiscal year, together with retirement system assets not needed to cover members' accumulated contributions, is insufficient to pay in full the amounts due in such year to all retired members and their beneficiaries, the amount of such insufficiency shall thereupon be provided by the employer. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.336. - Trustee. 
    The city council shall be the trustee of the assets of the retirement system. It shall have full power and authority to invest and reinvest such assets, subject to the provisions of Act 314 of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended, and as it might from time to time be amended or replaced by successor acts. The city council shall have full power to hold, sell, purchase, assign, transfer and dispose of any securities and investments in which any monies of the system have been invested as well as the proceeds of the investment and any monies belonging to the system. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.337. - Administration of retirement system. 
(1)  In accordance with section 11.22 of the Charter, the responsibility for the administration of the retirement system is vested with the board. The board shall have all such powers as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. The board may, from time to time, establish rules and regulations for the administration of the retirement system and the transaction of system business. In making any such rules and regulations, the board shall pursue uniform policies and shall not discriminate in favor of or against any employee or group of employees. Such provision against discrimination is not intended to apply to differentials between groups of employees based upon negotiated and council-approved labor contracts. The board may, upon recommendation of the city administrator, create an advisory board consisting of members of the system. Such advisory board shall have no authority other than to advise the board. 
(2)  The retirement system is intended to qualify as a pension plan and trust meeting the requirements of sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended, and shall be administered so as to fulfill this intent. The board may amend the retirement system plan provisions by resolution to comply with the Internal Revenue Code and related authority in order to maintain the qualified status of the plan. 
(3)  The regular terms of office of the board shall be as follows: 
(a)  The terms of the three (3) members of the commission shall coincide with and be identical to said commissioners' terms of office. 
(b)  The term of the member appointed by the Mayor shall be four (4) years. The initial term of office for said member shall expire on March 31, 2007. 
(c)  The term for the elected active members of the retirement system shall be four (4) years. The initial term of office for the one (1) elected active member obtaining the largest number of votes shall expire on March 31, 2007. The initial term of office for the one (1) elected active member receiving the second largest number of votes shall expire on March 31, 2005. 
(d)  The term for the elected retired employee member of the retirement system shall be for two (2) years. The initial term of office for the retired employee member shall expire on March 31, 2005. 
(4)  Each member of the board shall serve until the expiration of his or her term of office or until his or her death, incapacity, resignation, or removal. Removal from the board shall occur as follows: 
(a)  The members of the commission may be removed as provided in section 6.5(a) of the Charter. 
(b)  The member appointed by the mayor may be removed as provided in section 5.2 of the Charter. 
(c)  An elected active member of the retirement system shall be removed if he or she ceases to be an active member. 
(d)  Vacancies in the elected positions on the board shall be filled within one hundred twenty (120) days, for the unexpired term, in the same manner as the position was previously filled. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.338. - Restricted use of funds. 
    All monies and assets of the retirement system shall be held for the exclusive purpose of meeting the disbursements for pensions and other payments authorized by this chapter and shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.339. - Correction of errors. 
    Should any change or error in the records of the employer or the board result in any person receiving from the system more or less than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall correct such error and, as far as is practicable, shall adjust the payment of the benefit in such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such person was correctly entitled is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.340. - Subrogation. 
    If a person becomes entitled to a pension or other benefit payable by the retirement system as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be subrogated to the rights of the person against such third party to the extent of the benefits to which the city pays or becomes liable to pay. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.341. - Assignments prohibited. 
    The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated contributions, the pension itself, any pension option, any other right accrued or accruing to any member, retired member or beneficiary of any monies belonging to the retirement system, shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment or any other process of law whatsoever and shall be unassignable, except as is specifically provided in this chapter; provided, that if a member is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the employer and should such member be permitted and elect to continue such coverage as a retired member, he or she may authorize the employer to have deducted from his or her pension the payments required of him or her to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan; provided further, that the employer shall have the right to set off for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retired member, or beneficiary of a member or retired member. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.342. - Pension suspended. 
    In the event a retired member is reemployed by the employer in a position covered by the retirement system, payment of his or her pension shall be suspended during the period of his or her reemployment. During the period of his or her reemployment by the employer, a retired member shall not again become a member of the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.343. - Actuarial assumptions. 
    Effective July 1, 1984, the 1971 group annuity mortality table (set back five (5) years for females) with an interest rate of seven (7) percent per year, compounded annually, shall be used for all actuarial valuations and other calculations required in the operation of the system except those specifically provided to the contrary in this chapter. For purposes of determining actuarial equivalent optional forms of payment under section 1.323, unisex factors assuming ninety (90) percent of all members are male shall be used. For purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation under section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, the mortality table used shall be the table prescribed by the United States Secretary of the Treasury in accordance with section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Internal Revenue Code. The board may, from time to time, and upon written recommendation of the actuary, adjust and otherwise change the actuarial assumptions in order to reflect retirement system experience and trends. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 1.344. - Validity. 
    If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word contained in this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and words of this chapter, or the chapter in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 2-24-03) 
CHAPTER 10. - ELECTIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Registration, nomination and election, § 3.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Voting precincts, § 1.31. 

Sec. 1.381. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the election of the elective city officers in accordance with the provisions of Act 239 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for year 1970. 
Sec. 1.382. - Odd-year primary elections. 
    A primary election to be known as the odd-year primary election shall be held on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September of 1993 and on the same day of each odd-numbered year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 1, 1-17-77; Ord. No. 984, § 1, 12-11-78; Ord. No. 1318, § 1, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 1357, § 1, 1-25-93) 
Sec. 1.383. - Odd-year general elections. 
    A general election to be known as the odd-year general election shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November of 1973, and on the same day of each odd-numbered year thereafter. 
Sec. 1.384. - Officers to be elected at odd-year general election. 
    All elective city officers whose terms of office are expiring during such odd-numbered year shall be elected at the odd-year general election. 
Sec. 1.385. - Nomination for odd-year general elections. 
    All officers required to be elected at the odd-year general election shall be nominated at the odd-year primary election. 
Sec. 1.386. - Nominating petitions; necessity of primary. 
(1)  Nominating petitions for the offices to be filled at the odd-year general election shall be filed by 4:00 p.m. on the seventh Tuesday preceding the date of holding the odd-year primary election. The place of filing and the number of signatures shall be the same as is now required by the Charter. 
(2)  If, upon the expiration of the time for filing the nominating petitions, not more than twice the number of candidates as there are persons to be elected to that office have filed, a primary election for the nomination of candidates for such office shall not be held. Those persons filing valid petitions shall be declared nominees for such office and the names of such candidates for such office shall be placed on the election ballot to be voted for at the next odd-year general election in the same manner as though the candidates had been nominated at the odd-year primary election. 
Sec. 1.387. - Existing terms of office, effect on length of terms. 
    No existing terms of office shall be shortened by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. An officer scheduled by prior law to be elected at a time other than in November of an odd-numbered year shall not be elected on the date scheduled but shall continue in office until a successor takes office pursuant to the first odd-year general election following that date. 
Sec. 1.388. - Date and time for taking office. 
    All persons elected at the odd-year general election shall take office at 12:00 noon on the first Monday following the election at which they are elected and shall end when their respective successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
Sec. 1.389. - Manner of conducting odd-year elections. 
    All odd-year primary and general elections shall be conducted in the manner elections for state and county offices are conducted. 
Sec. 1.390. - Existing Charter provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all existing Charter provisions governing the election of candidates for city offices shall remain in full force and effect. 
CHAPTER 11. - FIRE AND POLICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM PENSION ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 1.395. - Pension adjustment. 
    Pursuant to section 6d of 1937 PA 345, as amended, (MCL 68.556d), all retired members and beneficiaries of retired members being paid a monthly pension from the city fire and police retirement system on September 1, 1988, shall have their pensions permanently adjusted. Beginning January 1, 1999, each such retired member and beneficiary shall be paid a monthly pension increased by the percentage change in the annual average consumer price index from the calendar year a monthly pension first became payable to the retired member or beneficiary, as the case may be, to 1998. As used herein, the term "consumer price index" means the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), U.S. City Average, all items, 1982-84=100. Surviving spouse and optional forms of pensions under section 6(1)(h) of 1937 PA 345 (MCL 38.556(1)(h)) shall be based on retired member's increased pensions. 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 1565, 2-17-09) 
CHAPTER 12. - EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1.400. - Intent. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a residency requirement for all persons who become employed by the city in an exempt position classification subsequent to the effective date hereof. 
    Local citizen service in the administration of municipal government secures enhanced job performance and promotes a deeper sense of community pride and an intensified commitment to the local government's progress, growth and development. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 5-13-85) 
Sec. 1.401. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  City council shall mean the city council of the City of Southfield. 
(b)  Exempt position shall mean a position not covered by civil service so far as appointment to, promotion in, and dismissal from the service is concerned, as so defined in the city personnel manual. 
(c)  Residence shall mean the actual domicile of the individual where (s)he normally eats and sleeps and maintains his/her normal personal and household effects. 
(d)  Resident shall mean a person whose residence is within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 5-13-85) 
Sec. 1.402. - Residency within city. 
(a)  Requirement. All persons who become employed by the city in an exempt position classification subsequent to the effective date of this section shall maintain residence within the city, and if not a resident thereof at the time of appointment or hire, shall become a resident of the city within six (6) months thereafter, and shall remain a resident while so employed. 
(b)  Waiver. Upon a specific finding by the city council that the interests of the city would best be served in a given circumstance by granting relief from this section, the city council may, by an affirmative vote of at least five (5) members thereof, waive or modify the condition of residency herein established. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Violation of this section shall be grounds for dismissal from employment. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 5-13-85) 
CHAPTER 13. - BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS 

Sec. 1.500. - Background investigation procedure. 
(a)  The chief of police may conduct a criminal background investigation of the following persons: 
(1)  Any applicant for any position of employment with the city. 
(2)  Any person or entity who may be awarded any contract with the city ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant for any license granted under the authority of the Charter or any ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Any person or company may request the chief of police to conduct a criminal background investigation of any applicant for any private security guard position when the position involves enforcement of city ordinances. 
(c)  The criminal background investigation may be made in any lawful manner. 
(d)  The criminal background investigation may be made by access to the Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN), provided that any access to LEIN information shall comply with 1974 PA 163 (MCL 28.211 et seq.), as amended, rules promulgated thereunder including Michigan Administrative Rules R. 28.5101 et seq., and other applicable laws, rules, procedures, and manuals established thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 9-25-89) 
CHAPTER 14. - RETIREE HEALTH CARE BENEFITS PLAN AND TRUST[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1675, adopted June 8, 2017, amended ch. 14 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former ch. 14 consisted of §§ 1.600-1.635, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1491, adopted December 6, 1999; Ord. No. 1464, adopted May 29, 2001; Ord. No. 1530, adopted January 17, 2006; Ord. No. 1552, adopted July 30, 2007 and Ord. No. 1670, adopted March 2, 2017. 

PART A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.600. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the plan and trust is to provide health insurance benefits or such other benefits approved by the city or approved by collective bargaining agreements for the welfare of qualified and the spouses and eligible dependents of such retirees. Health care benefits under the plan are provided for by the city pursuant to a health insurance plan(s) administered by a third-party administrator(s) as designated by the city. The city reserves the right to enter into substitute contracts with commercial insurance carriers or with health maintenance organizations or preferred provider organizations in order to provide benefits under the plan. 
    The plan and trust is created, under the authority of the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999 (MCL 38.1211 et seq.), and shall constitute a governmental trust pursuant to section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and is created for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits through policies issued by duly licensed commercial insurance companies, through a fund of self-insurance, or through any other lawful means of providing group health insurance as determined by city decisions and in accordance with any and all applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and applicable collective bargaining associations, for the benefit of retirees and beneficiaries who are eligible to participate in accordance with the plan. The city intends the benefits to be provided by the establishment and maintenance of a trust fund in conformance with all applicable federal statutes and regulations, state and local law. 
    The city reserves the right to enter into insurance agreements, and to modify, alter or amend such agreements from time to time, with commercial insurance carriers, health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for the purpose of providing benefits under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.601. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the City of Southfield Retiree Health Benefits Plan and Trust ("plan and trust"). 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.602. - Interpretation and law; construction. 
    The plan and trust is established in accordance with the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999 (MCL 38.1211 et seq.), shall be administered consistent with applicable federal and Michigan law, and shall constitute a section 115 governmental trust. The plan is intended to qualify as an accident and health plan and a group health plan under applicable provisions of the current Internal Revenue Code, (Sections 105, 106 and 162), the regulations promulgated under each, and applicable federal and Michigan law. If any provisions of the plan shall be for any reason invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions nevertheless shall be carried into effect. 
    Neither the establishment of the plan, nor the trust, nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the plan and trust or other person any legal or equitable right against the city, its elected or appointed officials or employees, the retiree health care board or any individual retiree health care board member, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter. 
    Neither the city, nor the retiree health care board, shall be responsible for the validity of any insurance agreement issued in connection with the plan or trust or for the failure on the part of the insurer to make payments provided by such insurance agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment or render an insurance agreement null and void or unenforceable in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.603. - Collective bargaining agreements. 
    The benefit provisions of this plan are subject to relevant provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and the various collective bargaining associations of the city. The express provisions of a collective bargaining agreement relative to retiree health care benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of the collective bargaining agreement and the plan. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or limit in any way the rights that the parties to the collective bargaining agreement may have, any supplements or memoranda thereto, or any arbitrator's award to enforce the terms of the plan and trust, inclusive of the collection of any amounts due to the trust and the right of the parties to sue for same. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.604. - 46th district court. 
    The benefit provisions of this plan for employees of the 46 th district court as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be as set forth in the plan for non-union employees of the city. Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement system to the contrary, court employees hired prior to September 1, 2005 shall be eligible for those benefits granted to non-union participants hired prior to June 1, 2005. Court employees hired on or after September 1, 2005 shall be eligible for those benefits granted to non-union participants under the terms of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.605. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Base plan means the benefits in effect at the time of an employee's retirement, or in the case of a deferred vested participant, at the time of separation from service, as provided by the policy or the comprehensive program in place at the time of the employee's retirement or separation from service, as applicable, (exclusive of HMO, PPO and other alternative plans) or by a substantially equivalent policy or program at the election of the city. 
(2)  City means the city of Southfield, Michigan. 
(3)  Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to any section or subsection of the Code includes reference to any comparable or succeeding provision of any legislation which amends or replaces such section or subsection. 
(4)  Collective bargaining agreements means any written agreement, supplemental agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's decision, judicial decision or decision of any public board or agency, by and between applicable collective bargaining associations and the city, and any amendments, continuations, or renewals, which require the city or any other entity to make payments into group health and life insurance programs for employees who are members of the city employee retirement system or fire and police retirement system. 
(5)  Collective bargaining associations means those associations which have negotiated to participate in this plan and trust. 
(6)  Contributions means the payment required to be made to the trust by the city and/or participants under the terms of the plan and trust or under any applicable existing collective bargaining agreements or any future collective bargaining agreements for the purpose of providing group health insurance for retirees and beneficiaries covered by the plan. 
(7)  Court shall mean the 46 th district court. 
(8)  Credited service means actual personal service rendered to the employer and credited to the participant under the participant's applicable retirement plan. Credited service for members of the city defined contribution plan shall be determined in accordance with the city employee retirement system's plan provisions, policies, and procedures. 
(9)  Dependent generally means a retiree's unmarried child until the end of the year in which he or she reaches age nineteen (19) and a participant's or retiree's unmarried child who is totally and permanently disabled by either a physical or mental condition prior to age nineteen (19). The definition of dependent applies unless the retiree selects an alternate insurance policy offered by the city, in which case the definition is controlled by the insurance policy covering the retiree, which may or may not vary from the definition herein. 
(10)  Effective date means the date of publication of this ordinance upon which the terms and conditions of this plan and trust shall become effective. 
(11)  Employee means a person employed by the city or the 46 th district court. 
(12)  Employer shall mean the city or the 46 th district court. 
(13)  Employment, for purposes of this chapter, shall include an election or appointment to a term of office. 
(14)  Family continuation dependent generally means an unmarried child of a retiree who (i) is age nineteen (19) through the end of the calendar year in which he or she reaches age twenty-five (25), (ii) is claimed as a dependent on the retiree's or surviving spouse's tax return in compliance with the code or is a full-time student for at least five (5) months of the year, (iii) is a member of the household of the retiree or surviving spouse, and (iv) is related to the retiree by blood, marriage or legal adoption. The definition of family continuation dependent applies unless the retiree selects an alternate insurance policy offered by the city, in which case the definition is controlled by the insurance policy covering the retiree, which may or may not vary from the definition herein. 
(15)  Health care benefits means group health care benefits as currently provided and any other future health care related benefits as may be determined to be part of the plan pursuant to city decisions and/or collective bargaining agreements. 
(16)  Insurance agreement means the health insurance plan(s) and any amendment(s) thereto, including any substitute insurance agreement with a commercial insurance carrier, health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for the purpose of providing benefits under the plan. The term "insurance agreement" shall include the plural where applicable. 
(17)  Insurance carrier means a commercial health insurance carrier, health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization or other qualified entity designated by the city to provide benefits under the plan. 
(18)  Major life event changes means birth of a child, legal adoption, legal separation, divorce, legal guardianship, death, or marriage of a dependent child. 
(19)  Participant means an employee who meets one (1) of the following requirements unless otherwise excluded pursuant to (e), (f), or (g) below: 
(a)  Who is a member of the city employee retirement system or the fire and police retirement system and whose participation has not terminated under other applicable provisions of the plan or an applicable collective bargaining agreement; or 
(b)  Who is an eligible career employee, the city clerk, the city treasurer, the city attorney or the city administrator who has elected to participate in a defined contribution plan sponsored by the city; or 
(c)  Who is a 46 th district court judge who was first elected or appointed on or after March 31, 1997; or 
(d)  Who is an employee granted health coverage under a separation agreement, settlement or court order. 
(e)  No person shall be considered a participant of the plan who is compensated for services to the city on a fee or independent contractual basis. 
(f)  No person shall be considered a participant of the plan who has elected to withdraw from participation in the plan in accordance with section 1.612. 
(g)  No person shall be considered a participant of the plan who is an employee who commenced employment with the city on or after September 12, 2011 unless otherwise provided in an applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(h)  In all cases of doubt, the retiree health care board shall decide who is a participant within the meaning of the provisions of this plan and trust provided such decision is consistent with any applicable collective bargaining agreements or established city policy. 
(20)  Plan means the retiree health care benefits plan of the city as described in this document and any subsequent amendments, and any insurance agreement(s), collective bargaining agreements, or other applicable insurance policy documents incorporated by reference into the plan. A description of the health benefits provided to retirees, spouses and dependents under this plan is maintained by the plan administrator. The plan is the plan provided for in Part B of this chapter. 
(21)  Plan administrator means the person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or companies, appointed by the city to administer the plan. The plan administrator shall be responsible for the day to day operations of the plan who shall carry out the directives of the city. 
(22)  Plan year means the period commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 of each year. 
(23)  Qualified beneficiary means any person satisfying the benefit eligibility requirements of the plan and shall be in accordance with the resolutions and decisions of the retiree health care board. 
(24)  Retiree means a former participant who retired from employment with the city and who upon termination of employment, had attained the required age and number of years of service with the city for retiree health care benefit eligibility as provided in section 1.609, 1.610 or 1.611. 
(25)  Retirement plan(s) mean the city employee retirement system, as provided in Chapter 9, Title 1 of the city of Southfield Code, as amended, and the city of Southfield fire and police retirement system, as provided in P.A. 345 of 1937, as amended (M.C.L. 38.551, et seq.) and the city defined contribution plan, as set forth in the governmental money purchase plan and trust adoption agreement, as amended. 
(26)  Spouse means a participant's or retiree's spouse by legal marriage at the time of retirement. 
(27)  Trust means the declaration of trust of the city of southfield health care benefits plan as provided for in Part C of this chapter. 
(28)  Trust administrator means the person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or companies, appointed by the retiree health care board to administer the trust. The trust administrator shall be responsible for the day to day operations of the trust and shall carry out the directives of the retiree health care board. The trust administrator may also serve as administrator for the retirement plans of the city. 
(29)  Retiree health care board or board means the board of trustees of the trust or a member of the board of trustees of the trust as provided for in Part C of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.606. - Notice. 
    Notice given to all interested parties shall, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, be sufficient if in writing and delivered or sent by prepaid first class mail or prepaid telegram or mailogram. Except as otherwise noted, the distribution or delivery of any statements or documents required under the plan and trust shall be sufficient if delivered in person or prepaid first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.607. - Reporting and disclosure. 
    The city and the retiree health care board, or their respective designees, shall complete and provide to participants, retirees, spouses and/or dependents and to the appropriate government agencies any reports as may be required by the Code, applicable federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.608. - Amendments. 
    The provisions of the plan and trust may be amended at any time by ordinance(s) adopted by the city council in accordance with applicable law and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
PART B. - HEALTH CARE BENEFIT PLAN 

Sec. 1.609. - Eligibility-Union employees. 
    Eligibility for retiree health care benefits for employees who are members of a collective bargaining association shall be as provided in the plan subject to relevant provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement. The express provisions of a collective bargaining agreement relative to retiree health care eligibility are controlling in the event of a conflict with the terms of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.610. - Eligibility-Non-union employees. 
    Eligibility for retiree health care benefits for non-union employees shall be as provided in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.611. - Eligibility-Generally. 
    In order to be eligible for post-retirement health care benefits during any plan year, an individual must: 
(1)  Have been an employee on the date preceding the effective date of the retiree's retirement from the city; and meet one (1) of the following: 
(a)  Have been a participant who commenced employment prior to June 1, 2005 and have attained the age of sixty (60) years with fifteen (15) or more years of credited service; have attained age fifty-seven (57) with twenty (20) or more years of credited service; or, whose age plus years of credited service, including fractional years thereof with a minimum of fifteen (15) years of credited service, is equal to or greater than eighty-two (82); or 
(b)  Have been a participant who commenced employment on or after June 1, 2005 but prior to August 1, 2007; and have attained the age of sixty (60) years with ten (10) or more years of credited service or have attained age fifty-seven (57) years with twenty (20) or more years of credited service; or 
(c)  Have been a participant who commenced employment on or after August 1, 2007, but prior to September 12, 2011 and have attained the age of sixty-five (65) years with fifteen (15) or more years of credited service; or have attained age fifty-seven years with twenty (20) or more years of credited service; or 
(2)  Be a former participant of the plan, who is receiving duty disability benefits from the city employee retirement system or the fire and police retirement system; or 
(3)  Be a former participant of the plan, who is receiving non-duty disability benefits from the city employee retirement system; or 
(4)  Subject to the provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement, if any, be a spouse of an individual who meets one (1) of the eligibility requirements (1) through (3) above, provided that, in the case of a surviving spouse, the retiree had either: 
(a)  Irrevocably elected to opt out of membership in the city's applicable retirement system and participated in a city sponsored defined contribution plan; or 
(b)  Elected an optional joint and survivor beneficiary form of retirement and nominated his or her surviving spouse as beneficiary of the option benefit. The surviving spouse benefit shall not terminate upon re-marriage; however coverage shall not extend to the surviving spouse's successive spouse and/or dependents; or 
(5)  Subject to the provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement, if any, be a dependent of an individual who meets one (1) of the eligibility requirements (1) through (4) above; and in the event of the retiree's death, the retiree had either: 
(a)  Irrevocably elected to opt out of membership in the city's applicable retirement system and participated in a city sponsored defined contribution plan; or 
(b)  Elected an optional joint and survivor beneficiary form of retirement, and there is a surviving spouse or surviving dependent as named beneficiary; or 
(6)  Subject to the provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement, if any, be a family continuation dependent of an individual who meets one (1) of the eligibility requirements (1) through (3) above; and in the event of retiree's death, the retiree had either: 
(a)  Irrevocably elected to opt out of membership in the city's applicable retirement system and participated in a city sponsored defined contribution plan; or 
(b)  Elected an optional joint and survivor beneficiary form of retirement and there is a surviving named beneficiary; or 
(7)  Be the surviving spouse or eligible dependent of a former participant, who on the date preceding the individual's date of death, was an employee; provided, (a) the surviving spouse or dependent is eligible for duty death and/or non-duty death benefits payable from the retirement plan or, (b) the former participant (i) commenced employment prior to August 1, 2007 and had ten (10) or more years of credited service; or (ii) commenced employment on or after August 1, 2007 but prior to September 12, 2011 and had fifteen (15) or more years of credited service; or 
(8)  Be the surviving spouse or eligible dependent of a former participant, who on the date preceding the individual's date of death, was an employee and a participant in a city sponsored defined contribution plan or was a 46 th district court judge who was first elected or appointed on or after March 31, 1997; provided, the former participant (i) commenced employment prior to August 1, 2007 and had ten (10) or more years of credited service; or (ii) commenced employment on or after August 1, 2007 but prior to September 12, 2011 and had fifteen (15) or more years of credited service; or 
(9)  Be an individual granted health coverage under a settlement agreement between the city and the individual; or 
(10)  Be an individual granted health coverage under a court order, provided: 
(a)  That the individual produces satisfactory documentation at the time of application for benefits; and 
(b)  That the city reserves the right to challenge the validity of the court order and that if such a challenge proves successful that the cost of any benefits provided be reimbursable to the trust; or 
(11)  Be a retiree or retiree's spouse or dependent who was in receipt of benefits at the time of the effective date of this plan (grandfather provision). 
(12)  Subject to the provisions of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, no post-retirement health care benefit will be provided to a former participant who terminates employment prior to retirement and later collects a vested pension benefit from an applicable retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.612. - Retiree costs-Premium sharing 
(1)  Retirees and/or beneficiaries satisfying the eligibility requirements of the plan and enrolling for retiree health care coverage shall be responsible to pay a portion of their healthcare premium as established by city council and applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
(a)  Participants who commenced employment with the city before June 1, 2005 shall be required to pay the following amount or percentage of their health care premium for base plan coverage based upon their years of credited service to the employer: 
i.  A retiree with fifteen (15) or more years of credited service, but less than twenty (20) years of credited service at retirement, shall be required to pay fifty percent (50) of the applicable cost, premium or illustrative rate per month for retiree and spouse, if spousal coverage is selected. 
ii.  A retiree with twenty (20) or more years of credited service, but less than twenty-five (25) years of credited service at retirement, shall be required to pay seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month for retiree. Spousal coverage may be added for an additional one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month. 
iii.  A retiree with twenty-five (25) or more years of credited service at retirement shall be required to pay thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for retiree. Spousal coverage may be added for an additional one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per month. 
iv.  A former participant or his or her qualified spouse and dependents who are granted duty death or duty disability benefits pursuant to the provisions of the city employee retirement system shall have the health care premium determined as if the former participant had obtained twenty-five (25) years of credited service. 
v.  A former participant or his or her qualified spouse and dependents who are granted non-duty death or non-duty disability benefits pursuant to the provisions of the city employee retirement system shall have the health care premium determined as if the former participant had obtained twenty (20) years of credited service, unless the former participant had obtained twenty-five (25) or more years of credited service and accordingly qualifies to have his or her health care premium determined based upon twenty-five (25) years of credited service. 
(b)  Participants who commenced employment with the city on or after June 1, 2005 but prior to August 1, 2007 shall be required to pay the following percentage of their health care premium (including eligible spouse) for base plan coverage based upon their years of credited service to the employer: 
i.  Ten (10) years up to sixteen (16) years of service, retiree pays thirty (30) percent of premium; 
ii.  Sixteen (16) years up to twenty-one (21) years of service, retiree pays twenty-five (25) percent of premium; 
iii.  Twenty-one (21) years up to twenty-five (25) years of service, retiree pays twenty (20) percent of premium; 
iv.  Twenty-five (25) or more years of service, retiree pays fifteen (15) percent of premium. 
(c)  Participants who commenced employment on or after August 1, 2007, but prior to September 12, 2011, shall be required to pay the following percentage of their health care premium (including eligible spouse) for base plan coverage based upon their years of credited service to the employer: 
i.  Fifteen (15) years up to twenty-five (25) years of service, retiree pays fifty (50) percent of premium; 
ii.  Twenty-five (25) or more years of service, retiree pays twenty (20) percent of premium. 
(2)  The cost of spousal coverage, dependent coverage and family continuation dependent coverage shall be born by the retiree unless otherwise provided by an applicable collective bargaining agreement, or resolution of city council, or as provided for in section 1.612(1)(a). 
(3)  Retiree premium payments shall be deducted from retirement payments payable from the applicable retirement plan or, in the event there are insufficient retirement benefits payable or the retiree elected participation in an alternative retirement program established by the city, the retiree will authorize automatic premium payments in accordance with such policies and procedures as established by the retiree health care board. 
(4)  Premium payments by applicable retirees from the fire and police retirement system may be paid on a pre-tax basis in accordance with the Pension Protection Act of 2006. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.613. - Withdrawal from participation. 
    A defined contribution plan participant, judges of the 46 th district court, the city clerk, the city treasurer, the city attorney or the city administrator may, within sixty (60) days of adoption of this amendment to the plan or within sixty (60) days of commencement of employment, irrevocably elect to opt out of participation in this plan. The election must be in writing and filed with the retiree health care board and the human resources department. Eligible employees electing to opt out of participation in the plan will not be eligible to re-enroll or receive retiree health care benefits at a future date. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.614. - Commencement of benefit. 
    Subject to all applicable provisions of the plan and/or insurance agreement, a participant shall commence eligibility for benefits from the plan on the first day he or she satisfies the eligibility requirements of sections 1.609, 1.610, or 1.611, provided the participant has enrolled for coverage on such date. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.615. - Enrollment. 
(1)  The city shall give each participant timely written notice of his or her eligibility and his or her right to enroll for coverage under the plan. A participant or retiree may enroll for coverage on a form or forms provided by and filed with the city. In connection with his or her enrollment for coverage, the participant or retiree shall furnish all pertinent information requested by the city, plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier, and the plan administrator or the insurance carrier may rely upon all such forms and information furnished. 
(2)  Spouse and dependents shall be eligible for coverage as provided in the plan and/or insurance agreement and in 1.609, 1.610, and 1.611 above. spouse and dependents shall be enrolled for coverage under the plan by the participant or retiree at the time the participant or retiree enrolls for coverage under the plan or as provided for in subsection (3). 
(3)  Participants or retirees must report major life event changes to the city within thirty (30) days of the event in order to add or delete persons from their benefit plans (health insurance). Major life event changes may impact eligibility for benefits. Notification beyond thirty (30) days of the event may delay any additions of persons to benefits until the group's next reopening date. If failure to report the event within thirty (30) days results in additional benefit costs by the plan and trust due to non-termination of benefits, the participant or retiree may be held responsible for such costs. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.616. - Termination of benefits. 
    Except as provided in 1.617, participation in the plan shall terminate in accordance with the plan and/or insurance agreement or applicable collective bargaining agreement, on the earliest of: 
(1)  Termination of the plan; 
(2)  Non-payment of any required participant or retiree contributions; 
(3)  Death of the individual receiving benefits under the plan; 
(4)  A participant's or retiree's election in writing to cease coverage under the plan; 
(5)  In the case of a spouse or dependent, the date the spouse or dependent ceases to be a spouse or dependent as defined in this plan; or 
(6)  In the case of a spouse, dependent, family continuation dependent or death of the retiree if the retiree elected a straight life equivalent form of retirement benefit at the time of retirement or if the retiree failed to nominate the required beneficiary necessary to ensure coverage of the spouse, dependent, family continuation dependent; or 
(7)  In the case of a retiree, if that individual had a contractual agreement with the city to provide health benefits at retirement which did not include the right to name a beneficiary, or if the contractual agreement did include the right to name a beneficiary, and the retiree failed to nominate the required beneficiary to ensure coverage of the spouse, dependent, family continuation dependent; or 
(8)  In the case of a retiree and a surviving spouse and/or dependent, if that individual assumes employment elsewhere and that employer provides health coverage to its employees which does not substantially differ from that offered by the plan; provided that should the individual lose such coverage from the other employer for any reason, including voluntary or involuntary separation of employment, upon production of proof of such loss to the city and satisfaction of eligibility elsewhere under the plan, the city's obligation to provide health coverage under the plan shall recommence immediately upon the satisfactory production of such proof-of-loss. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.617. - COBRA continuation coverage. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of 1.616, continuing coverage shall be provided under the plan to eligible participants, retirees, their spouses and dependents in accordance with Internal Revenue Code provisions (currently Section 4980B, and Title XXII of the Public Health Services Act ("COBRA continuation coverage"), as amended). 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.618. - Conversion privilege. 
    An individual who is no longer eligible to receive benefits under the plan (as a spouse, dependent or COBRA qualified beneficiary) may, if permitted by and in accordance with the terms of the plan and/or insurance agreement, convert his or her coverage under the plan to an individual medical expense policy with the plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier, without the necessity of a medical examination and with no interruption in coverage. The cost of such individual conversion coverage shall be paid solely by the affected individual. Application for individual conversion coverage must be made to the city and/or plan administrator in accordance with the plan and/or to the insurance carrier in accordance with the insurance agreement. A COBRA qualified beneficiary must be given notification of this conversion privilege during the 180-day period ending on the expiration of the qualified beneficiary's COBRA continuation period. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.619. - Health care benefits, general. 
    Beginning on the effective date, the city shall provide health care benefits to each eligible retiree and, if elected, to his or her eligible spouse and, at the retiree's cost, eligible dependents, unless modified by an applicable collective bargaining agreement or resolution of city council. The benefits provided under the plan are those set forth in the plan and/or insurance agreement and collective bargaining agreements and/or resolutions of city council. The insurance agreement(s) and collective bargaining agreements are incorporated herein by this reference. A complete description of benefits provided under the plan and the insurance agreement, inclusive of those set forth in the collective bargaining agreements, shall be maintained by the city or the plan administrator. 
    In accordance with the plan and/or insurance agreement with the insurance carrier, retirees and their spouses and dependents will be entitled to the benefits in effect at the time of the retiree's retirement or, in the case of a deferred vested participant, at the time of separation from service ("base plan"). These benefits may be provided under the same policy or program in place at the retiree's retirement or, in the case of a deferred vested participant, at the time of separation from service or under a substantially equivalent policy or program at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.620. - Alternative policies or programs. 
    The city, in its discretion, in addition to the base plan, may offer alternative policies or benefit structures to participants, retirees, spouses and/or dependents. In the event that the city chooses to offer alternative policies or benefit structures, participants or retirees and their spouses and/or dependents may transfer from one (1) policy or benefit structure to another policy or benefit structure during open enrollment periods. However, any additional cost above the base plan shall be born by the participant or retiree or the participant's or retiree's spouse and/or dependents. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.621. - Duplicate coverage disallowed. 
    Duplicate coverage will not be provided in the event that there are two (2) or more participants and/or retirees who (a) are each independently eligible for health care benefits from the city or the plan and (b) are each also eligible for health care benefits from the city or the plan as a spouse or dependent of a participant or a retiree. Said parties shall be eligible to participate in only one (1) policy or program so that one (1) party participates in the one (1) policy or program as the principal insured and the other party(ies) participates in the same policy or program as a spouse or dependent of the participant or retiree. Dependent shall suffer no detriment as a result of the disallowance of duplicate coverage. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.622. - Medicare eligibility. 
    Unless otherwise stated below, upon attaining the age of Medicare eligibility, all eligible retirees and/or spouses shall enroll in both Medicare A and B, and are obligated to pay for Medicare Part B. Once a retiree is in receipt of Medicare A and B coverage, this plan will provide complimentary coverage as provided pursuant to any applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the coverage in effect at the time of retirement. 
    In the event a retiree or spouse is not eligible for Medicare coverage, and provides proof of same to the plan administrator, retiree or spouse shall be eligible for continued health care coverage at the same benefit level under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.623. - Coordination of benefits. 
    The city intends that the plan shall provide each retiree with payment for health care expenses incurred by the retiree and, if eligible, his or her spouse and his or her dependents, as provided in the plan and/or insurance agreement. The city does not intend that payment under this plan shall exceed the amount of the expenses incurred. For this reason, the plan coordinates benefits with other insurance policies according to industry standards and applicable laws. 
(1)  Reimbursement. If an expense is paid under the plan byte plan administrator on behalf of a retiree, his or her spouse or dependents, and such expense subsequently is paid from any other source, in whole or in part, the retiree, his or her spouse or dependents, shall remit to the plan an amount equal to the duplicated benefits. In addition, the plan administrator may reimburse any other plan, person or entity that has paid an expense on behalf of a retiree, his or her spouse or dependents which expense was payable under this plan. In such event, the plan, plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier shall be relieved of all further responsibility with respect to that expense. 
(2)  Subrogation. In the event any payment is made by the trust under the plan, the plan and the trust shall be subrogated and shall succeed to the rights of any retiree, his or her spouse and dependents against any other plan, person or entity for recovery of health care expenses for which such other plan, person or entity legally is liable. All amounts so recovered, by settlement, judgment or otherwise, shall be paid to the trust. retirees, their spouses and dependents shall furnish such information, execute and deliver such assignments, documents or other instruments, and take whatever steps are necessary to secure the rights of the plan. Retirees, their spouses and dependents shall take no action to prejudice the rights and interests of the plan hereunder. 
(3)  Effect of exclusions. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to create any independent right to payment of any benefit under this plan. Any exclusion or limitation contained in the plan and/or insurance agreement shall supersede any provision of this section regarding coordination of benefits. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.624. - Plan administration, city duties. 
(1)  The city shall be responsible for complying with the Code's reporting and disclosure requirements and for the purpose of fulfilling such other plan administrative functions as are not specifically assigned to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier. The city may employ a plan administrator and/or insurance carrier who will be responsible for the interpretation, administration and the payment of health care claims under the plan. 
(2)  The city also shall be responsible for the performance of its duties as employer and plan sponsor under applicable Internal Revenue Code Sections. The city may delegate all or any part of its plan administration responsibilities. Any such delegation shall be done in writing. 
(3)  The city may employ one (1) or more persons to render advice with regard to any responsibility such fiduciary has under the plan. Any fiduciary, agent, representative or other person performing services to or for the plan shall be entitled to reasonable compensation for services rendered, unless such person is employed by the city and already receives full pay from the city, and to reimbursement or expenses properly and actually incurred. 
(4)  The city shall furnish the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier, while this plan is in effect, any information as may be required, at intervals and in the form prescribed by the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier, for the enrollment of retirees, spouses and/or dependents for coverage under the plan and for the processing of terminations or other changes in coverage of retirees, spouses and/or dependents and also shall furnish to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier such other information required for the administration of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.625. - Plan administration, insurance carrier duties 
    Each insurance carrier shall have the responsibility for interpreting and administering their respective insurance agreement and for processing and paying benefit claims, and shall provide the city with such information as the city may deem necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by law. The insurance carrier also shall provide a description of the benefits provided under their respective insurance agreement directly to the retirees, spouses and/or dependents or to the city for distribution to retirees, spouses and/or dependents. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.626. - Plan administration, plan administrator duties. 
    The plan administrator shall have the responsibility for interpreting and administering the plan and for processing and paying benefit claims, and shall provide the retiree health care board with such information necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by applicable laws or regulations governing the trust. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.627. - Plan administration, retiree health care board's duties. 
    The retiree health care board shall be vested with the authority to render decisions regarding participation in the plan. Such authority shall be specifically limited by (1) the eligibility requirements of 1.609, 1.610, or 1.611 or as otherwise provided for in this chapter, and (2) the city's ability to obtain coverage under the plan and/or from the applicable insurance carrier. 
    The retiree health care board shall have such other duties under the trust as are set forth in Part C of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.628. - Health care benefits, claims procedures. 
    A claim for benefits under the plan must be submitted in writing to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier in accordance with procedures established by the plan administrator or the plan and/or insurance carrier as communicated in writing to retirees, spouses and/or dependents. The plan administrator and/or insurance carrier shall provide adequate notice to any participant or qualified beneficiary whose claims for benefits under this plan have been denied, setting forth the specific reasons for such denial, written in a manner calculated to be understood by the party. The plan administrator and/or respective insurance carrier has responsibility for the resolution of disputes involving payment of benefits under the portion of the plan assigned to the plan administrator or insurance agreement with the insurance carrier. The plan administrator and/or insurance carrier shall afford a reasonable opportunity to any participant or qualified beneficiary whose claim for benefits has been denied for a full and fair review of the decision denying the claim. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.629. - Funding. 
    For the purpose of creating and maintaining the plan and trust for the payment of benefits payable as provided in this chapter, the city shall appropriate an amount sufficient to maintain the trust subject to the provisions of Part C of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
PART C. - DECLARATION OF TRUST 

Sec. 1.630. - Irrevocable section 115 trust, established. 
    The section 115 trust established in this chapter shall be irrevocable and shall conform to all applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, the collective bargaining agreements, the statement of purpose in Part A of this chapter, and all statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, arbitrators' awards and judicial decisions interpreting the foregoing provisions. 
    The trust shall consist of city contributions, participant contributions, any contributions which may be paid by retirees and other qualified beneficiaries due to the election of additional coverage beyond that provided by the city, all investments made or held under trust, and all income therefrom, both received and accrued, and any other property, which may be received or held by reason of this trust. Funds paid by retirees and other qualified beneficiaries as a result of premium sharing required pursuant to applicable collective bargaining agreements and/or city policy, shall be paid directly to the city and/or the applicable insurance carrier and shall not be paid into the trust. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.631. - Use of trust assets. 
(1)  No part of the net earnings of the trust may inure to the benefit of any participant, retiree or other beneficiary other than by benefit payments or for services provided to the retiree health care board in their administration of the trust. The trust assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than to provide the benefits contemplated under the plan for the exclusive benefit of retirees and their spouses and eligible dependents, except any administrative expenses for which the trust is liable. A portion of net earnings may be used for payment for reasonable and necessary professional services, costs and expenses related to assisting the retiree health care board and the trust administrator in the operation of the trust. 
(2)  All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures and any and all monies, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or held by the retiree health care board hereunder, shall become part of the trust when received, and shall be held for the use and purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.632. - Funding. 
(1)  For the purpose of creating and maintaining a fund for the payment of health care benefits payable as provided in this chapter, the city shall be required to pay to the trust an amount consistent with the actuarial valuations and calculations made by the actuary for the trust to result in a pre-funded plan. Such contributions shall also be made in accordance with any collective bargaining agreements between the collective bargaining associations and the city and this trust, and such other regulations of the retiree health care board as are not inconsistent with the authority stated in this chapter. 
(2)  Commencing at such date as shall be determined by the city council, all active, non-union participants shall contribute a percentage of their applicable wages to the trust. The percentage shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be amended by resolution of the city council. The participants will pay such contributions, to the extent allowable under applicable law, to the trust on a post-tax basis. 
(3)  Participants who are members of a collective bargaining association shall make contributions to the trust in such amounts as required pursuant to the provisions of their applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(4)  The officer or officers responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the contributions provided for in this subsection to be deducted from the compensation of each participant on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so long as he or she is a participant of the plan. The participant's contributions provided for in this subsection shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any participant is thereby changed, each participant shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this subsection. When deducted, the contribution shall be paid to the trust and shall be credited to the participant's individual account from whose compensation such deduction was made. 
(5)  Participants who cease employment prior to satisfying the eligibility requirements for the receipt of the health care benefits payable as provided in this chapter, or who are otherwise ineligible for receipt of the health care benefits payable as provided in this chapter, shall receive a refund of his or her participant contributions standing to his or her credit in the trust upon his or her demand in writing on forms furnished by the retiree health care board. No interest shall be credited or paid on participant contributions. 
(6)  Qualified beneficiaries shall contribute those amounts required for additional coverage as optioned by such qualified beneficiaries and otherwise as determined by the retiree health care board. 
(7)  Subject to the tax provisions of the city charter and state law, the retiree health care board may, to the extent matters are not set forth in the trust, in their discretion decide the manner and means of payments, the procedures to be followed in making the payments, and the forms required to accompany the payments to the trust. Upon determination by the retiree health care board of these matters, the board shall provide written notice to the city and to the collective bargaining associations and require payments by the city to be made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the trust. 
(8)  Time is of the essence in making and processing all payments to the trust. The parties recognize that the regular and timely payments of contributions are essential to the operation of the trust and the providing of benefits under various insurance programs. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.633. - Retiree health care board. 
(1)  The retiree health care board shall consist of eleven (11) trustees, as follows: 
(a)  The city administrator or his/her designee. 
(b)  The treasurer of the city. 
(c)  The same two (2) elected uniformed employee representatives that serve on the board of trustees of the city fire and police retirement system. 
(d)  The same two (2) appointed representatives that serve on the board of trustees of the city fire and police retirement system. 
(e)  The same three (3) members that serve on the administrative civil service commission. 
(f)  Two (2) general employee representatives to be elected by the employee members of the Southfield employee retirement system from their own number. However, such representatives shall not be from the same department. 
(2)  The general administration, management and responsibility for the proper operation of the trust and for making effective and construing the provisions of the trust shall be vested in the retiree health care board established by this section, consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A trustee on the retiree health care board or other fiduciary under the trust shall discharge his or her duties with respect to the trust solely in the interest of the participants and qualified beneficiaries for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and qualified beneficiaries and paying reasonable expenses of administering the trust. A trustee shall discharge his or her duties with the care, skill, and caution under the circumstances then prevailing which a prudent person, acting in a like capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an activity of like character and purpose. 
(3)  The election of the employee trustees provided in paragraph (f) of subsection (1) of this section shall be held under such rules and regulations as the board shall adopt. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.634. - Trustees' terms of office. 
(1)  The regular terms of office of the trustees to the retiree health care board shall be as follows: 
(a)  The term of the city administrator or his/her designee of the city shall be identical to the city administrator's term of office. 
(b)  The term of the treasurer of the city shall be identical to his or her term of office. 
(c)  The representatives from the board of trustees of the city fire and police retirement system shall coincide with and be identical to said representatives' terms of office on the board of trustees of the city fire and police retirement system. 
(d)  The representatives from the city administrative civil service commission shall coincide with and be identical to said representatives' terms of office. 
(e)  The regular term of office of the elected general employee representatives shall be six (6) years. The initial term of office for the one (1) elected general employee representative obtaining the largest number of votes shall expire December 31, 2006. The initial term of office for the second elected general employee representative shall expire December 31, 2003. 
(2)  Each trustee shall serve until the expiration of his or her term of office or until his or her death, incapacity, resignation or removal. 
(3)  A vacancy or vacancies in the office of the trustees shall not impair the powers of the remaining trustees to administer the affairs of the trust, provided there are sufficient trustees to constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.635. - Officers and administration. 
(1)  At its meeting in February of each year, the retiree health care board shall select a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary from the group of the then existing trustees and the chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary shall serve a term of one (1) year or until a new chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary is elected. 
(2)  Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations, the retiree health care board shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations for the day-to-day management of the trust, the investment of monies held by the trust, to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the trust, and such other trust related subjects as shall be deemed necessary and proper by the retiree health care board. If any rule or regulation of the trust or part thereof is found to be in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement, law, statute, judicial decision, arbitration decision or any other competent body or tribunal, such rule or regulation or part thereof shall be deemed voided and, all other rules and regulations of the trust shall remain in full force and effect. 
(3)  Whenever the signature of a trustee is required on any document, signature of the chairperson or acting chairperson and secretary or acting secretary shall be required. 
(4)  In the event of any suit brought against the trustees arising out of the acts within the scope and powers and duties of the retiree health care board, or in the event of any lawsuit brought by the trustees as authorized by this chapter, the cost of defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the trust, and shall be paid directly from the trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the trust or to the beneficiaries thereof. 
(5)  The retiree health care board may employ such clerical personnel or administrative personnel to perform whatever administrative activities are required in the proper performance of the trust. In addition thereto, the retiree health care board may, if they desire, contract with an administrator to perform such clerical and administrative duties as they may, in their sole discretion, determine is reasonably and prudently necessary to carry out the trust's activities and purposes. Under no circumstances shall said administrator have control or authority with respect to the management of the trust or its assets. The said administrator shall not be clothed with any type of authority or power which will constitute the administrator as a fiduciary. Said administrator will not have the power or authority to act as an investment counselor or manager and will not be authorized to furnish investment advice. 
(6)  The board may utilize city staff for such functions as personnel administration, accounting, banking and purchasing and will comply with all established city control procedures and policies related to these services. The board will annually reimburse the city for actual costs of these services as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board and the city. 
(7)  City employees, upon the request of the board, may also be assigned to the trust for the proper operation of the trust. Said employees shall be subject to the supervision of the board. The board shall have the authority to establish job descriptions and promulgate rules and regulations appropriate for the trust in addition to those adopted by city council. The supervision of City employees by the board shall not serve to impair the authority and responsibility of the city administrator under the City Charter for personnel services. The board will annually reimburse the city for the actual costs of these employees as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board and the city. 
(8)  The retiree health care board may employ (an) investment manager(s) to manage the assets of the trust. Such investment manager(s) must be registered under the Investment Advisor's Act of 1940, as amended, and must meet any applicable state and federal requirements to act as an investment manager. The retiree health care board may, if they deem proper in their discretion, or if the circumstances require it, appoint such investment manager, managers, banks or insurance companies as fiduciaries and enter into an agreement with such institutions, naming it a fiduciary and conveying to such fiduciary all or a portion of the assets of the trust, so that said fiduciary may handle, manage and hold those assets conveyed to it. All assets conveyed to said fiduciary shall be subject to the provision of the agreement or agreements between the retiree health care board and the fiduciary. 
(9)  The retiree health care board may employ legal counsel with whom they may seek advice, consult with, require attendance at meetings and to otherwise represent the retiree health care board in matters relating to the trust. 
(10)  The retiree health care board may authorize the purchase of insurance for the trust and for the trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including but not limited to, an act or omission (errors or omissions) of a fiduciary, including the trustees; provided however, that such insurance policy permits recourse by the insured against the fiduciary, including the trustee or trustees involved, in case of breach of fiduciary obligation by the fiduciary. 
(11)  The retiree health care board shall appoint an actuary who shall advise the board on the actuarial operation of the plan and trust. The board shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of experience and a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary in the operation of the trust on an actuarial basis. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.636. - Board meetings. 
(1)  The retiree health care board shall meet at least once quarterly. The board shall determine the time for the regular meetings of the board and the place or places where such meetings shall be held. The secretary of the retiree health care board or his or her designee, shall be responsible for giving notice of the time and place of such meetings to the other trustees. 
(2)  Notice and conduct of all meetings of the retiree health care board, both regular and special, shall be given in accordance with applicable law including the Michigan Open Meetings Act. 
(3)  The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Six (6) trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the board and at least six (6) concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.637. - Compensation. 
    All trustees shall serve without compensation as members of the board, except that elected employee trustees shall suffer no loss in compensation on account of their services as trustees. trustees may also be reimbursed by the trust for reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of the trustees in performing their duties as trustees and related to the operation of the trust. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.638. - Retiree health care board's powers and responsibilities. 
    The retiree health care board shall hold all the powers that are necessary to carry out the purposes of the trust and are generally available to trustees under the laws of the State of Michigan, except as limited by the trust and by federal law and regulations. It is intended that the plan and trust shall be tax exempt and shall qualify under the Internal Revenue Code, and any amendments of the Code applicable to plans of this type. The retiree health care board shall have the continuing duty to propose to the city amendments to this chapter to the extent it becomes necessary to qualify said plan and trust under the Internal Revenue Code and to continue the tax exempt status of the trust. The retiree health care board shall take no action nor make any determination inconsistent with any qualification or ruling of the Internal Revenue Service, an arbitrator or the courts with respect to the trust. In the case of amendments to the Internal Revenue Code or changes of regulations by the Internal Revenue Service or the labor department, the retiree health care board are empowered to take all necessary action(s) authorized by this chapter, federal and state law and regulations, to continue the qualification of the trust as a qualified trust. In carrying out the purposes of the trust, the retiree health care board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The board shall, in order to effectuate the purposes of the trust, be bound by the terms of the plan and any applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and the collective bargaining associations and shall comply with all applicable laws. 
(2)  The board shall establish a uniform system for the timely transmission of required reports and contributions from the city on behalf of the participants and/or qualified beneficiaries. 
(3)  The board, in accordance with the requirements of law, may direct an impartial firm of independent certified public accountants to act as agent of the retiree health care board to examine the payroll records and reports as may be necessary to determine the monies due on behalf of a participant and/or qualified beneficiary covered by this trust and to make a written report to the board, with an identical copy to the city. 
(4)  The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, proper books of accounts and records of and for the administration of the trust, including the minutes of all meetings, make them available for inspection at the permanent office of the trust during reasonable business hours by the city, by any collective bargaining association, or any participant or qualified beneficiary covered by the plan and trust. 
(5)  The financial records of the trust shall be subject to the annual audit of the city. The board shall fully comply with all applicable statutory and municipal budgetary and accounting procedures and provide access to and/or documentation of all assets and liabilities of the trust and a resume of the operations of the trust for the preceding year together with such other data as may be required by law and/or as part of the city's annual financial report to the state treasurer. 
(6)  The board shall be authorized, pursuant to Public Act 149 of 1999, as amended, to invest the assets of the trust in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.639. - Trust liabilities. 
(1)  The city shall not be liable for payment to the trust of any amount other than those required of it by the trust and/or any applicable collective bargaining agreement. Neither the city nor any participant or qualified beneficiary or trustee shall be liable for any debts, liabilities or obligations of the trust except as provided for in this chapter. Neither the city nor any participant and/or qualified beneficiary shall have any right to the return of any money properly paid into the trust, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, or to money improperly paid which has already been invested or distributed. Any contribution improperly paid into the trust by the city or on behalf of a participant or qualified beneficiary shall be returned by the retiree health care board upon the request of the city, the participant or the qualified beneficiary or upon discovery by the retiree health care board that such monies have been improperly paid into the trust, unless those monies have already been invested or distributed. 
(2)  No part of the trust or any benefits payable by the retiree health care board shall be subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or encumbrance charge by any person. No participant or qualified beneficiary shall be entitled to receive any part of the contributions made by the city or payments required to be made by the trust, in lieu of such benefits provided under the plan as determined by the retiree health care board in accordance with the trust. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
Sec. 1.640. - Termination of the trust. 
(1)  Subject to the limitations of this chapter, the parties hereby contemplate that new employment benefit decisions may be made by the city and/or new collective bargaining agreements may be entered into which continue or modify the provisions of the trust. The trust shall continue during such period of time as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of any ordinance or collective bargaining agreement requiring payment to the trust and the fact that such collective bargaining agreements or employment benefit decisions are not extended shall not by itself terminate the trust, which shall continue for a period of time sufficient to wind up the affairs of the trust. 
(2)  Provided there are no longer any qualified beneficiaries eligible for benefits from the trust, the trust may be terminated at any time by the retiree health care board so long as the termination is not inconsistent with any than existing ordinance or collective bargaining agreement. It shall not be necessary for the city or the collective bargaining associations to execute such an agreement for the trust to terminate. 
(3)  If the trust shall terminate, the retiree health care board shall forthwith notify any insurance carrier or carriers then providing insurance to qualified beneficiaries in the trust. 
(4)  In the event of the termination of the trust, the remaining funds available after providing for all the outstanding obligations, shall be used in a manner as will, in the opinion of the retiree health care board, best effectuate the purposes of the trust, including, but not limited to, the purchase of insurance benefits. 
(Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 6-8-17) 
CHAPTER 15. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 1.700. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Municipal civil infraction shall mean a violation of a provision of this Code, designated in section 1.608, for which the remedy and/or penalty is prescribed to be a civil fine, or other sanction other than a criminal penalty. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation shall mean a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized official directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by that person. 
    Municipal civil infraction determination shall mean a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one (1) of the following: 
(a)  An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, "with explanation." 
(c)  A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing. 
(d)  A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled appearance. 
    Repeat offense shall mean a determination of responsibility for a second, or any subsequent, municipal civil infraction with regard to the same code provision, committed by the same person within any three-year period, unless some other period is specifically provided with regard to a specific Code provision. 
    Responsible or responsibility shall mean a determination entered by a court or magistrate that a person is in violation of a provision of this Code prescribed to be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.701. - Commencement of municipal civil infraction action. 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction action shall be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the person alleged to be responsible to appear in court. 
(2)  The form of citations or notices used to charge municipal civil infraction violations shall be in accordance with state law (see MCL 600.8709). 
(3)  The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall be as set forth below: 
(a)  An authorized official who witnesses a person violate an ordinance, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that a person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person violate an ordinance, a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the attorney for the city approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(4)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served in the following manner: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided below, the authorized official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
(b)  In a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(c)  A citation served, as provided in paragraph (b) above, for a violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure, shall be processed in the same manner as a citation served personally upon a defendant. 
(d)  1.  The original citation shall be filed with the district court. 
2.  The first copy shall be an abstract of court records. 
3.  The second copy shall be retained by the authorized official. 
4.  The third copy shall be delivered to the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.702. - Ordinance enforcement officer. 
(1)  The city council is hereby authorized to appoint by resolution any person or persons as ordinance enforcement officers for such term or terms as may be designated in the resolution for purposes of carrying out the duties and responsibilities specified in this Code for authorized officials charged with the enforcement of this Code. The council may further, by resolution, remove any person from such office, in the discretion of the council. 
(2)  An appointed ordinance enforcement officer is authorized to enforce all provisions of this Code whether or not any particular provision specifies or designates a different enforcing official. Where a particular officer is designated in any Code provision, that officer's authority shall continue in full force and effect, and shall not be diminished or impaired by the terms of this section; and the authority of the ordinance enforcement officer shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. 
(3)  The ordinance enforcement officer's duties shall include the following: investigation of code violations; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations; and appearance in court or other judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings in the administration of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.703. - Penalties for municipal civil infractions. 
(a)  The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is specified in connection with a particular Code provision: 
(1)  First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(2)  Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat offense shall be not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs and other sanctions for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages, and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this Code. 
(c)  Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for in this Code, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought. 
(e)  The judge or magistrate shall also be authorized to impose costs, damages, and expenses as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.704. - Designation of civil infractions. 
    A violation of the following chapters, provisions, or sections of this Code or any rule, regulation, or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be deemed to be a municipal civil infraction which shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in this chapter: 
Chapter 17, section 2.10 
Chapter 19, section 2.134 
Chapter 45 
Chapter 100 
Chapter 111, sections 9.1, 9.3, 9.10, 9.11, 9.12, 9.21, 9.22, 9.41, and 9.48 
    Any other chapter or section of this Code which specifically provides that a violation thereof is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 8-26-02) 
CHAPTER 16. - LIVING WAGE REQUIREMENTS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1478, enacted August 26, 2002, enacted new provisions to be designated as ch. 14, §§ 1.600-1.610. Inasmuch as there already exists a ch. 14, §§ 1.600-1.610, said provisions have been redesignated as ch. 16, §§ 1.800-1.810. Original numbering has been maintained in the history notes following each section. 

Sec. 1.800. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to improve the lives of working people and their families by requiring covered employers that provide contractual services to the city or that receive a tax abatement from the city to pay their covered employees a wage sufficient to meet basic subsistence needs, defined herein as a living wage. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.600), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.801. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Covered employer means a person that either: 
(a)  Enters into a contract or contracts with the city primarily for the furnishing of services where the total amount of the contract or contracts, including related subcontracts, exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any twelve-month period. Covered employer includes a related subcontractor, but does not include a person that has a contract or subcontract primarily for the purchase or lease of goods or property by the city; or 
(b)  Receives a tax abatement from the city. 
(2)  Covered employee means a person employed full-time by a covered employer to perform services in connection with the covered employer's contract or contracts with the city, including related subcontracts, or a person employed full-time by a covered employer at an office or facility which either has been granted a tax abatement or where personal property which has been granted a tax abatement is located. 
(3)  Federal poverty guideline shall mean the official poverty guideline issued annually by the United States Department of Health and Human Services for a family of four (4). 
(4)  Health care benefits shall mean comprehensive medical coverage for the covered employee fully paid for by the covered employer, whether provided on an insured or self-funded basis. Health care benefits may include membership in a health maintenance organization (HMO) or similar entity, if the membership or subscription fee is fully paid for by the covered employer. 
(5)  Living wage shall mean an hourly rate which, on an annual basis (based on forty (40) hours per week, fifty (50) weeks per year), is equivalent to either of the following: 
(a)  One hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the federal poverty guideline, or 
(b)  One hundred (100) percent of the federal poverty guideline, if health care benefits are provided to the covered employee. 
(6)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, joint venture, partnership, corporation, club, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent, or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors, and assigns thereof. 
(7)  Tax abatement means a tax abatement approved by the city, pursuant to the Plant Rehabilitation and Industrial Development District Act, Public Act 198 of 1974, MCL 207.551, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.601), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.802. - Living wage required. 
(1)  Every covered employer shall pay its covered employees and at least ninety (90) percent of all the employees working on behalf of a covered employer in connection with a contract with the city no less than a living wage. 
(2)  In order to qualify to pay the living wage rate for covered employers providing employee health care benefits under subsection 1.801(5)(b), a covered employer shall furnish proof of the health care benefits to the city. 
(3)  All city contracts covered by this chapter shall provide that a violation of this chapter shall be a material breach of the contract resulting in its termination. 
(4)  Any tax abatement covered by this chapter shall be granted upon the condition that a violation of this chapter shall result in its revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.602), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.803. - Monitoring of compliance with this chapter. 
    The city purchasing agent shall monitor compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and shall notify all covered employers of any adjustment in the federal poverty level by March 1 of each year. If the living wage has increased, the covered employer shall begin paying the increased wage rate no later than April 1 of that year. The purchasing agent shall require all covered employers to annually certify compliance with the requirements contained in section 1.802 and all other provisions of this chapter. In addition, any covered employer who is required to pay a living wage under section 1.802 shall post a notice of such requirement in a conspicuous place in any work place where a covered employee is employed. The notice shall also state that, if the covered employer has failed to comply with the requirement of section 1.802, a covered employee may file a notice of noncompliance with the purchasing agent. All city departments shall be provided with standard notices which set forth the requirements of this chapter for inclusion in the solicitation of proposals, bids, or applications for city contracts. Departments shall include said notices in their RFPs, RFQs, specifications, and notices inviting bids or any other solicitations for contracts. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.603), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.804. - Notice of noncompliance. 
    Any covered employee of a covered employer, who believes the covered employer has failed to comply with this chapter, may file a notice with the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent, based on such notice or on his or her own initiative if a possible violation of this chapter is discovered by other means, shall forward a notice to the covered employer by first class mail describing the violation; requesting the submission of proof of compliance within thirty (30) days of mailing, and indicating that failure to do so shall result in the termination of its contract or tax abatement. This chapter shall not be construed to limit a covered employee's right to bring legal action for violation of any other minimum compensation or wage and hour law. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.604), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.805. - Noncompliance. 
    In the event the purchasing director determines that a covered employer has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the covered employer has failed to rectify the non-compliance within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice provided for in section 1.804, the city shall take appropriate action to terminate its contract or tax abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.605), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.806. - Exemptions from application of this chapter. 
    The following exemptions from compliance with this chapter shall apply: 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a contract with another unit of government. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a covered employee who is: 
(a)  Younger than eighteen (18) years of age; 
(b)  Employed during summer months in a student or youth employment program; 
(c)  Engaged in any training program, not to exceed a time period of ninety (90) days, that qualifies the person either to begin employment with the covered employer or to receive an employment promotion within the covered employer; or 
(d)  Engaged or participating in a bona fide student internship program. 
(3)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where a covered employee is subject to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. 
(4)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where federal or state law requires the payment of a prevailing wage. 
(5)  A nonprofit covered employer, which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided that this exemption shall only apply to a nonprofit covered employer if it employs ten (10) or fewer employees on a continuous basis. A continuous basis is defined as employing ten (10) or fewer employees on each working day in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding year. 
(6)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to contracts entered into or tax abatements approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.606), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.807. - Exemptions determined by city council. 
    The city council may grant a partial or complete exemption from the requirements of this chapter if it determines one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The application of this chapter would violate federal, state, or local law(s); or 
(2)  The application of this chapter to a nonprofit covered employer, recognized as tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, would not be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.607), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.808. - Change in status of employees. 
    No affected covered employer shall reduce the compensation, wages, fringe benefits, or leave available to any covered employee or other employee in order to pay the living wage required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.608), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.809. - Annual report. 
    The city administrator shall submit an annual report to the city council and the mayor with regard to the operation of this chapter. The report shall contain a listing and the status of all contracts and tax abatements to which this chapter applies, including the term; dollar amount; the services performed or assistance provided; a summary of all violations of this chapter; adjustments to the living wage, if any; a description of any administrative problems encountered; and recommendations for more efficient and effective administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.609), 8-26-02) 
Sec. 1.810. - Penalty. 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus all costs of the action. The court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce this chapter, including payment to the affected covered employee or employees of the difference between wages actually paid and the living wage that should have been paid, interest, and other relief deemed appropriate. 
(2)  Each day, upon which a violation occurs, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1(1.610), 8-26-02) 
CHAPTER 16A. - REIMBURSEMENT FROM PERSONS IN CUSTODY FOR MEDICAL SERVICES 

Sec. 1.900. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the obligation of persons in the custody of the city to pay and reimburse the city for medical services and expenses incurred during the period of such confinement. 
(Ord. No. 1589 , § 1, 2-26-12) 
Sec. 1.901. - Individuals in custody. 
    For purposes of this chapter, individuals who are "in custody" shall include, but not be limited to, individuals who are: 
(a)  Under arrest; 
(b)  Incarcerated; 
(c)  Imprisoned; 
(d)  Escaped from confinement; 
(e)  Under supervised release; 
(f)  On medical furlough; 
(g)  Residing in a mental health facility or halfway house; 
(h)  Living under home detention; or 
(i)  Confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or rule. 
(Ord. No. 1589 , § 1, 2-26-12) 
Sec. 1.902. - Responsibility for payment of treatment costs. 
    Any person in custody of the city shall be responsible for the payment of any and all medical services or treatment rendered to and received by that person during the course of his or her confinement with the city, or at the city's direction or the direction of a court of competent jurisdiction. Any such person shall be required to reimburse the city in full for any fees, charges, or expenses of any kind or nature whatsoever that are incurred for the provision of any such medical services or treatment unless such fees, charges, or expenses are paid directly to the medical facility or practitioner by the person in custody or paid by his or her insurance carrier. 
    The obligation of a person in custody to reimburse the city for medical services or treatment shall be construed to be as broad as possible. Without limiting the scope of the obligation in the preceding sentence, the obligation shall apply to all medical services, including, without limitation, transportation to and/or from any medical provider or facility and any medical treatment or procedures rendered during the course of such transportation. Further, without limiting the scope of the obligations herein set forth, the obligation shall apply to any treatment deemed necessary by the treating physician, facility, or medical provider of the person in custody, whether or not the treatment was requested by the person in custody. 
(Ord. No. 1589 , § 1, 2-26-12) 
Sec. 1.903. - Cooperation with city. 
    A person in custody of the city shall cooperate with the city in seeking reimbursement for medical expenses incurred by the city on behalf of that person. Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to chapter 15 of the City Code and is subject to a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and may be required by the court to make restitution to the city in the amount of medical expenses incurred for that person by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1589 , § 1, 2-26-12) 
Title II - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, tit. I; subdivision and project improvements, § 5.361 et seq.; building regulations, tit. VIII; cable communications service, tit. XII. 

CHAPTER 17. - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Duties of department of public works, § 1.132; landfill dumping operations, § 5.263. 

Sec. 2.1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Family unit shall mean any one (1) of the following groupings, if maintaining a household with common use of the facilities for preparation and serving of food: 
(a)  Man and/or wife, their children and dependent relatives; 
(b)  Brothers and/or sisters and dependent relatives; 
(c)  Not more than four (4) unrelated persons maintaining a household in cooperation without the benefit of paid housekeeper or servants. 
Any number of bona fide guests may be included in a family unit. 
(2)  Residential unit shall mean a structure or any part thereof together with any land area in connection therewith set aside or retained for the use of a single family unit. 
(3)  Garbage includes all animal or vegetable wastes which accumulate in the course of marketing, processing, preparing and serving of goods. 
(4)  Rubbish includes all forms of dry waste material which may accumulate in the home, in places of business, in industrial establishments or in public buildings and institutions. 
(5)  Yard wastes include grass clippings, leaves, trimmings from shrubs, and any other wastes that accumulate from the normal maintenance of lawns and landscaping, excluding earth. 
(6)  Refuse or wastes and waste materials shall mean refuse and waste materials including garbage, rubbish and yard wastes, but do not include materials which may be retained and processed for their salvage value. 
(7)  Mandatory provisions. The enforcement of this chapter with respect to certain acts or methods that are specifically prohibited is mandatory. In other provisions, "shall" or "must" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(8)  Private premises shall mean any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any person whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building or other structure erected thereon. 
(9)  Public place shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
(10)  Litter shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(11)  Dumpster shall mean any container of more than one (1) cubic yard capacity, whether covered or not, used for the depositing and/or temporary storage of rubbish ordinarily with the collection, transportation and disposal of such rubbish by motor vehicle. 
(12)  Director shall mean the director of public services of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 6-30-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 2.2. - Licensing. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as denying to any person the right to transport or dispose of the wastes originating in his own home or business establishment in any lawful manner; but every person desiring to collect refuse on a commercial basis with one (1) or more regular customers, and to transport garbage or other refuse on the streets and ways of the city, shall first obtain a license for refuse collection and transportation from the city clerk. Licenses shall be issued upon application to the city clerk on forms provided by him and upon payment of such fee as shall be required by section 7.36. No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the director that the equipment and the ability of the licensee is such that the licensee is able to conduct a refuse collection business in accordance with the terms of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted by the director under this chapter. The director shall make such rules and regulations governing the operation of the business of refuse collection, transportation and disposition as he may deem necessary. Revocation of licenses shall be in accordance with section 7.17 of this Code. Prior revocation of a license shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal by the director to certify any future application by such licensee. 
Cross reference- Business and trade licenses, § 7.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2.3. - Residential collection. 
    The city will provide for the regular collection of refuse or waste materials from residential units according to a published schedule, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Liquid wastes; 
(2)  Hazardous material, including explosives, active chemicals, radioactive or highly inflammable materials; 
(3)  Tree trunks or branches or parts thereof with a diameter greater than three (3) inches or a length greater than four (4) feet; 
(4)  Refuse from new construction or from extensive repairs or alterations. 
    The above exceptions are classified as commercial rubbish and shall be cared for by the contractor doing the work. The wastes from such projects as are ordinarily done by the householder will be accepted up to a limit of fifty (50) pounds. 
Sec. 2.4. - Containers. 
    Garbage must be kept in metal containers of ten (10) to twenty (20) gallons' capacity, with metal handles or bale and tight-fitting covers or such other containers as may be authorized by the city. Garbage must be securely wrapped. Garbage and rubbish may be mixed. 
Cross reference- Rubbish receptacles in public alleys or public places, § 4.7. 
Sec. 2.5. - Regulations. 
(1)  Rubbish must be kept dry until collected. Substantial containers of metal, plastic or wood may be used. 
(2)  Newspapers must be tied in bundles. 
(3)  Cardboard cartons must be flattened and tied in bundles. 
(4)  Wooden crates or boxes must be broken up and tied in bundles, not to exceed three (3) feet by three (3) feet by four (4) feet. 
(5)  Brush and small trees must be cut into sections not more than three (3) feet long and tied. 
(6)  Articles of rubbish that cannot be placed in containers may be flattened, folded or tied. 
(7)  No single article or bundle shall be more than four (4) feet long. 
(8)  The weight limit for each container, article or bundle must not exceed a total of sixty (60) pounds. 
(9)  Any time a container is not collected because of nonconformance to these requirements it shall be tagged, stating the reason the collection was not made. 
Sec. 2.6. - Placing refuse at curb. 
    Containers and bundles shall be placed at the front curb or at the edge of the public street upon which the residence fronts, not earlier than 4:00 p.m. of the day before collection, and the empty containers must be removed therefrom no later than noon of the day following collection. Refuse containers, bundles, and materials shall be kept and stored in such manner so as not to be visible when viewed from the street upon which the residence fronts prior to being placed at the curb for collection. Any violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in section 1.703 of chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1417, § 1, 3-30-98; Ord. No. 1605 , § 1, 3-31-13) 
Sec. 2.7. - Refuse collection charge. 
(1)  The owners of residential property for which the collection of refuse or waste material is provided under this chapter shall pay a charge therefor as shall be determined by a resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Such charge shall be provided for in the annual budget adopted by the city and shall be certified to the assessor and assessed against the premises served and shall be collected or returned in the same manner as other municipal taxes are certified, assessed, collected and returned. 
(3)  The owner of any new residential unit completed after July 1 of any year for which the collection of refuse or waste material is provided under this chapter shall pay a proportionate amount of the above charge at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the period from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy through the following June 30. 
Sec. 2.8. - Commercial and industrial refuse. 
    It is not the intent of this chapter to restrict the handling of commercial and industrial refuse more than is necessary for the protection of public health, safety and convenience. All such refuse must, however, be stored and disposed of in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Garbage must be kept in ratproof, insectproof containers and collected at frequent intervals to prevent any nuisance, public or private. 
(2)  Rubbish must be stored in a suitable covered place, enclosed or screened from public view, and the premises must be kept clean and free from rats. 
(3)  Contracts for collection, transportation and disposal shall be made only with contractors licensed by the city. 
Sec. 2.9. - Prohibitions. 
    The following acts are expressly prohibited. 
(1)  Burning garbage in an open air incinerator; 
(2)  Burning leaves, grass or rubbish on any paved or bituminous surfaced street; 
(3)  Burning any type of refuse where smoke, ashes or odor will create a nuisance, public or private; 
(4)  Burning rubbish less than fifteen (15) feet from a building; 
(5)  Leaving a rubbish fire unattended; 
(6)  Burying garbage where it will attract rats or other animals; 
(7)  Throwing or depositing litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps; 
(8)  Collecting, accumulating, processing or storing junk, used machines, old automobiles or materials for salvage, unless such use is permitted under chapter 45 (Zoning) and a certificate of occupancy for such use has been issued in accordance with chapter 98 (Building Code) and chapter 45 (Zoning) of this Code; 
(9)  Allowing garbage, rubbish or other wastes to become scattered about or to accumulate on any public or private premises. The owner, tenant or lessee of such premises must keep all such materials in proper storage while awaiting collection and disposal; 
(10)  Placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles except in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or public place or private property; 
(11)  Sweeping into or depositing in any gutter, street or other public place within the city litter, grass clippings, leaves or other debris from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter; 
(12)  Throwing or depositing litter on any private premises within the city, except that the owner or any person in control of private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
Cross reference- Depositing waste in parks and playgrounds, § 3.2; depositing rubbish likely to attract rodents or vermin declared a nuisance, § 9.3; littering of public and private property, § 9.133; fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 
Sec. 2.10. - Litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. The department of public service is hereby charged with the enforcement of this section. No person being the owner or person in charge of, or occupant of, any private premises shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of any litter on the private premises owned, controlled or occupied by him in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. When any litter shall be accumulated or permitted to accumulate on any private premises in a manner prohibited by this chapter, the enforcing officer shall notify the owner, person in control or occupant of such private premises to remove the litter and clear such private premises within a time limited to the notice, such time not to be less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be served in the manner provided in chapter 1 of this Code. If the owner, person in charge or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance consisting of the accumulation of litter on any private premises shall fail to abate the same within the time limited in the notice therefor, the enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by removing the litter and clearing the private premises. The cost of abating such nuisance plus an additional fifteen (15) percent for overhead and other expenses shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant thereof or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within sixty (60) days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected in the manner provided by chapter 1 of this Code or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed the city. 
Cross reference- Official notice to abate nuisance, § 1.14; littering of public and private property, § 9.133. 
Sec. 2.11. - Clearing ice and snow. 
    No person shall shovel or push by means of plow or otherwise cause to be placed or deposited in or upon the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk or within any ditch or gutter in any public street, any snow or ice removed by him or under his direction from any private property, or from any public property abutting any private property owned or occupied by him. The existence of any deposit of snow or ice deposited by artificial means in the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk or within any ditch or gutter in any public street shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of the abutting property closest thereto placed or deposited such ice or snow therein. 
Cross reference- Keeping sidewalks clear of ice, snow and other obstructions, § 4.75. 
Sec. 2.12. - Location of dumpsters. 
(1)  No dumpster shall be located in any single-family residential zone unless in connection with the approval of a special use of such premises granted by either the city council or the zoning board of appeals under the provisions of section 5.62, article 5, of chapter 45, of this Code. 
(2)  No dumpster shall be placed on any property in the city until the location of such dumpster has been approved by the city planner or the city traffic engineer. In approving such location, the city planner or city traffic engineer shall take into consideration a location which will provide adequate access for service vehicles and which will not be detrimental or injurious to adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 1039, § 2, 6-30-80) 
Cross reference- Placement of rubbish receptacles in public alleys and public places, § 4.7. 
Sec. 2.13. - Screening of dumpsters. 
(1)  All dumpsters located in the city must be enclosed or screened from public view. Such screening shall consist of a completely obscuring wall or fence not less than six (6) feet (1.8288 meters) in height on three (3) sides. Posts or bumpers shall be provided within the enclosure to protect it from damage from the dumpster. The inside clearance of the enclosure shall be not less than ten (10) feet (3.0480 meters) in depth and ten (10) feet (3.0480 meters) in width. 
(2)  Screening materials shall consist of any of the following: 
(a)  Masonry, either brick, concrete block or reinforced concrete; 
(b)  Wood, provided the wood is heartwood cedar, redwood, marine grade exterior plywood or equivalent of at least five-eighths-inch thickness (1.5875 centimeters) or other types of wood which have been pressure treated with preservatives. If cedar, redwood or plywood are used in the screening, it shall be protected from possible rot or decay by the application of an oil-base exterior stain of a neutral color. Wood that has been pressure treated need not be further protected from possible rot or decay. 
(3)  All of the existing dumpsters located within the city shall comply with the provisions of this section within six (6) months from the effective date of this section (June 30, 1980). The director of the department of building and safety engineering may grant a waiver of all or part of the provisions of this section upon a finding that by reason of the shape or area of the specific property on which the existing dumpster has been installed, the strict application of this section would result in practical difficulties or undue hardship to the owner. In granting a waiver, the director of building and safety engineering may impose reasonable conditions in fulfillment of the purpose of this section. 
(4)  This section is not intended to require the screening of any dumpster used on a temporary basis during the construction of any building, provided that such dumpster is removed from the premises or is moved to an approved, screened location on the site prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the building under construction. 
(5)  The director of the department of building and safety engineering is hereby charged with the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1039, § 2, 6-30-80) 
Cross reference- Placement of rubbish receptacles in public alleys and public places, § 4.7. 
Sec. 2.14. - Emptying of dumpsters. 
    No dumpster located within five hundred (500) feet of any structure intended for use as a residential dwelling, except hotels and motels, shall be emptied between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the day following. 
(Ord. No. 1258, § 1, 1-9-89) 
Sec. 2.15. - Emergency litter removal. 
(1)  Findings. The city council finds that, in situations where persons have been dispossessed of private property as a result of legal process such as in a landlord-tenant or mortgage foreclosure proceeding, the contents of the structure(s) located on the property are often removed and left openly on the property or in the adjoining public right-of-way. The council further finds that these accumulations of litter are much greater in volume than ordinary amounts of litter that might accumulate on private property from time to time or litter which would be placed in the public right-of-way for normal, weekly removal by the city. The council further finds that these accumulations of litter are a potential traffic hazard; constitute a possible attractive nuisance to children; create an unsafe and unsanitary condition; and adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood. The council further determines that the adoption of this section is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city's residents. 
(2)  Litter removal. If the owner, person in control, or occupant of any private premises is dispossessed of said premises through any legal process such as, including but not limited to, a landlord-tenant or mortgage foreclosure proceeding; and, as a result, there exists an accumulation of litter on the premises or the adjacent public right-of-way, the city shall notify the last known owner of such property as listed on the tax assessment roll or court records that they have forty-eight (48) hours to remove said litter from the premises and/or the adjacent public right-of-way. Notice shall be served by posting a notice in some conspicuous place on the premises and by overnight mail addressed to the last known owner. Overnight mail service is complete at the time of mailing. If the last known owner shall fail to remove the litter within forty-eight (48) hours after posting and mailing the notice, the city is hereby authorized to enter upon such premises to remove the litter therefrom and/or the adjacent public right-of-way. The cost of removal and disposal of the litter, plus an additional fee, equal to the city's actual administrative costs, shall be charged to the last known owner and shall constitute a lien against the premises. If not paid within thirty (30) days after the bill for such charge is rendered, it shall be collected, as provided in section 1.13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1510, § 1, 4-11-05) 
Sec. 2.16. - Rodent control. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
(a)  Accessory structure. Any building which is accessory to the main building. Accessory structure shall not include a plastic injection molded premanufactured shed (e.g. Rubber Maid, Suncast, etc.), when placed in a location permitted by chapter 45 of the City Code, having a base dimension of thirty-two (32) square feet or less and a total height of less than seven (7) feet, and which is easily movable and/or portable. 
(b)  Face cord. A quantity of firewood, as defined herein, which when piled in an orderly manner has the dimension of not more than eight (8) linear feet in length, not more than four (4) linear feet in height, and does not exceed two (2) linear feet in width, for a total of not more than sixty-four (64) cubic feet. 
(c)  Firewood. Any part of a tree which has been severed from the ground and cut into pieces for use in any indoor or outdoor wood-burning device. This definition shall include such wood as may have been trimmed or milled into untreated lumber. 
(d)  Occupant. The individual, partnership or corporation that has the use of or occupies any building, structure or vacant land. 
(e)  Outside storage. The stockpiling of firewood, as defined herein, in any place except a location completely enclosed within a building, structure, garage, barn or shed. 
(f)  Owner. The individual, partnership or corporation that is listed on the last tax assessment records of the building, structure or vacant land. 
(g)  Rodent. Any variety of species of rats, mice or other vermin. 
(h)  Rodent extermination. The elimination of rats from a building, structure or vacant land by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc., so that there is no evidence of rat infestation remaining. 
(i)  Rodent harborage. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside of a building, structure or vacant land. 
(j)  Yard, front yard, rear yard, and side yard. As used in this section, these terms shall have the meanings as defined in chapter 45 of the City Code. 
(2)  Conditions permitting rodent harborage prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to permit a condition of rodent harborage to exist in any building or structure or on any occupied or vacant land. 
(3)  Requirements for prevention of rodent harborage. All owners and/or occupants in the City of Southfield, in order to prevent rodent harborage, shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All garbage and debris shall be kept and stored in accordance with the requirements of chapter 17 of the City Code. 
B.  All lots, vacant or occupied, and all buildings and structures shall be kept free of all litter, garbage and debris at all times in accordance with chapter 17 of the City Code. 
C.  All accessory structures shall be erected on a concrete rat wall measuring a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches deep and four (4) inches thick and which is free from cracks or voids. A cement floor shall also be provided under the structure, measuring at least four (4) inches thick. Upon receipt of a written request by the owner(s) of property, the city's director of building or his designate shall be permitted to issue, in writing, variances from this provision upon a finding in his or her reasonable discretion that practical difficulty exists complying with the terms of this subsection and a reasonable alternative exists meeting the spirit and intent of this subsection after reviewing the following: 
(1)  Size and character of the accessory structure. 
(2)  Dimensions of the proposed alternative rat wall barrier. 
(3)  Any other circumstances necessary to make a determination, such as unique soil conditions or other considerations. 
D.  No person shall feed wild birds or animals with other than commercially approved bird food, including seed, suet and other commercially available feed in an approved container for the distribution of such bird seed. Such container shall be elevated at least forty-eight (48) inches above ground level. 
E.  Firewood regulations. 
(1)  The outside storage of firewood on any property is hereby prohibited except as provided hereinafter. 
(2)  Regulations for outside storage. In residentially zoned and multiple family residentially zoned districts, the outside storage of firewood shall be permitted provided it complies with all of the following regulations: 
(a)  Location on premises. No firewood shall be stored in a front yard or required side yard. Storage shall be a minimum of six (6) inches away from the required set back line. 
(b)  Manner of storage. 
[i]  All firewood shall be stockpiled in a neat and orderly manner. 
[ii]  Stockpiles shall be elevated eight (8) inches above the ground and shall not exceed a total height of four (4) feet, eight (8) inches, as measured from the ground. 
(c)  Number of face cords and length of stockpiles. The total number of face cords permitted on the premises and the length of stockpiles shall be no greater than two (2) face cords and no greater than sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(4)  Notice of violations. When any structure, building or vacant land is found to be in violation of this section, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified in writing, by first-class mail, of such violation and the corrective measures that are to be taken to eliminate such violation and that said corrective measures shall be completed within a specified period of time, being no less than seven (7) calendar days. Violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the penalties as set forth in section 1.703 of the City Code. 
(5)  Failure to comply; extermination by city; costs. Upon the failure of any owner and/or occupant to comply with the directives of any notice issued by the city pursuant to this section, the City of Southfield is hereby authorized to go upon the property and take whatever measures are reasonably necessary to remove unlawful accumulations and other conditions of rodent harborage existing on the property, and/or otherwise undertake rodent extermination on the property. 
    The costs so incurred by the city shall constitute a lien against the property, and shall be charged to the occupant thereof, or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If such charges are not paid within sixty (60) days after the bill for such charges is sent to the owner and/or occupant, such charges may be collected in the manner provided in section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 1, 4-30-07; Ord. No. 1653 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
CHAPTER 18. - CITY WATER UTILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Department of water supply, § 6.19; public utilities, § 10.12. 
Cross reference- Water rates, § 2.152 et seq.; improvements required in subdivisions, § 5.347; plumbing rules, § 8.451 et seq. 

Sec. 2.31. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter: 
(1)  Backflow means water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. 
(2)  Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. 
(3)  Department shall mean the department of public works of the city. 
(4)  Main or its plural shall mean any pipes other than service pipes used for conveying or distributing water. 
(5)  Premises shall mean every lot or parcel of land and any dwelling, house or structure related thereto. 
(6)  Safe air gap means the minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one (1) inch and need not be more than twelve (12) inches. 
(7)  Secondary water supply means a water supply system maintained in addition to a public water supply, including but not limited to water systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of Act 98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended, being sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the Compiled Laws of 1948, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an approved storage facility. 
(8)  Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
(9)  User shall mean any person or his agent owning, occupying or using any premises supplied, or to be supplied, with city water. 
(10)  Water distribution system operator shall mean an employee of the Department of Public Works certified to operate a Class I Public Water Distribution System, according to the provisions of Part 19 of the Michigan Department of Health Administrative Rules (R 325.11901, et seq.) as from time to time amended. 
(11)  Water service pipe shall mean pipe tapped into the water main and extending thence to the meter. 
(12)  Water supply system shall mean any part of equipment or materials attached to the water mains conveying water furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 2.32. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  ASA shall mean the American Standards Association. 
(2)  AWWA shall mean the American Water Works Association. 
(3)  ASTM shall mean the American Society for Testing Materials. 
(4)  MSHD shall mean the Michigan State Health Department. 
(5)  SOCWA shall mean the Southeastern Oakland County Water Authority. 
Sec. 2.32A. - Supervision of water distribution system. 
    The water distribution system owned and operated by the city shall be under the supervision of a properly certified "water distribution system operator" as specified in section 9(5) of P.A. 399 of 1976 as it may from time to time be amended (MCL 325.1002, et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
WATER SERVICE PIPES 
Sec. 2.33. - Depth, manner of laying. 
    All water service pipes on either public or private property shall be laid on a solid bottom not less than four (4) feet six (6) inches below the established grade. Water service pipe laid in the same trench as the sewer shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches distant from the sewer and shall be shelved into the bank. 
Sec. 2.34. - Pipe specifications. 
    All water service pipe from the main to the water meter shall be copper pipe (Type K), or cast iron when approved by the department. In no case will less than three-quarter-inch service pipe, inside diameter, be allowed. The use of galvanized or wrought-iron pipe will not be permitted. 
Sec. 2.35. - Applications for water service. 
(1)  All applications for the use of water through a service pipe, all applications for installation of service pipes and all applications for meters shall be made at the office of the department by the owner or a licensed plumber representing the owner. 
(2)  All applications shall state in full detail the purposes for which the supply is required, with correct street address, lot number and any other information required by the department. 
(3)  All expenses incurred by reason of incorrect information given in an application shall be charged to and paid by the applicant or his or her agent. 
Sec. 2.36. - Service pipe, installation regulations. 
(1)  Installations of service pipes from main to lot line shall consist of tapping the main, inserting corporation cock with proper couplings, laying pipes from main to lot line, providing a stop with an approved type of stop box and cover marked "water." 
(2)  No service shall be installed when the plumber's pipe is in line with a driveway, tree, fire hydrant, catch basin or other obstruction. 
(3)  All service connections and service pipes from the city's mains to lot line shall be put in only by properly authorized employees of the department acting under the direction of the director. Before receiving a permit for a service connection, there must be paid such a sum as the city may require to cover the expenses of installing same. 
(4)  Service connections from the curb stops installed at the lot line by the department to the customer's building shall be installed by a licensed plumber in complete conformity with all these rules and regulations. 
Sec. 2.37. - Service pipe, installation, maintenance. 
(1)  The water service pipe from the main to the curb stop, also the curb stop and the stop box, will be provided in place by the department under the fee for water permit provided in this chapter. Water service pipe, from main to the property line, shall be maintained by the department, but this clause shall not apply to old services installed by private parties. The curb stop, stop box and all water service pipe from the property line to the meter shall be maintained by the owner of the premises. 
(2)  There shall be no joints between the curb stop and the meter unless commercial lengths are not available to allow for this provision (in the event of excessive building setbacks). All joints between the main and the meter shall be flared type joints. No person shall interfere in any way with water service pipe installed by the department. No person is permitted to turn water on or off at the curb stop except for the purpose of testing his work, in which case the curb stop shall be left in the same condition and position as he found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premises shall do so inside the building only. The license of any plumber violating the provisions of this paragraph shall be revoked. 
Sec. 2.38. - Gate valves. 
    A separate gate valve the same size as the meter connections shall be placed on the service pipe on both sides of the meter. Such valves shall be equal in quality to the service cock. 
(1)  Gate valves shall be installed on each side of any backflow prevention device except for vacuum breakers, hose bibbs and atmospheric vacuum breakers. 
(2)  Indicating type (OS & Y) gate valves shall be installed on fire sprinkler system backflow prevention devices and prescribed by the city construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 2.39. - Turning on water. 
    Licensed plumbers shall not interfere in any way with water service pipes installed by the department and are not permitted to turn on or off at the stop cock except for the purpose of testing their work, in which case the stop cock shall be left in the same condition and position as they found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premises shall do so inside the building only. The license of any plumber violating the provisions of this paragraph may be revoked. 
Sec. 2.40. - Cross connections unlawful. 
(1)  Cross connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, or to cause or permit the creation of, any cross connection; and it shall furthermore be unlawful for any person to maintain any cross connection after January 1, 1974; where the creation or maintenance of such cross connection is: 
(a)  Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply. 
(b)  Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant. 
(c)  Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant. 
(d)  Between a public water supply and any other source of potential contaminant regardless of the source. 
(2)  That the city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(3)  That it shall be the duty of the department of public works to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(4)  That the representative of the department of public works shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connection. 
(5)  That the city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this chapter exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  That all testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be tested on an annual basis or as required by the city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved and State of Michigan certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(7)  That the potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply be protected from possible contamination as specified by Michigan Department of Environmental Quality rules and by Michigan Plumbing Code and Michigan Residential Code. Any water outlet supplied by a secondary water supply which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the public water supply system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(8)  Permit for proposed corrective action required. A user of public water shall obtain a permit issued by the director of the department of building and safety engineering for any proposed corrective action or installation of any protective device before installing or using it, except that no permit shall be required for the installation of vacuum breakers on hose bibs. 
(9)  Identifying colors and tags required. When a secondary water source is used in addition to a public water supply system, exposed public water and secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety. It may be necessary to protect the public water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the water distribution system operator of the department of public works. 
(10)  That this section does not supersede the Michigan Plumbing Code and Michigan Residential Code and is supplementary to them. 
(Ord. No, 1296, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 2.41. - Outlets between meter and main. 
    A plugged tee or any other accessible outlet between the meter and the main will not be allowed. 
WATER METERS 
Sec. 2.42. - Premises to be metered. 
    All premises using city water shall be metered and shall pay for water at the rate established from time to time by the city council. In no case will water be supplied, except for temporary use by council approval, at other than the established water rates. 
Sec. 2.43. - Meter charges. 
    All necessary repair charges to the meter and/or the remote reading receptacle shall be paid by the customer and/or owner unless it can be shown that such repairs were due to the fault of the department. If a water meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the same usage rate as billed for that same period one year prior. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 2.44. - Meter installation. 
    The expense of installing the meter setup shall be borne by the owner. The meter couplings or flanges will be furnished by the department. The maintenance of the meter will be the obligation of the department; providing that, where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of the meter are made necessary by the act, neglect, or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, the expense to the department caused thereby, may be charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises. Such charges shall be set from time to time by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 2.45. - Meter testing. 
    The accuracy of any meter installed in any premises will be tested by the department upon written request of the customer, who shall pay in advance a fee which shall be set from time to time by council resolution. If, on such test, the meter shall be found to register over five (5) percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be installed and the fee paid will be refunded to the customer, and the water bill may be adjusted in such manner as may be fair and just. If any meter is found defective and five (5) percent or less than the correct amount registers, the customer will be charged the same amount as was charged in the preceding seasonal quarter. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 2.46. - Multiple meters. 
(1)  Meters for terraces and apartment houses may have a single connection with meter for all connecting houses, or separate connections to each. 
(2)  More than one (1) meter may be used for business property occupied by more than one (1) tenant. If more than one (1) meter is used, an agreement must be signed by the owner protecting the city in treating this property in its entirety, should it necessitate a shut-off to enforce payment of rate. 
Sec. 2.47. - Large meters to be compound type. 
    Meters larger than two (2) inches in size must be of the compound type except in special cases where in the judgment of the department other type of meters would be satisfactory. 
Sec. 2.48. - Couplings. 
    Couplings for meter and meter templates will be furnished on receipt at the department office of application blank properly filled out by a licensed plumber. 
Sec. 2.49. - Meter wells. 
(1)  Upon special permission being granted by the department, meters may be installed in the meter wells of a type approved by the department. 
(2)  The service meter wells for setting meters one (1) inch or less in size shall be a type suitable for outside service meter settings in cold climates. The meter well shall be a standard prefabricated type made of concrete or vitrified clay. The meter wells shall have a minimum inside diameter of twenty (20) inches and a minimum depth of forty (40) inches. The meter wells shall be equipped with a cast-iron frame and double cover suitable for installation on the type of meter well furnished. Meter wells for setting meters larger than one (1) inch in size shall be of a type approved by the water department. 
(3)  All meter wells shall be drained to a sewer if within one hundred (100) feet of sewer and must in such cases have trap next to well. If well is not drained in this manner, it must be provided with sump for pumping water out. 
(4)  When it is necessary to make more than one (1) trip to set a meter, a charge which shall be set from time to time by council resolution will be made for each additional trip. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 2.50. - Moving meter prohibited. 
    All persons are forbidden to interfere with or move a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the department. 
Sec. 2.51. - Injury to meter. 
    The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water and from injury or interference by any person or persons. 
Sec. 2.52. - Meter location. 
(1)  Meters and their valves will not be allowed in closets or compartments that are kept locked or in coal bins, in or under toilet room floors, under buildings, porches, show windows, show boards or where they are difficult of access. 
(2)  All meters shall be set horizontally in dry, clean, sanitary places, perfectly accessible with valves on both sides, and where a small leak or the spilling of water will do no damage. 
(3)  Access must be unobstructed to the outside reading device. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 2.53. - Large meter installation requirements. 
(1)  All services one and one-half (11/2) inch or larger must have a tee between the meter and outlet valve, to be used for testing the meter without its removal. The size of the side opening of this tee shall be one and one-half (11/2) inch service pipes, two (2) inches for all service pipes up to four (4) inches and three (3) inches for larger service pipes, according to plans which can be had on application. The side opening of such tee shall be plugged. All meters one and one-half (11/2) inch or larger must be set by the plumber after the settings have been inspected and approved by the water department. 
(2)  Bypasses of the same size as meters are required on one and one-half-inch to six-inch connections. Bypasses will not be allowed on one-inch meters or smaller. The bypasses shall be constructed according to plans furnished by the city. 
Sec. 2.54. - Fire lines and sprinkler systems. 
    The city required all private fire lines and sprinkler systems to be metered. 
(1)  All fire lines in size up to and including two (2) inch shall be connected on the building side of the normal domestic water meter. 
All connections made in this manner shall be charged a one time standby surcharge fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus a monthly assessment fee of five dollars ($5.00) if there is no meter installed. 
(2)  All fire line connections in size two and one-half inch and larger shall have a three-fourths inch bypass meter incorporated into the connection assembly. The three-fourths inch meter will be supplied by the city at the current price of said meter. There shall be a one time standby surcharge of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus a monthly assessment fee based upon size, as follows: 
  Size 
(in inches) Monthly 
Assessment 
Fee 21/2 $ 7.00 3   10.00 4   15.00 6 and larger   20.00  
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Secs. 2.55-2.60. - Reserved. 
WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
Sec. 2.61. - Application. 
(1)  Before any connection shall be made to any water main, application for same shall be made in writing to the department by the owner of the premises to be served, or by his or her authorized agent. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the department. The owner, user, and/or applicant for a water tapping permit by such application impliedly agrees to abide by all rules and regulations of the department in all respects, but more especially with those respecting the responsibility for the payment for water and this paragraph is expressly made a part of such application. 
(2)  The location of service lead at the property line will be designated by the owner and shown on application unless there are, in the opinion of the department, reasons for changing same. 
Sec. 2.62. - Connection fees. 
    No water service connection shall be made until the applicant has paid the necessary deposit or fee, if known, for same in accordance with the schedule of rates set forth by the council from time to time. Such schedule will be available for public inspection at the offices of the department. 
Sec. 2.63. - Outside service. 
    Property owners not within the city corporate limits may connect into the city water mains only upon the approval of the city council. All connections shall comply with this chapter. 
Sec. 2.64. - Service during construction. 
    At the time application is made for a service connection to a new building, the applicant shall deposit with the department a fee which shall be set from time to time by council resolution to guarantee maintenance during construction period of the water stop-box, which sum shall be retained by the department until final grading of the premises is completed. If upon inspection it shall be determined that the stop-box has been damaged, the department will correct the same and apply full deposit for the service so rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 2.65. - One service for each premises. 
    No premises shall be served by more than one (1) water service and one (1) meter. A building under one (1) ownership consisting of several premises may be served by more than one (1) water service and meter upon approval by the director, but in no case shall the number of water services and meters exceed the number of premises. In multiple installations, no totalizing meter will be installed or read by the department. When more than one (1) meter is served by one (1) water service, all the meters served by the service must operate from a manifold type arrangement. Failure of one (1) unit in a manifold arrangement to pay for water received will result in a discontinuance of water to that meter. 
Sec. 2.66. - Remodeling for multiple use. 
    Where a building originally built as a single building or premises and fitted with one (1) service pipe shall thereafter be subdivided and each subdivision shall be separately owned, the separate division or divisions so made must be connected to the main by separate service pipes within thirty (30) days after such subdivision. 
Sec. 2.67. - Underground sprinklers. 
    Automatic underground sprinkling systems for watering grounds must not be installed in the road right-of-way in such a manner that piping will be in the way of department operations. Any damages incurred to such installations is the sole responsibility of the owner and the department will not repair same. 
Sec. 2.68. - Injury to installations. 
    No person or persons shall obstruct or interfere with any stop cock, valves or any appurtenances connected with the city's water mains by placing in or about it building materials, rubbish, soil, snow or other hindrance to easy and free access thereto. 
Secs. 2.69, 2.70. - Reserved. 
USE OF WATER 
Sec. 2.71. - Opening curb stop. 
    When new water service pipes are put into any premises the curb stop shall be left closed and will thereafter be opened by the department only upon request of the owner or his agent. Under no circumstances shall curb stops be opened or closed by any person not an employee or agent of the department except that a licensed plumber may open a curb stop to test his work. 
Sec. 2.72. - Prohibited connections between premises. 
    Water shall be taken and used only through water service pipes under the supervision of the department and no connection through which water may pass from one property to another shall exist even though the ownership of both properties may be the same. 
Sec. 2.73. - Water waste. 
    Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures is strictly prohibited. For disregard or repeated violation of this requirement, the water may be turned off by the department. 
Sec. 2.74. - Turning on after shutoff. 
    Where the water has been turned off by the department for any reason, no person or persons except authorized employees or agents of the department may turn it on again. When this rule is violated the person or persons so doing shall be liable to the penalties hereinafter provided, and the water may be shut off at the corporation cock at the main, in which case the owner shall, before it is turned on again, pay in advance the charge of the department therefor, which shall be fixed by the director based on time and material plus ten (10) percent. 
Sec. 2.75. - Boiler connections. 
    No steam engine boilers shall be directly connected to the water service pipe. The owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least ten (10) hours into which the service pipe shall discharge. 
Sec. 2.76. - Issuance of administrative regulations. 
(1)  The city administrator or, in the absence of the city administrator, the director of public works, may issue regulations to reduce, restrict, redistribute, or otherwise regulate the quantity of, and the days, times or periods during which water may be drawn or used by customers of the public water system. 
(2)  Any such regulations shall be in writing, shall be dated and signed by the issuing official, shall state the regulatory provisions in clear language, shall state the purpose or objectives of the regulation, and shall expire ninety (90) days after issuance, unless extended by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  In determining the terms of the administrative regulations the issuing official shall consider, without limitation, the ability of the public water system to deliver water to customers without damage to the system, the consequence of an insufficient volume or pressure at any time or place, the possibility of contamination of the water by any means, and the quantity and pressure of the water available from the water supplier, and conditions necessary to assure an adequate supply of water for essential domestic, commercial, fire fighting and public health needs. 
(4)  Notice of such regulations may be given by cable television, public radio, broadcast television, and newspapers commonly circulating within the city. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with an administrative regulation issued according to the provisions of this section, after having received actual notice of the order by personal service or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 1, 6-27-95) 
Secs. 2.77-2.80. - Reserved. 
WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION [4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 

Sec. 2.81. - Fire hose connections. 
    Where hose connections for fire apparatus are provided on any pipe, each connection or opening on such pipes shall have not less than twenty-five (25) feet of fire hose constantly attached thereto, and no water shall be taken through such openings or hose for any purpose other than for extinguishing fires or testing such fire equipment. Any such test must be conducted under special permit and under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. Fire lines must be metered as provided for in this chapter. 
Sec. 2.82. - Opening hydrants. 
    No person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant without first securing a permit from the water department. An application for a permit to use fire hydrants shall be made, specifying which hydrant is to be used, for what period of time, and for what purpose. A deposit in accordance with the schedule of rates set forth by council from time to time will be required, if permit is granted, to cover the costs of the meter, backflow preventor, and any accessories required for proper connection, water, repairs to hydrant (if any), and inspection charges. Such schedule will be available for public inspection at the offices of the department. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 2.83. - Obstructing hydrants. 
    No person shall place anything or any object within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant nor otherwise obstruct same. 
Secs. 2.84, 2.85. - Reserved. 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 2.86. - Access to premises. 
    Any official, inspector, foreman or other authorized employee of the department shall have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with department water for the purpose of reading the water meter or making an inspection thereof, including the examination of the entire water supply and plumbing system on the premises. No person shall refuse to admit the authorized inspectors and employees of the department to any premises for any such purpose. If any authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises, or being admitted is hindered or prevented in making such examination, the water shall be turned off from such premises after giving twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 2.87. - Notice of area shutoff. 
    Should it become necessary to shut off water from any section of the city because of accidents or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the department will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby, and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes, but failure to give such notice shall not render the department responsible or liable for damages that may result therefrom, or for any other cause. 
CHAPTER 19. - CITY SEWER SERVICE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, published October 11, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 19, §§ 2.101-2.121 and 2.130-2.134, and adding a new ch. 19. Former ch. 19 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1546, adopted April 30, 2007. 
Cross reference- Duties of department of public works, § 1.132; sewage disposal utility, § 2.168 et seq.; required improvements in subdivisions, § 5.347; plumbing rules, § 8.451 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2.101. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
(2)  Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(3)  Combination sewer or combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
(4)  Department shall mean the City of Southfield Department of Public Works. 
(5)  Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
(6)  Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes, solids, or semisolids from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
(7)  Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface or ground water. 
(8)  Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
(9)  Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm waters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
(10)  Sewage shall mean any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business and commercial buildings, institution and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and storm waters as may be present. 
(11)  Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
(12)  Sewer shall mean any pipe, tile, tubes or conduit for carrying sewage. 
(13)  Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
(14)  Director shall mean the City of Southfield Director of Public Works. 
(15)  Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.102. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, food waste or other objectionable waste. Food waste disposers shall be installed in all residences and buildings, provided such residences and buildings have a connection to a public sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.103. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any unsanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.104. - Privies and septic tanks. 
(1)  Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(2)  The owner(s) of any structure serviced by a septic tank, privy, privy vault, or other private sewage disposal facilities or system (collectively "private sewage disposal system") shall, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, have the private sewage disposal system inspected by the Oakland County Health Division (the "health division") or such other public or private agency or organization as may be approved for such purpose by the city ("other approved agency") and provide written health division or other approved agency certification to the city that the private sewage disposal system has been determined and declared to be in compliance with health division certification criteria at the time of inspection and certification. Such certification shall expire after three (3) years, at which time the owner(s) must properly abandon the private sewage disposal system and connect to the available public sanitary sewer or renew inspection and certification by the health division or other approved agency. Thereafter, certifications shall expire every three (3) years and must be renewed by the health division or other approved agency in order for an owner(s) to continue use of the private sewage disposal system. Failure to properly and timely provide periodic written certifications by the health division or other approved agency in accordance with this section 2.104, shall result in the owner(s) of the structure being required to connect the structure to the available public sanitary sewer. Upon an inspection and determination at any time by the health division or other approved agency that a private sewage disposal system servicing a structure has failed, is subject to failure, is inadequate, or is otherwise unsafe, the owner(s) of the structure shall either: 
(a)  Connect the structure to the available public sanitary sewer; or 
(b)  Repair, restore, and/or reconstruct the private sewage disposal system in accordance with the following requirements: 
(i)  The owner(s) shall, within thirty (30) days of such determination, apply for all required permits from the health division and the city necessary to repair, restore or reconstruct the private sewage disposal system; and 
(ii)  Upon the issuance of the required permits, the owner(s) shall install and complete the repair, restoration, and/or reconstruction of the private sewage disposal system within sixty (60) days, unless such period is extended by the building official based upon conditions or circumstances beyond the control of the owner(s). 
(3)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section 2.104 shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in chapter 15, section 1.703 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09; Ord. No. 1683 , § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 2.105. - Definitions. 
(1)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(a)  Available public sanitary sewer system means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property, and passing not more than two hundred (200) feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
(b)  Public sanitary sewer system means a sanitary sewer or a combined sanitary and storm sewer used or intended for use by the public for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage for treatment or disposal and owned or operated by a governmental agency or a private corporation, association, partnership or individual. 
(c)  Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for use for household, commercial or industrial or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09; Ord. No. 1683 , § 2, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 2.106. - Installation of sewers. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of all sewers shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of environmental quality and shall be constructed and connected in accordance with regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.107. - Connections outside city. 
    No connection shall be made to any sewer from property outside the city without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.108. - Sewer connections. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. That portion of the building sewer lying within the right-of-way of any street, alley or easement shall be installed by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.109. - Permit fee. 
    All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the city shall be made only by the department after a permit has been issued by the city on payment of such fees as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.110. - Private sewer systems. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 2.105 above, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the provisions of this Code and the county health department's rules. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.111. - Installation permit. 
    No septic tanks shall be constructed or installed within the city unless the plans for the installation are approved by the director and the Oakland County Health Department as conforming to the regulations prescribed in this chapter and a permit issued in accordance with chapter 102 (general building regulations). 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.112. - Installation of building sewer. 
    All building sewer construction and the installation of pipes, fittings and appurtenances shall be done in accordance with the building regulations of the city and such supplementary rules and regulations as the director may prescribe, which shall be effective upon approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.113. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be accessible at all times to the director, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.114. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.115. - Inspectors. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Secs. 2.116-2.129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SURFACE AND GROUND DRAINAGE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Soil removal and landfills, effects on surface drainage, § 5.251 et seq.; plumbing and drainage rules, § 8.451 et seq. 

Sec. 2.130. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the enforcement and interpretation of this article: 
    Building contractor: The person holding a general contract for the construction of a building or structure. In the event no such person is employed by an owner, then in such cases the owner of the property affected shall be the building contractor. 
    Building department: The Building Department of the City of Southfield. 
    City: The City of Southfield. 
    Earth change: A man-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including the movement or placement of soil from excavation, construction or land balancing, and cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. 
    Engineering department: The Engineering Department of the City of Southfield. 
    Excavation: Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and also included shall be the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Grading: Any stripping, excavating, fill or stockpiling of soils or any combination of thereof. 
    Grading permit: A permit issued by the engineering department to alter the topography of a lot. 
    Grubbing: To disturb the soil by removing the vegetative cover. 
    Major development: Any use or development requiring a site plan, any land proposed for platting and any development projects of federal, state and/or local agencies. 
    Minor development: The development of a single-family residential lot or development on any site not subject to site plan approval under provisions of the city zoning ordinance provisions. 
    Natural ground surface: The existing surface contours and its vegetative cover or that established in previous uses. 
    Owner: The fee title holder, a land contract vendee, a lessee, a tenant of the property and the persons, individually and collectively, entitled to possession of said property. 
    Parcel: A tract, lot or plot of land, either platted or unplatted. 
    Permit: A permit issued to authorize work to be performed under the provisions of this article. 
    Person: Any natural persons, firm, corporation, partnership or association. 
    Runoff: That part of precipitation which does not infiltrate into the ground or is not absorbed by vegetation and flows off the land, including runoff from snow and ice melt. 
    Soil: Topsoil, subsoil, gravel, rock, stone, earth or any other minerals of a like nature. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.131. - Generally. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to build, change, alter or enlarge or permit the building, changing, alteration or enlargement of any existing, proposed or future structure or land or part thereof of any building or land, or change the drainage pattern of any land or part thereof until a grading and building permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, properly endorsed as to occupancy in a manner provided in this section, shall have been issued by the city engineer hereinafter authorized, or by his duly appointed assistants. 
(2)  An application for a grading permit shall be made to the city engineer, prior to the time when a new or enlarged or changed or altered use of a structure or land or part thereof is intended to begin. No building or structure shall be erected, altered or changed and no building or structure shall be moved into any parcel of land and no drainage pattern of any land shall be changed by filling, cutting or grading in this city prior to the issuance of a permit therefore. Any application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan, on a sheet no smaller than 81/2" × 11" and no larger than 24" × 36", drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet showing the exact dimension of the land and structures to which the permit is to apply. 
(3)  The plot plan for any building or structure which is presented in connection with a building permit application shall have superimposed thereon one-foot or less contours of the area including not less than one hundred (100) feet outside the boundary line of the plot on which the permit is being sought, where feasible, and shall include proposed grade of the building, the lot or parcel and the corners thereof, and the point, area, ditch or enclosure to which storm water is to drain. Such contour map and storm water disposal system shall be reviewed by the city engineer to determine that site drainage is proper and that the drainage from abutting properties is not obstructed and the downstream properties will not be damaged or inconvenienced. The plot plan shall be prepared and signed or sealed by a registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(a)  Right of entry. Grading permits are issued on the condition that the grading inspector shall have right of entry upon the site at all reasonable times to inspect the activities for compliance with the approved plans and to investigate any complaints about the work. 
(b)  Penalties. Upon discovery of violations of a valid permit or other conditions of this article, the permittee shall be notified, in writing, of all violations, corrective actions necessary to come into compliance and the deadline for compliance. An order will be filed with all city departments to cease all further inspections on the property until violations have been corrected. In cases of serious concern and/or consequence, a stop-work order will be immediately placed on the property, prohibiting all activity on the site except work necessary to correct violations of the permit and this article. Inspections made to determine compliance with these written orders will be assessed the city's standard inspection fees. 
(c)  Foundation/basement. After placement of the foundation and backfilling, a written certification from a licensed, registered surveyor or engineer shall be submitted to the city engineer. This certification shall state that the proposed brick ledge elevations and horizontal placement of the foundation are properly set and conform to the approved grading plan. This certification shall also state that the surveyor or engineer has properly staked the garage and all other foundations in accordance with the approved grading plan. No rough framing shall be placed without receipt and approval of such certification by the city engineer. In the event of a failure to comply with this provision, removal or modification of the structure may be required as determined by the city engineer based upon a review of all applicable circumstances, including, without limitation, the cause and/or impact of the lack of conformance with the plans. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the flow of surface water over easements for public utilities or to impede the flow of surface water across private property in a manner different from the approved grading plan and drainage pattern. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, it will be necessary that an "as built" grading survey, prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor be submitted to the engineering department attesting to the fact that the site is graded in accordance with the drainage pattern approved at the time of issuance of the building or land use permit. 
(6)  In lieu of such land survey, a letter of credit or cash deposit in an amount set by the engineering department may be required to ensure grading and submission of such survey at a later date when a building, land or structure is otherwise suitable for occupancy during that season of the year when weather conditions make finish grading unfeasible. In such case, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued and the date for completion of grading shall be indicated on the temporary certificate of occupancy or its related documents. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the entry of any roof water, groundwater or surface water into the sanitary sewer system or to direct any roof water, groundwater or surface water in such a manner that it enters the sanitary sewer system. Any person who was previously permitted to have a storm water, roof water or groundwater connection to a sanitary sewer shall install splash blocks and conductors to carry roof water not less than five (5) feet from the building wall and grade in accordance with this chapter and such work shall be completed to the satisfaction of the engineering department within sixty (60) days of notice to comply with this section. 
(8)  At the time the application for a permit is submitted, there shall be paid for the plan examination required under this section a fee based upon two (2) percent of the cost of construction for on-site storm drainage, parking area and driveway surfacing for nonresidential sites, and a flat fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per site for all single-family residential sites. The city engineer shall from time to time review these fees and make a report and recommendation to the council concerning the reasonableness of such fees. The city council, upon receiving a report and recommendation from the city engineer, may by resolution change such fees or prescribe such additional fees as may be deemed reasonable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.132. - Regulation of sump pump discharge. 
(1)  All footing drain discharge shall be deposited into the storm sewers or other storm water drainage facility in accordance with the plumbing code of the city, or upon the surface of the ground in those instances where no storm drainage facility is available as may be determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  Any surface, roof drainage or sump pump discharges which flow into, onto or across any adjacent premises or buildings so as to create a structural hazard, health hazard or a nuisance to the owner or occupant of the adjacent premises shall be abated by the owner of the improperly drained area, who shall cause the drainage to be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the engineering department. 
(3)  Where such footing drain discharge is deposited upon the surface of the ground, the place of deposit shall be in the yard area that drains to an area that is acceptable to the engineering department without crossing any other parcel of land. Discharge of such water shall be carried not less than five (5) feet from foundation walls by means of splash blocks or pipe which shall be installed at the time of construction, and shall not discharge on the surface of the ground within the street right-of-way or within twenty (20) feet thereof. 
(4)  Where footing drain discharge is ejected or carried to the drainage system by means of a pump or lift, and where it is not deposited on the surface of the ground, there shall be a relief line installed wherever there is a probability that the drainage system may become inoperative due to freezing or surge charging. Such systems shall be protected against backflow as required by the applicable sections of the plumbing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.133. - Final building grade and maintenance. 
(1)  The final building grade shall be established and maintained at an elevation that will provide a minimum five (5) percent slope away from the building or house for a minimum distance of ten (10) feet and the balance of the building or house site shall be graded to conform to the approved site drainage plan. 
(2)  Where local setback, side yard or rear yard requirements would result in the building being located less than ten (10) feet from the property line, then the surface of the ground shall conform to the approved site drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.134. - Building or house downspout. 
(1)  Roof waters from buildings shall not discharge or fall onto any walkway, sidewalk, driveway or on any approach to a building. Such waters shall be intercepted by gutters and rain leaders or roof sumps and downspouts to an area approved by the engineering department. 
(2)  Where local setback, side yard or rear yard requirements would result in a building or house being located less than five (5) feet from a property line, gutters and rain leaders or roof sumps and downspouts shall be installed to convey rainwater to a safe point of discharge, but in no event shall such rainwater be directed to a private or city sanitary sewage disposal system. 
(3)  Roof rainwater shall be discharged only in a manner approved by the engineering department. 
(4)  No approval shall be given by the grading inspector unless the method being used shall provide a positive slope away from the building foundation wall. 
(Ord. No. 1571 , § 1, 10-11-09) 
CHAPTER 19A. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2.136 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to incorporate within the City Code certain amendments to the Code of Federal Regulations regarding the discharge of wastewater into wastewater collection and treatment systems which are binding upon the City of Southfield, to streamline necessary procedures for compliance with the aforementioned federal amendments and for improvement of the efficiency, operation and implementation of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department's Industrial Pretreatment Program, to establish new regulatory requirements for centralized waste treatment facility dischargers and for groundwater dischargers, to place new responsibility upon industrial users for conducting self-monitoring and waste minimization activities, and to modify the appeal and reconsideration process available to industrial users for redress of administrative actions by the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the City of Southfield. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.137. - Delegation of authority. 
    The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state-approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter 19A on behalf of the City of Southfield. The City of Southfield has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this chapter, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
ARTICLE II. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL 

Sec. 2.138. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 C.F.R. part 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage department; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(c)  This chapter provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and city wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.139. - Authority. 
    By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being MCL 323.1 et seq.; the City of Southfield Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this chapter shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.140. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter and unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
(2)  Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(i)  Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a corporation, who is either (a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or (b) the manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or 
(ii)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. (See 2.141 (n).) 
(3)  Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN-) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
(4)  Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user, which can or does lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw material, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical and economic considerations. 
(5)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
(6)  Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
(7)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.] 
(8)  Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including: 
(i)  A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site, and 
(ii)  A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
(9)  City means the City of Southfield. 
(10)  Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
(11)  Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
(12)  Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four (4) aliquot per twenty-four (24) hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403, Appendix E.] 
(13)  Confidential information means the information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user (see section 56-3-64.1). 
(14)  Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the state under the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. (see 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a)). 
(15)  Cooling water means the non-contact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat. 
(16)  Days mean consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter. 
(17)  Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
(18)  Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
(19)  Director means the Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, or the Director's designee. 
(20)  Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
(21)  Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
(22)  Environmental Protection Agency or administrator or EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
(23)  Facility means a location, which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
(24)  Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that's extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
(25)  Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
(26)  Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
(27)  Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b),(c) or (d). 
(28)  Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
(29)  Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
(30)  Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(i)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(ii)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
(31)  May means permissive. 
(32)  National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
(33)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
(34)  New source means: 
(i)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or 
(ii)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (i)(b) or (i)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(iii)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: (1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
(35)  Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(36)  Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
(37)  pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
(38)  Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
(39)  Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
(40)  Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, State or local law, rules and regulations. 
(41)  Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user (see 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r)). 
(42)  Pretreatment standards means all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in section 2.141 hereof. 
(43)  Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
(44)  Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including: 
(i)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(ii)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(iii)  The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
(45)  POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
(46)  Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
(47)  Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one (1) or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136. 
(48)  Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial consumption. 
(49)  Shall means mandatory. 
(50)  Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter; 
(ii)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(iii)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(iv)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority; 
(v)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within ninety (90) days after the scheduled date; 
(vi)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within thirty (30) days after the due date; 
(vii)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(viii)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(51)  Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(i)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water; or 
(ii)  Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(iii)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this chapter; or 
(iv)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this chapter as determined by the department; or 
(v)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or 
(vi)  Is found by the City of Detroit or City of Southfield to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
(52)  Slug means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
(53)  Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
(54)  Standard methods mean methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two (2) references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed. 
(55)  State means the State of Michigan. 
(56)  Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
(57)  Suspended solids (total) mean the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
(58)  Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated zero. 
(59)  Total phenolic compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l. 
(60)  Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
(61)  Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
(62)  Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this chapter or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(63)  User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
(64)  Wastewater or wastestream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm water, and cooling water. 
(65)  Wastewater discharge permits mean permits issued by the department in accordance with section 2.143. 
(66)  Waters of the state mean groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section: 
(1)  BMR - Baseline monitoring report 
(2)  BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand 
(3)  C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations 
(4)  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency 
(5)  FOG - Fats, oil or grease 
(6)  l - liter 
(7)  MDEQ - MI. Department of Environment Quality 
(8)  mg - milligrams 
(9)  mg/l - milligrams per liter 
(10)  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(11)  POTW - Publicly owned treatment works 
(12)  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(13)  SIC - Standard industrial classification 
(14)  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(15)  TSS - Total suspended solids 
(16)  U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.141. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F or 60° C using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21; or 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units; or 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; or 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; or 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit; or 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged; or 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150° F or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° F (40° C); or 
(10)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; or 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half (1/2) inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW. 
(b)  Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following in excess of the following limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants. See appendix C. 
(2)  Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
mg/l Arsenic (As) ..... 1.0 Cadmium (Cd) ..... See 
Appendix C Chromium (Cr) ..... 25.0 Copper (Cu) ..... 2.5 Cyanide (CN) (available) ..... 1.0 Iron (Fe) ..... 1,000.0 Lead (Pb) ..... 1.0 Nickel (Ni) ..... 5.0 Silver (Ag) ..... 1.0 Zinc (Zn) ..... 7.3 Total phenolic compounds: ..... 1.0 or See 
Appendix B  
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136. 
(a)  The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one (1) or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 2.148(d). 
(b)  The limitation for mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/1, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one (1) or more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 2.148(d). 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136. 
(3)  Compliance period. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter, the department shall notify all industrial users operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this chapter. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or non-compliance with these limitations, and, in the event of non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this chapter. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(c)  National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this chapter, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. part 403 and as established by the department. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in Appendix A. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 C.F.R § 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this chapter. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed ninety (90) days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with sections 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and of this chapter. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under section 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1)-(7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least ninety (90) days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5). 
(d)  Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the City of Southfield, the City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan. 
(e)  Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in section 2.143 of this Code. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this chapter. 
(f)  Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. 
An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as delineated in appendix A, shall be so designated; 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater; 
(3)  At least one (1) sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection (f)(1) of this section; 
(4)  A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es); 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by section 2.143(c)(1) through (18) of this Code, or by rules adopted by the board. 
The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in section 2.143, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in section 2.143 regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 
All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. 
(g)  Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. 
The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within one hundred eighty (180) days after its enactment. 
If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in section 2.143, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(h)  Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the City of Southfield reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. Ninety (90) days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(i)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter [November 19, 1986]. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. 
For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five (5) percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than fifty-five (55) gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW. 
The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(2)  At least once every two (2) years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within thirty (30) days of notification by the department. 
(j)  Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this chapter or applicable law, within one (1) hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or City of Southfield laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five (5) calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(k)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(l)  Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this chapter, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(m)  Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into the City of Southfield collection system, shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p). 
(n)  Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in section 2.140(a)(2), may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in section 2.140(a)(2)(i) or (ii), where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in section 2.140(a)(2)(i) or (ii); 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(o)  Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this chapter. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.142. - Fees. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)  The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; and 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.143. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of section 2.141. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this chapter, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in section 2.143(c) and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). 
(2)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in section 2.143(c) and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(3)  Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the department for the discharge(s) at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(b)  Permit application or reapplication. The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within thirty (30) days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this chapter. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in section 2.143(c) and (g). 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(c)  Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in section 2.141(a) and (b), those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one (1) year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. §1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator; 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (c)(4), of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4), of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven (7) days of the week; 
(8)  Denote: (i) The average and maximum twenty-four-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; (ii) each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and (iii) each combined wastestream; 
(9)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in subsection (c)(8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this chapter and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of section 2.141(i); 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this chapter and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(1)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6); 
(3)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(4)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. 
The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this chapter. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user has thirty (30) days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in section 2.149, twenty (20) days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one (1) facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this chapter, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or City of Southfield without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in section 2.141, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: 
a.  All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this chapter. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six (6) month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of section 2.143(e)(8)(d) and (e). The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with section 2.143(e)(9) and (11). 
c.  Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the department no later than ninety (90) days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than ninety (90) days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six (6) month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with section 2.143(e)(8)(d) and (e). The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with section 2.143(e)(9) and (11). The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined wastestream. 
d.  Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. Part 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. 
e.  This report, and those required under sections 2.141(c)(5) and 2.143(e)(8)(b) and (c), shall include the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations. Said certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as defined in section 2.140(a)(2). If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
f.  If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the department within twenty-four (24) hours of the time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the department within thirty (30) days after said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this chapter, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this chapter, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five (5) years nor less than one (1) year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(g)  Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in section 2.141 are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within thirty (30) calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Change(s) in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those delineated in appendix A of this chapter. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location (see section 2.144 of this Code); 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. 
When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has thirty (30) days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in section 2.149, the permit will become effective twenty (20) days after issuance. 
(h)  Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least thirty (30) days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department allows to be retained. 
(i)  Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.144. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this chapter. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within ninety (90) days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream, (ii) which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which lines handle each combined wastestream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications (see section 2.143(g)). 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.145. - Inspection, sampling and record-keeping. 
(a)  For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any other applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(c)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this chapter, which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section 2.146. 
(d)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(e)  Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(f)  Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this chapter, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three (3) years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's industrial waste program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(g)  Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(h)  In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(i)  In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two (2) or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in section 2.141(b), or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within fourteen (14) days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two (2) times the limitation in the future. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.146. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. 
The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.147. - Statutes, laws and regulations. 
    The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this chapter to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the city shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.148. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge. 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in section 2.143(g)(1). 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the department. 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers. 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this chapter including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this chapter until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(b)  Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment standards where the requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met. 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the department, orally or in writing, within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: 
(i)  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(3)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this chapter upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(c)  Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten (10) days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user properly notified the department as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the department may approve an anticipated bypass. 
(d)  Where one (1) or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in section 2.141(b) during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a part of the department's enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMPs, shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or BMP. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within twenty-four (24) hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within twenty-four (24) hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his designated representative, within ten (10) days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within fifteen (15) days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (e) of this section, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(g)  Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this chapter, the department, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(1)  a.  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this chapter, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten (10) days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this chapter and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
b.  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions: 
(i)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
(ii)  No single increment referred to in subsection (i) of this section shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(iii)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
(iv)  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this chapter. 
c.  Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this chapter or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(2)  Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user, who violates this chapter or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
a.  Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: 
(i)  In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
(ii)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
b.  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(3)  Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
a.  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this chapter, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
b.  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period; 
c.  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period; 
d.  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
e.  Control of discharge quantities; 
f.  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts; and/or 
g.  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
h.  A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this chapter or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(4)  Public notification of significant noncompliance. The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the City of Southfield a list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous twelve (12) months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least thirty (30) days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(h)  Legal actions. 
(1)  Criminal action: Any user, who violates any provision of this chapter including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both. The department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Civil action: Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this chapter, the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits the department, director, board, or City of Detroit from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this chapter, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(3)  All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Sec. 2.149. - Reconsideration and appeal. 
    Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this chapter. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this chapter. 
(a)  Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
(1)  Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the department, or (ii) by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
(3)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this chapter, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within twenty (20) days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request. 
(4)  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived. 
(b)  Reconsideration. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
(1)  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
(3)  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
(4)  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
(5)  Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(c)  Appeal. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
(1)  Any request for an appeal must be made within twenty (20) days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
(3)  The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within fifteen (15) days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
(4)  The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within thirty (30) days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Appendix A 
Aluminum forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 467 Asbestos manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 427 Battery manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 461 Builder's paper and board mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 431 Canned and preserved fruits/vegetables ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 407 Canned and preserved seafood proc. ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 408 Carbon black manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 458 Cement manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 411 Centralized waste treatment ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 437 Coal mining ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 434 Coil coating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 465 Copper forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 465 Dairy products processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 405 Electrical and electronic components I & II ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 469 Electroplating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 413 Explosives manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 457 Feed lots ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 412 Ferroalloy manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 424 Fertilizer manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 418 Glass manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 426 Grain mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 406 Gum and wood chemicals mfg ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 454 Hospital ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 460 Ink formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 447 Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I & III) ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 415 Iron and steel ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 420 Landfills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 445 Leather tanning & finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 425 Meat products ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 432 Metal finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 433 Metal molding and casting ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 464 Metal products and machinery ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 438 Mineral mining and processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 436 Nonferrous metals forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 471 Nonferrous metals mfg. I ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 421 Nonferrous metals Mfg. II ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 421 Ore mining and dressing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 440 Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 414 Paint formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 446 Paving and roofing material ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 443 Pesticide chemicals ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 455 Petroleum refining ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 419 Pharmaceutical ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 439 Phosphate manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 422 Photographic ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 459 Plastics molding and forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part463 Porcelain enameling ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 466 Pulp, paper, and paperboard ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 430 & 431 Rubber manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 428 Soap and detergent mfg ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 417 Steam electric ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 423 Sugar processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part409 Textile mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 410 Timber products ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 429 Transportation equipment cleaning ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 442 Waste combusters ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 444  
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Appendix B 
    An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation specified in section 2.141(b)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight (8) individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election; 
2-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Chloro-3-methylphenol ..... 1.0 mg/l 2,4-Dichlorophenol ..... 5.5 mg/l 2,4-Dinitrophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Methylphenol ..... 5.0 mg/l 4-Nitrophenol ..... 15.0 mg/l Phenol ..... 14.0 mg/l  
    Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
Appendix C. - Interim Discharge Limitations 
    No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants: 
a.  Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a twenty-four-hour period. 
b.  Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
c.  Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
d.  Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
(2)  Non-compatible pollutants: 
Cadmium (Cd) 1.0 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 1572 , 10-11-09) 
CHAPTER 20. - WATER RATES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Utility charges to be fixed by council, § 10.13. 
Cross reference- City water utility, § 2.31 et seq. 

Sec. 2.152. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Premises shall mean each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city. 
(2)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation or public agency or instrumentality. 
(3)  Department shall mean the city department of public service. 
(4)  Director shall mean the director of the department. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 2.153. - Payment of service costs. 
    Effective July 1, 1985, the owner of any premises having any connection to the water distribution system of this city shall pay to the city a charge for water service furnished at such premises. The charge shall be as set forth in this chapter and shall be computed on the basis of water consumption; upon a monthly fee for each water meter used at the premises; upon a debt service charge; upon the cost of maintenance work performed by the city upon any water distribution facilities situated upon the premises; and upon other charges as provided in this chapter. The rates to be charged for water service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Consumption charge. There shall be a charge levied for the water consumed at such premises as metered by the city water meter installed thereon, for each one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of water consumed. The consumption charge shall be fixed by council resolution. 
(2)  Meter charge. The monthly water fee shall be determined by the size of each water meter installed and shall be in addition to the consumption charge. The meter charge shall be fixed by council resolution. 
If the inspection of any water service by city personnel reveals an open bypass around a meter or a broken seal on a meter without prior approval of the department director, the customer will be billed an amount equal to the highest rate of consumption for that meter for the billing period in which the tampering is suspected or an estimate to be determined by the water department. The imposition of these charges shall not affect any of the proceedings which may be taken under the provisions of section 2.156. 
(3)  Debt service charge. In addition to the consumption charge and meter charge, each of the premises shall pay a debt service charge, as follows: 
(a)  All premises connecting directly or indirectly to the water mains constructed from the proceeds of bonds authorized by Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933 for the State of Michigan, as amended, or to any water mains thereafter constructed from earnings of the system shall pay a tap-in debt service charge based on the size of the tap at the time the connection [is made]. Such fee shall be established from time to time by council resolution. 
(b)  All premises connecting directly to any of the water mains constructed from the proceeds of sale of the bonds authorized by Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933 for the State of Michigan, as amended, or to any water mains constructed from earnings of the system shall pay a direct-benefit debt service charge in addition to the debt service charge required under paragraph (a) above. Such charge shall be set from time to time by council resolution. 
(4)  Existing tapping and connection charges. Any premises heretofore connected to the system or hereafter connecting to the system that are not covered by the debt service charge provided for in subsection (3) shall pay, in addition to the consumption charge and meter charge, connection or tapping charges in accordance with chapter 18. 
(5)  Hydrant rental. For water used through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the city shall pay a charge of two dollars ($2.00) per hydrant per year, which charge shall be payable in quarterly installments in advance from the current funds of the city or from the proceeds of taxes which the city, within constitutional and statutory limits, is hereby authorized and required to levy in an amount sufficient for that purpose. 
(6)  Special rates. For miscellaneous services for which a special rate shall be established, such rates shall be fixed from time to time by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 1, 5-24-76; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 6-21-76; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 11-15-76; Ord. No. 994, § 1, 6-11-79; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1063, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 7-22-85; Ord. No. 1568 , § 1, 8-9-09) 
Sec. 2.154. - Billing. 
    The city shall provide each owner or his designated representative with a water service bill no more frequently than once per month or less frequently than once per quarter year. Such bill shall represent the water service charges for the period immediately preceding the date of the bill. All bills shall be due and payable within twenty (20) days from the date thereof. A penalty of two (2) percent of the amount billed for customers of a one (1) family dwelling unit (as defined in subsection 5.4(16) of chapter 45) which is served by an independent water meter, and five (5) percent of the amount billed for all other customers shall be assessed by the city and paid by the owner on all bills not paid within twenty (20) days from the date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 1, 6-11-79; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1063, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 7-22-85; Ord. No. 1489, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 2.155. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The charges for water services which are under the provisions of Section 21, No. 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and Section 2, No. 178, of Public Acts of 1939, as amended, made a lien on all premises served thereby are hereby recognized to constitute such a lien; and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six (6) months, the city official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on May 1 st of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the city, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge, plus an administrative charge which will be set from time to time by council resolution, shall be by him entered upon the next tax rolls as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien therein enforced, provided, however, where notice is given, pursuant to Section 21 of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, and Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178, as amended, that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by Section 21 and Section 5, a lien shall not be placed against the premises provided the following requirements have been fully satisfied: 
(1)  A lease of the premises shall have been legally executed between the landlord and the tenant and filed with the water department; the lease must contain a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for payment of water bills accruing subsequent to compliance with the requirements contained in Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178; and 
(2)  An affidavit in the form provided by the city, is filed with the water department attesting to the execution of a lease containing the provisions required by Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178; and 
(3)  The affidavit contains notice of the expiration date of the lease; and 
(4)  The affidavit contains a provision whereby the landlord agrees to provide not less than twenty (20) days' notice of any cancellation, changes in or termination of the lease; and 
(5)  A security deposit is an amount sufficient to protect the system from loss in the event that tenant(s) in the lease agreement fail to make timely usage payments. The amount of the required security deposit shall be determined by the director of public works, or his designee, in his or her sole discretion to assure that the system is adequately protected from loss. 
(6)  All landlords seeking relief from the imposition of the lien created by Section 21, No. 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and Section 2, No. 178, of Public Acts of 1939 must comply with each of the requirements set forth in this Section regardless of the term of the lease; and 
(7)  The water department shall keep a log of each affidavit and lease received including the date received, the expiration date of the lease, the amount of deposit received and name of landlord and tenant. A service fee may be charged, as approved by the city council by resolution from time to time, for maintaining and processing the landlord-tenant agreements. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of water rates when due. If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date thereof, then water services to such premises shall be discontinued. Water services so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing shall be paid, including any applicable penalty, plus a turn-on charge which shall be set from time to time by council resolution. At its option, and in addition to the remedies set forth in this Section 2.155, the city may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any water charge and applicable penalty which are thirty (30) days or more delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1660 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 2.156. - Prohibition on use and interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, tamper with, damage or interfere with any part of the city water system. 
CHAPTER 21. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL UTILITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- City sewer service, § 2.101 et seq.; improvements required in subdivisions, § 5.347. 

Sec. 2.168. - Public utility operation. 
    The sewage disposal system of the city shall be on a public utility basis in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
Sec. 2.169. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the words "the system" are referred to in this chapter, they shall be understood to mean the complete sanitary sewage disposal system of the city, including all sewers, pumps, lift stations, treatment facilities and all other facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, including all appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto which may hereafter be acquired. 
    Whenever the words "revenues" and "net revenues" are used in this chapter, they shall be understood to have the meanings as defined in Section 3, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 2.170. - Control. 
    The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the system shall be under the supervision and control of the city council. The city administrator shall have active administrative charge of the operation and management of the system and he may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as he deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system, subject to the approval of the city council. The council may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to ensure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
Sec. 2.171. - User charge for sewer service. 
    Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater disposal utility are hereby established and made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have direct or indirect connections to the system or which may otherwise discharge wastewater either directly or indirectly into the system. 
(2)  The rates and charges hereby established shall be based upon a methodology which complies with applicable federal and state statutes and regulations. The amount of the rates and charges shall be sufficient to provide for debt service and for the expenses of operation, maintenance and replacement of the system as necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. The amount of the rates and charges shall be reviewed annually and revised when necessary to ensure system expenses are met and that all users pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement expenses of the Southfield wastewater disposal utility. 
(3)  Premises served by both the wastewater disposal utility and a metered water system shall pay a use charge for wastewater disposal based on the amount of potable water furnished to the premises as shown by the water meter installed therein. 
(4)  Premises served by both the wastewater disposal utility and a private unmetered potable water supply system shall pay a use charge for wastewater disposal based on an average consumption usage as established from time to time by resolution of the city council, at the rates prescribed by subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)  The amount of such rates and charges shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(6)  The rates and charges for operation, maintenance and replacement hereby established shall be uniform within the area serviced by the city. No free service shall be allowed for any user of the wastewater system. 
(7)  All customers of the wastewater disposal utility shall receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the wastewater disposal bill into its components for: 
a.  Operation, maintenance and replacement; and 
b.  Debt service. 
(8)  The rates and charges so determined by resolution of the city council shall include: 
a.  A monthly industrial waste control meter charge for all nonresidential customers, based upon the water meter size. This charge shall be in addition to the normal water meter charges, but shall not apply to any meter which services solely residential users, churches, schools, and government buildings, or which are used for fire protection. 
b.  A high strength surcharge for all industrial and nonresidential commercial customers, identified by the City of Detroit Water and Sewer Department, the Oakland County Drain Commissioner, or the Oakland County Department of Public Works as contributors of high concentrations of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 1, 11-15-76; Ord. No. 948, § 1, 9-6-77; Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-19-78; Ord. No. 995, § 1, 6-11-79; Ord. No. 1025, § 1, 12-10-79; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 1070, § 1, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 1-10-83; Ord. No. 1124, § 1, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1181, § 1, 7-22-85; Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 1578 , § 1, 12-26-10) 
Sec. 2.172. - Billing. 
    All recurring charges of the system shall be rendered during each operating year at the same time as the water bill is rendered and shall represent charges for the period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. Such bills shall become due and payable within twenty (20) days from the date thereof, and for all bills not paid when due, a penalty of two (2) percent of the amount billed for customers of a one (1) family dwelling unit (as defined in subsection 5.4(16) of chapter 45) which is served by an independent water meter, and five (5) percent of the amount billed for all other customers shall be added thereto. Provided, however, for premises served by the wastewater disposal utility only, pursuant to subsection 2.171(4), the penalty of two (2) percent of the amount billed shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 1, 11-15-76; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 2.173. - Sanitary interceptor fee. 
    There shall be paid on behalf of each premises capable of connection to the system, for the privilege of making such connection, a sanitary interceptor fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) times the number of sanitary units assigned to such premises, in accordance with the unit assignment schedules and procedures as set forth hereafter. 
1.  Sanitary unit assignments: 
a.  One (1) sanitary unit shall be considered equivalent to one (1) single-family residential premises. 
b.  Determination of total sanitary units for non-single-family residential premises connected to the sanitary sewer system shall be based on a schedule of unit assignment factors. The city adopts by reference the "Schedule of Unit Assignment Factors" published by the Oakland County Drain Commissioner (aka water resource commissioner) on July 1, 1998, or as amended for this purpose. 
c.  A minimum of one (1) sanitary unit shall be assigned to any premises connecting to the sewer system. Any fractional sanitary unit shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
d.  Multi-tenant and single-tenant premises with mixed uses will or can have sanitary units determined based on the sum of multiple formulas in calculating any new interceptor fee. 
e.  Sanitary unit assignments and interceptor fees shall be determined through the completion of a sanitary interceptor fee worksheet. 
2.  Reassignment of sanitary units resulting from a change of use. 
a.  Any change in a premises' use may be cause for a review for purposes of a possible reevaluation and reassignment of total sanitary units for said premises. A change in a premises' use or intensity of use will not result in a reduction of units already assessed against such premises. 
b.  Any person or firm requesting a review and possible reassignment of total sanitary units assessed as a result of a change in use of the premises pursuant to subsection 2.173(2)a. shall pay in advance a fee based upon the hourly building department service fee, as established by resolution of the city council from time to time, multiplied by the estimated number of hours anticipated necessary to verify the prior use and the number of sanitary units sought to be credited. If the review by the building department is completed in less than the anticipated number of hours, a proportionate amount of the fee shall be credited back to the applicant; however, if the number of hours to complete the review exceeds the anticipated number of hours, the applicant shall pay the city for such additional time prior to any permits being issued. 
c.  When a sanitary unit adjustment is being considered because of a change in use, any units previously paid for said premises shall be credited and deducted from the new unit total for the new use. City records or prior known use shall constitute prima facie evidence for credit calculations. 
d.  A new sanitary unit worksheet will be completed for any premises required to obtain a building permit, exclusive of single-family residential units, to determine the new number of units to be charged based on the new use or uses. 
e.  Any change in use of a parcel that will increase the assigned sanitary units will require approval by the city engineer prior to any permits being issued or the interceptor fee's final determination. 
f.  The city may approve the splitting of sanitary units on a certain parcel; provided, however, such units shall remain assigned to that particular parcel and shall not be transferable to any other parcel. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1639 , § 1, 5-10-15) 
Sec. 2.174. - Lateral use charge. 
    Lateral sanitary sewers that need to be connected to the public sanitary sewer line, shall be constructed solely at the cost/expense of the premises making such connection or solely as part of an approved special assessment district. Any proposed lateral sewer shall be approved by the city engineer and be constructed in conformance with the city engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 1639 , § 2, 5-10-15) 
Sec. 2.175. - Connection costs. 
    There shall be paid on behalf of each premises making a connection to the system such actual costs as may be incurred by the city in making such connection and all permit fees, inspection fees and similar charges which may be established by the city council. 
Sec. 2.176. - Special rates. 
    For miscellaneous services or facilities furnished by the system for which a special rate shall be established, such rates shall be fixed by the city council. 
Sec. 2.177. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The charges for sewer services which are under the provisions of Section 21, No. 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and Section 2, No. 178, of Public Acts of 1939, as amended, made a lien on all premises served thereby are hereby recognized to constitute such a lien; and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six (6) months, the city official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on May 1 st of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the city, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge, plus an administrative charge which will be set from time to time by council resolution, shall be by him entered upon the next tax rolls as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien therein enforced in the same manner as the general city taxes against such premises are collected; provided, however, where notice is given, pursuant to Section 21 of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, and Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178, as amended, that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by Section 21 and Section 5, a lien shall not be placed against the premises provided the following requirements have been fully satisfied: 
(1)  A lease of the premises shall have been legally executed between the landlord and the tenant and filed with the water department; the lease must contain a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for payment of sewage bills accruing subsequent to compliance with the requirements contained in Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178; and 
(2)  An affidavit in the form provided by the city, is filed with the water department attesting to the execution of a lease containing the provisions required by Section 5 of PA 1939, No. 178; and 
(3)  The affidavit contains notice of the expiration date of the lease; and 
(4)  The affidavit contains a provision whereby the landlord agrees to provide not less than twenty (20) days' notice of any cancellation, changes in or termination of the lease; and 
(5)  A security deposit in an amount sufficient to protect the system from loss in the event that tenant(s) in the lease agreement fail to make timely usage payments. The amount of the required security deposit shall be determined by the director of public works, or his designee, in his or her sole discretion to assure that the system is adequately protected from loss. 
(6)  All landlords seeking relief from the imposition of the lien created by Section 21, No. 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and Section 2, No. 178, of Public Acts of 1939 must comply with each of the requirements set forth in this Section regardless of the term of the lease; and 
(7)  The water department shall keep a log of each affidavit and lease received including the date received, the expiration date of the lease, the amount of deposit received and name of landlord and tenant. A service fee may be charged, as approved by the city council by resolution from time to time, for maintaining and processing the landlord-tenant agreements. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue sewer service to any premises for the nonpayment of charges for sewer services when due. If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date thereof, then sewer services to such premises shall be discontinued. Sewer services so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing shall be paid, including any applicable penalties, plus a turn-on charge which shall be set from time to time by council resolution. At its option, and in addition to the remedies set forth in this Section 2.177, the city may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any sewer charge and applicable penalties which are thirty (30) days or more delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 1516, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1661 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 2.178. - Free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
Sec. 2.179. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1355, adopted October 26, 1992, deleted § 2.179 in its entirety. Former § 2.179 pertained to sufficiency of rates and derived from the 1976 codification. 
Sec. 2.180. - Fiscal year. 
    The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 next following. 
Sec. 2.181. - Disposition of revenues. 
    The revenues of the system shall be set aside as collected and deposited in a separate depository account in such bank or banks as may be authorized from time to time by the city council for the deposit of city funds in an account to be designated the sewage disposal system receiving fund (hereinafter, for brevity, referred to as the receiving fund), and such revenues so deposited shall be transferred from the receiving fund periodically in the manner and at the times specified as follows: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance fund. Out of the revenues in the receiving fund there shall be first set aside semiannually into a depository account designated the operation and maintenance fund a sum sufficient to provide for the payment for the next quarter's current expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
(2)  Debt retirement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account to be designated the debt retirement fund which shall be used solely for the payment of sewage disposal system obligations of the city. There shall be deposited in such fund quarterly such sums as the city council shall determine. 
(3)  Replacement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account designated the replacement fund which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system if needed. There shall be set aside into such fund, after provision has been made for the operation and maintenance fund and the debt retirement fund, such sums as the city council shall deem necessary for this purpose. 
(4)  Improvement fund. There shall next be established and maintained an improvement fund for the purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into such fund, after providing for the foregoing funds, such sum as the city council shall determine. 
(5)  Surplus moneys. Moneys remaining in the receiving fund at the end of any operating year, after full satisfaction of the requirements of the foregoing funds, may, at the option of the city council, be transferred to the improvement fund or used for any other lawful purpose specified by the city council. 
(6)  Bank accounts. All moneys belonging to any of the foregoing funds or accounts may be kept in one (1) bank account, in which event the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the city within this single bank account, in the manner above set forth. 
Sec. 2.182. - Current deficit. 
    If the moneys in the receiving fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, any moneys and/or securities in other funds of the system shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance fund to the extent of any deficit therein. 
Sec. 2.183. - Investment of funds. 
    Moneys in any fund or account established by the provisions of this chapter may be invested in obligations of the United States of America in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. If such investments are made, the securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the fund from which such investments were made. 
Sec. 2.184. - Direct benefit charge. 
(1)  All premises making use of any public sewer line constructed and available for connection subsequent to June 1, 1998, from the earnings of the system, not financed by means of a special assessment levied against the property, shall pay a direct benefit charge in addition to the sanitary interceptor fee required under section 2.173 of this chapter, at the time of making an application for a tap permit. The direct benefit charge shall be in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The provisions of this section shall apply to all zoning classifications. The direct benefit charge shall be in addition to the sanitary interceptor fee, as provided in section 2.173 of chapter 21, and all other application charges and fees in accordance with the City Code, including, without limitation, the sewer tap permit fee pursuant section 2.109 of chapter 19. 
(2)  The direct benefit charge, sanitary interceptor fee, and other charges and fees assessed for connection to the public sanitary sewer system in accordance with the City Code, shall be paid by the owner(s) of the premises upon application for a sewer tap permit; provided, however, the owner(s) may elect at the time of such application to spread the direct benefit charge over a period of eighteen (18) years as set forth in subsection 2.184(3), upon executing and delivering to the city a promissory note satisfactory to and in favor of the city for the total amount of all such charges plus applicable interest. 
(3)  Interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate of interest then in effect at the time the promissory note has been executed and delivered to the city, as determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. For the first three (3) years of the eighteen (18) year loan period, annual payments to the city shall be interest only; no payment on the principal amount shall be due. On July 1 following execution and delivery of the promissory note, and annually thereafter, the city treasurer shall bill the owner(s) in equal installments for: 
(a)  Interest only on the unpaid direct benefit charge unpaid balance for the first three (3) years; and 
(b)  The principal amount of the unpaid direct benefit charge plus applicable interest for the remaining fifteen (15) years of the loan period. 
    If any such annual billing is not paid by August 31 of any year, all sums due, inclusive of interest, shall be collected by the city as a single lot special assessment against the property pursuant to section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1182, 7-22-85; Ord. No. 1433, § 2, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 1596 , § 1, 8-19-12; Ord. No. 1684 , § 1, 11-2-17) 
CHAPTER 21A. - WATER AND SEWER REVENUE BOND ORDINANCE 

Sec. 2.184A. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this chapter, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan 1933, as amended, known and cited as the Revenue Bond Act. 
(b)  Adjusted net revenues means for any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the system determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest expense on bonds and payments to the issuer in lieu of taxes, to which may be made the following adjustments: 
(1)  Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases adopted prior to the issuance of additional bonds or to be placed into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional bonds becomes payable from revenues as applied to quantities of service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that the increased rates were not in effect. 
(2)  Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the system. 
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above shall be reported upon by professional engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the regular employment of the issuer. 
(c)  Authority means the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority. 
(d)  Authorized officers means the city administrator, deputy city administrator, director of financial services, city clerk and city treasurer of the issuer. 
(e)  Bonds or senior lien bonds means any bonds or series of bonds hereafter issued payable from net revenues deposited in the redemption fund, which are secured by a statutory first lien on the net revenues established by this chapter and which are senior and superior in all respects with respect to the net revenues to any junior lien bonds secured by the statutory second lien established by this chapter, together with any additional bonds of equal standing thereafter issued. 
(f)  Issuer means the City of Southfield, County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
(g)  Junior lien bonds means any bonds or series of bonds (including the series 1998 bonds) payable from net revenues deposited in the junior lien redemption fund, after satisfaction of any requirements for funding the redemption fund, and which are secured by a statutory second lien on the net revenues and are or shall be junior and subordinate in all respects with respect to the net revenues to any bonds hereafter issued secured by the statutory first lien established by this chapter. 
(h)  MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or any department of the state succeeding to its duties and responsibilities. 
(h.1)  Outstanding bonds means the issuer's outstanding Series 1998A bonds, Series 1998B bonds, and Series 1999 bonds. 
(h.2)  Prior ordinance or Ordinance 1438 means Ordinance No. 1438, adopted by the city council on August 24, 1998, as supplemented by Ordinance No. 1449, adopted by the city council on August 23, 1999, authorizing the issuance of the outstanding bonds, combining the issuer's water supply system and sewage disposal system as a single unitary system and establishing system funds and accounts, establishing the issuance of bonds and junior lien bonds, and taking certain other actions in respect thereof. 
(i)  Project means the acquisition and construction of additions, extensions, replacements and improvements to the system together with appurtenances and attachments thereto, as described generally in the final project plan dated June 30, 1997, prepared by Hubbell, Roth & Clark, Inc., consulting engineers to the issuer, as the same is updated from time to time by the preparation of definitive plans therefor. 
(j)  Reserve requirement means the amount required to be on deposit in the bond reserve account or the junior lien bond reserve account with respect to a series of bonds or junior lien bonds, which may not exceed the lesser of (1) the maximum annual debt service due on the bonds or the junior lien bonds in any year, (2) one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the average annual debt service on the bonds or the junior lien bonds, or (3) ten (10) percent of the principal amount of the bonds or junior lien bonds, as shall be determined in the ordinance authorizing the series of bonds or junior lien bonds. 
(k)  Revenues and net revenues mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "revenues," the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this chapter. 
(l)  Series 1998 Bonds means the Series 1998A Bonds and the Series 1998B Bonds of the issuer in the aggregate principal amount of not to exceed seventeen million dollars ($17,000,000.00) authorized by this chapter. 
(m)  Series 1998A Bonds means the issuer's outstanding water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien), Series 1998A (limited tax general obligation), dated November 12, 1998, issued in the original stated principal amount of one million, nine hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($1,975,000.00). 
(n)  Series 1998B Bonds means the issuer's outstanding water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien), Series 1998B (limited tax general obligation), dated December 17, 1998, issued in the original stated principal amount of ten million, nine hundred thirty-five thousand dollars ($10,935,000.00). 
(n.1)  Series 1999 Bonds means the issuer's outstanding water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien), Series 1999 (limited tax general obligation), dated September 30, 1999, issued in the original stated principal amount of thirteen million, three hundred fifty-five thousand dollars ($13,355,000.00). 
(n.2)  Series 2000 Bonds means the issuer's water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bonds authorized by subsections 2.186(a) and (b) of this chapter. 
(o)  Sufficient government obligations means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
(p)  System means the unitary water supply and sewage disposal system of the issuer established by subsection 2.200(f) hereof, including such facilities thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 8-28-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1438, enacted August 24, 1998, enacted provisions to be designated as § 2.184. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 2.184, said provisions have been redesignated as § 2.184A. 
Sec. 2.185. - Necessity; costs; payment of cost. 
(a)  Necessity; approval of plans and specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to acquire and construct the next phase of the project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by Hubbell, Roth & Clark, Inc., of Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The project qualifies for the state revolving fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the authority, whereby bonds of the issuer are sold to the authority and bear interest at a fixed rate established from time to time by MDEQ, currently established at two and one-half (2.5) percent per annum. 
(b)  Costs; useful life. Total cost of the project is estimated to be fifty-two million dollars ($52,000,000.00) plus the payment of incidental expenses as specified in subsection 2.185(c) of the prior ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the project is estimated to be twenty (20) years. 
(c)  Payment of cost; bonds authorized. To pay part of the cost of acquiring the project, including funding all or a part of a bond reserve for the Series 2000 Bonds (if necessary), legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2000 Bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) and issue one (1) or more series of the Series 2000 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining cost of the project shall be defrayed from issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
Except as amended by or expressly provided to the contrary in this Ordinance [Ord. No. 1456], all the provisions of the prior ordinance shall apply to the Series 2000 Bonds issued pursuant to this Ordinance [Ord. No. 1456], the same as though each of said provisions were repeated in this chapter in detail; the purpose of this chapter being to authorize the issuance of additional revenue bonds of equal standing with the outstanding bonds to finance the cost of acquiring additions, extensions and improvements to the system, additional bonds for such purpose being authorized by the provisions of section 2.199 of the prior ordinance (as amended by this Ordinance [Ord. No. 1456]), upon the conditions therein stated, which conditions have been fully met. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, §§ 2-4, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, §§ 2-4, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.186. - Issuance; execution. 
(a)  Issuance of junior lien Series 2000 Bonds; details. The Series 2000 Bonds of the issuer, to be designated water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bonds (junior lien), Series 2000 (limited tax general obligation), are authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) or such lesser amount as finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying part of the cost of the project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2000 Bonds. The Series 2000 Bonds issued and sold under this section shall be junior lien bonds. If determined necessary by the authority or the MDEQ, the Series 2000 Bonds may be issued and delivered in more than one (1) series, and in such event the separate series shall bear a distinguishing designation approved by an authorized officer. The Series 2000 Bonds shall be payable out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully in section 2.188 hereof, provided that if a series of Series 2000 Bonds is sold as senior lien bonds as set forth in subsection (b) hereof, the Series 2000 Bonds issued and sold as junior lien bonds shall be subordinate to the prior lien with respect to the net revenues created for the senior lien bonds and of any additional bonds of equal standing with the senior lien bonds hereafter issued. The Series 2000 Bonds issued and sold as junior lien bonds shall be in the form of a single, fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery of the Series 2000 Bond, payable in not more than twenty-five (25) principal installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2000 Bonds issued under this section and approved by the authority and an authorized officer. Final determination of the principal amount and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2000 Bonds issued under this section shall be evidenced by execution of a purchase contract (the "purchase contract") between the issuer and the authority providing for sale of the Series 2000 Bonds, and the authorized officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the purchase contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above. 
    The Series 2000 Bonds issued under this section or principal installments thereof will be subject to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times as provided in the form of Series 2000 Bond contained in this chapter or as may be approved by the authorized officers at the time of sale of the Series 2000 Bond or by the authority at the time of prepayment. 
    The Series 2000 Bond issued under this section shall bear interest at a rate of two and one-half (2.5) percent per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the purchase contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and the authorized officers shall deliver the Series 2000 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the authority. 
    The principal amount of the Series 2000 Bond issued under this section is expected to be drawn down by the issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn by the issuer. 
    The Series 2000 Bond issued under this section shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one (1) fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2000 Bonds shall be payable as provided in the Series 2000 Bond form in this chapter. 
    The city clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the city clerk. 
    Upon payment by the issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2000 Bond issued under this section, the authority shall deliver the Series 2000 Bond to the issuer for cancellation. 
(b)  Option to issue senior lien Series 2000 Bonds; details. Series 2000 Bonds of the issuer, to be designated water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bonds, Series 2000B, are authorized to be issued as senior lien bonds in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed the total amount authorized under subsection (a) of this section less the principal amount of Series 2000 Bonds issued under subsection (a) of this section, as finally determined by the director of financial services, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of the project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds. Said senior lien Series 2000 Bonds shall be senior and superior in all respects as to the net revenues with respect to all junior lien bonds (including the outstanding bonds and the Series 2000 Bonds issued under subsection (a) of this section) issued and outstanding from time to time. The senior lien Series 2000 Bonds shall be payable out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully in section 2.188 hereof, and shall consist of fully-registered bonds of the denomination of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) each, or integral multiples thereof not exceeding in any one (1) year the amount maturing in that year, dated as of such date as determined by an authorized officer, numbered in order of registration and shall mature on such dates as shall be determined by an authorized officer, in the years and amounts as determined by an authorized officer, provided that the final maturity shall not be greater than twenty-five (25) years from the date of issuance. 
    The senior lien Series 2000 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates to be determined on public sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding eight (8) percent per annum or the maximum rate permitted by law, payable semiannually on such dates as shall be determined by an authorized officer, commencing as determined by order of an authorized officer by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent selected by the issuer to the person or entity which is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner at the registered address as shown on the registration books maintained by the transfer agent. The date of determination of registered owner for purposes of payment of interest as provided in this paragraph may be changed by the issuer to conform to market practice in the future. The Series 2000 Bonds shall be sold at not less than ninety-eight (98) percent of their par value. The principal of the Series 2000 Bonds shall be payable at a bank or trust company designated by the city treasurer as registrar and transfer agent for this issue. 
    The senior lien Series 2000 Bonds maturing in or after 2009 may be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the times and prices as approved by order of an authorized officer and within the limits established by law. 
    If so determined by an authorized officer upon the advice of the issuer's financial advisors, the initial purchaser of the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds may designate any one (1) or more maturities from 2009 through the final maturity as term bonds and the consecutive maturities on or after the year 2009 which shall be aggregated in the term bonds. The amounts of maturities which are aggregated in a designated term bond shall be subject to mandatory redemption in the years and in the amounts set approved by an authorized officer at a redemption price of par, plus accrued interest to the date of mandatory redemption. Term bonds or portions thereof mandatorily redeemed shall be selected by lot. 
    In case less than the full amount of an outstanding senior lien Series 2000 Bond is called for redemption, the transfer agent, upon presentation of the senior lien Series 2000 Bond called in part for redemption, shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall be given in the manner specified in the form of the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds. 
    The senior lien Series 2000 Bonds may be issued in book-entry only form as one (1) fully-registered bond per maturity and, if so issued, shall be registered in the name of Cede & Co., as bondholder and nominee of the Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), New York, New York. If the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds are issued in book-entry only form, DTC will act as securities depository for the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds, and purchasers will not receive certificates representing their interest in senior lien Series 2000 Bonds purchased. If the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds are issued in book-entry only form, provisions in this chapter to the contrary shall be of no force nor effect unless and until the suspension of the book-entry only system. The authorized officers are authorized to determine whether the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds shall be issued in book-entry only form, to make such changes in the form of the Series 2000 Bonds and the notice of sale as shall be necessary or convenient to enable the Series 2000 Bonds to be issued in book-entry only form, and to execute such documents as may be required to enable the senior lien Series 2000 Bonds to be so issued. 
(c)  Execution of Series 2000 Bonds. The Series 2000 Bonds shall be signed by the manual or facsimile signature of the mayor and countersigned by the manual or facsimile signature of the city clerk and shall have the corporate seal of the issuer or a facsimile thereof impressed or imprinted thereon. Except for Series 2000 Bonds bearing manual signatures of the mayor and the city clerk sold to the authority, the Series 2000 Bonds shall be delivered to the transfer agent for authentication and thereafter be delivered by the transfer agent to the purchaser thereof in accordance with instructions from the director of financial services or the director's designee upon payment of the purchase price for the bonds in accordance with the bid therefore when accepted. Series 2000 Bonds bearing manual signatures of the mayor and city clerk sold to the authority shall require no further authentication. Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, §§ 5-7, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, §§ 5-7, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.187. - Registration and transfer. 
    Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond, or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The issuer shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business fifteen (15) days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2000 Bonds contained in section 2.197 of this chapter and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least twenty (20) days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
    The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer; and upon presentation for such purposes, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, bonds as provided above. 
    If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond or junior lien bond issued under this chapter shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 8, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 8, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.188. - Payment of bonds; security; priority of lien. 
    Principal of and interest on the Series 2000 Bonds and the outstanding bonds shall be payable from the net revenues. There is hereby recognized the statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues created by the prior ordinance, which shall be a first lien (except with respect to the junior lien bonds, including the junior lien Series 2000 bonds authorized by this chapter, which shall have a statutory second lien on the net revenues) to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds or junior lien bonds payable from the net revenues, or until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds or junior lien bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. 
    Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds or junior lien bonds the holders of that series shall have no further rights under the prior ordinance or this chapter, except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds or junior lien bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under the prior ordinance or this chapter. 
    In addition, with respect to the Series 2000 Bonds being sold as junior lien bonds to the authority, the issuer hereby pledges its limited tax full faith and credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on the junior lien Series 2000 Bonds. Should the net revenues of the system at any time be insufficient to pay the principal of and interest on the junior lien Series 2000 Bonds, as the same become due, then the issuer shall advance from any funds available therefor, or, if necessary, levy taxes upon all taxable property in the issuer, subject to constitutional, statutory and charter limitations, such sums as may be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the net revenues of the system subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or encumbered by this chapter or the prior ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 9, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 9, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.189. - Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
    The holder or holders of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than twenty (20) percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
    If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
    The holder or holders of the bonds and the junior lien bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the bonds and the security therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 15, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 15, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.190. - Rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance [Ord. No. 1456]. No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 11, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 11, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.191. - Fixing and revising rates; rate covenant. 
    The rates now in effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and this chapter. In addition, it is agreed that the rates shall be set from time to time so that there shall be produced each fiscal year net revenues in an amount not less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the principal of and interest on all bonds coming due in each fiscal year and not less than one hundred (100) percent of the principal of and interest on all junior lien bonds coming due in each fiscal year. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.192. - Funds and accounts; flow of funds. 
    Commencing on October 1, 1998, all funds belonging to the system shall be transferred as herein indicated and all revenues of the system shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated water supply and sewage disposal system receiving fund (the "receiving fund"). In addition, on October 1, 1998, all revenues in any accounts of the system shall be transferred to the receiving fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The revenues credited to the receiving fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred or debited from the receiving fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified: 
A.  Operation and maintenance fund: Out of the revenues credited to the receiving fund there shall be first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated operation and maintenance fund (the "operation and maintenance fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration, operation and maintenance of the system for the next ensuing operating year, shall be approved by the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating year. No payments shall be made to the issuer from moneys credited to the operation and maintenance fund except for services directly rendered to the system by the issuer or its personnel. 
B.  Bond and interest redemption fund: There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary fund designated bond and interest redemption fund (the "redemption fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the bonds. The moneys in the redemption fund (including the bond reserve account) shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the bonds, or any series thereof, are payable. 
Out of the revenues remaining in the receiving fund, after provision for the operation and maintenance fund, there shall be set aside in the redemption fund each month, commencing with the date of issue of a series of bonds, a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the then current principal of and interest on the bonds, less any amount in the redemption fund representing accrued interest on the bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the redemption fund, (including investment income on amounts held as part of the bond reserve account, but only to the extent that the bond reserve account is fully funded). Commencing with the date of issue of a series of bonds, the amount set aside each month for interest on the bonds shall be the fractional amount of the total amount of interest on the bonds next coming due derived from the number of months from the date of issue of the bonds to the first interest payment date. Commencing with the first interest payment date, the amount set aside each month for interest on the bonds shall be one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the total amount of interest on the bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal, commencing with the date of issue of a series of bonds, shall be the fractional amount of the total amount of principal on the bonds next coming due by maturity or sinking fund redemption derived from the number of months from the date of issue of the bonds to the first principal payment date. The amount set aside each month for principal payment commencing with the first principal payment date shall be one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity or sinking fund redemption. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit in the redemption fund, including investment income thereon and on the bond reserve account (but only to the extent that the bond reserve account is fully funded), is necessary to pay principal and interest due on the bonds on the next succeeding principal payment date. 
There is established a separate account in the redemption fund to be known as the bond reserve account (the "bond reserve account"). Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of a series of bonds may provide for a reserve requirement respecting such series. There shall be deposited in the bond reserve account the reserve requirement. Interest on the bond reserve account must be transferred to the redemption fund once the reserve requirement has been reached. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys credited to the bond reserve account shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the bond reserve account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be replaced from the net revenues first received thereafter which are not required for current principal and interest requirements until the amount on deposit equals the reserve requirement. Each ordinance authorizing bonds shall provide for additional deposits to the bond reserve account to be made from the proceeds of the bonds or issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use in an amount that will result in the bond reserve account being equal to the reserve requirement after issuance of the bonds, or such lesser amount, provided that the bond reserve account must be funded to the reserve requirement in not more than five (5) years from the date of issuance of the bonds. If on any principal payment date the amount in the bond reserve account exceeds the reserve amount, the excess shall be transferred to the redemption fund for payment of principal and interest on the bonds due on that date. 
C.  Junior lien bond and interest redemption fund: There is hereby established and there shall be maintained a separate depositary account designated junior lien bond and interest redemption fund (the "junior lien redemption fund"). Except as otherwise provided herein, the moneys on deposit therein from time to time shall be used for the purpose of paying the principal or redemption price of and interest on any junior lien bonds. There is hereby established a separate account in the junior lien redemption fund designated junior lien bond reserve account (the "junior lien bond reserve account"). 
Out of the revenues remaining in the revenue fund, after transfer, if required, for deposit into the operation and maintenance fund and the redemption fund, there shall be set aside monthly in the junior lien redemption fund a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the next payment when due of the then current principal of and interest on the junior lien bonds, less any amount in the junior lien redemption fund representing accrued interest on the junior lien bonds, and less the sum of any funds actually on deposit in the junior lien redemption fund. Commencing with the date of issue of a series of junior lien bonds, the amount set aside each month for interest on the junior lien bonds shall be the fractional amount of the total amount of interest on the junior lien bonds next coming due derived from the number of months from the date of issue of the junior lien bonds to the first interest payment date. Commencing with the first interest payment date, the amount set aside and transferred to the junior lien redemption fund each month for interest on the junior lien bonds shall be one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the total amount of interest on the junior lien bonds next coming due or such greater or lesser amount as is necessary to assure that the amount set aside in the junior lien redemption fund as of the first of such month is not less than the product of (a) one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the amount of interest next due on the junior lien bonds times (b) the number of months elapsed since and including the last interest payment date. For the month immediately prior to each interest payment date the amount set aside and transferred to the junior lien redemption fund to pay interest shall be reduced by amounts, including investment earnings, available in the junior lien redemption fund which are available for such purpose. The amount set aside each month for principal, commencing with the date of issue of a series of junior lien bonds, shall be the fractional amount of the total amount of principal on the junior lien bonds next coming due by maturity or sinking fund redemption derived from the number of months from the date of issue of the junior lien bonds to the first principal payment date. The amount set aside and transferred to the junior lien redemption fund each month for principal commencing with the first principal payment date or mandatory sinking fund redemption date shall be one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the amount of principal next coming due on the junior lien bonds by maturity or as a mandatory redemption requirement or such greater or lesser amount as is necessary to assure that the amount set aside in the junior lien redemption fund as of the first of such month is not less than the product of one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the amount of principal next due on the junior lien bonds times (b) the number of months elapsed since and including the last principal payment date. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding month's requirement. 
For purposes of this chapter and the junior lien bonds, term bonds shall be deemed to come due at the time and in the amounts of the mandatory redemption requirements therefor and the principal amount due on term bonds on the dates of their stated maturities shall be reduced by the mandatory redemption requirements therefor coming due prior to the stated maturities for such term bonds. A mandatory redemption requirement for the junior lien bonds may be satisfied by the call of junior lien bonds of the same maturity in the principal amount of the mandatory redemption requirement at par and accrued interest or the purchase and surrender to the transfer agent of junior lien bonds of the same maturity in the principal amount of the mandatory redemption requirement from moneys in the junior lien redemption fund, or purchased with other funds legally available therefor. The issuer shall elect the manner in which it intends to satisfy a mandatory redemption requirement not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the due date of each mandatory redemption requirement and notify the transfer agent thereof in writing. The moneys in the junior lien redemption fund shall be used to satisfy the next mandatory redemption requirement for the junior lien bonds that are term bonds, either by (a) redeeming said junior lien bonds on the next following date for a mandatory redemption requirement or (b) arranging for the purchase by the transfer agent of junior lien bonds that are term bonds of the same maturity with respect to the mandatory redemption requirement, and surrendering the same to the transfer agent for cancellation on or prior to the required date of the mandatory redemption requirement or (c) both in part. In the event that after any mandatory redemption date, moneys remain in the junior lien redemption fund as a result of the purchase of junior lien bonds at less than par, the amount of such excess shall remain in the general account of the junior lien redemption fund. 
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of a series of junior lien bonds may provide for a reserve requirement respecting such series, and for deposits to the junior lien bond reserve account to be made from the proceeds of such series of junior lien bonds or from some other source in an amount that will result in the funds or other assets on deposit in the junior lien bond reserve account being equal to the reserve requirement for the junior lien bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys or other funding sources credited to the junior lien bond reserve account shall be used solely for the payment of the principal and redemption price (if any) of and interest on the junior lien bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default or on the final maturity date for the junior lien bonds of the series to which moneys in the junior lien bond reserve account relate. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the junior lien bond reserve account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be replaced from the revenues first received thereafter in the revenue fund which are not required for operation and maintenance expenses or to for deposit into the redemption fund. 
Moneys in the junior lien redemption fund shall be used first for the purpose of paying the principal or redemption price of and interest on the junior lien bonds. If so provided in an ordinance with respect to junior lien bonds secured by a credit facility, moneys in the junior lien redemption fund next shall be used for the purpose of reimbursing the credit entity which issued the credit facility securing the junior lien bonds for amounts drawn on the credit facility pursuant to the terms of the reimbursement agreement between the issuer and the credit entity, and an ordinance may authorize the creation of a separate account in the junior lien redemption fund for such purpose. 
D.  Replacement fund: There shall next be established and maintained a fund, separate depositary account, designated water and sewer replacement fund (the "replacement fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the system. On October 1, 1998, there shall be credited to the replacement fund the sum previously on account in the water and sewer replacement and improvement funds. Out of the revenues and moneys of the system remaining in the receiving fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the operation and maintenance fund, the redemption fund (including the bond reserve account), and the junior lien redemption fund (including the junior lien bond reserve account), there may be deposited in the replacement fund such additional funds as the issuer may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the replacement fund for the purpose for which the replacement fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the receiving fund which are not required by this chapter to be used for the operation and maintenance fund, the redemption fund (including the bond reserve account), or the junior lien redemption fund (including the junior lien bond reserve account). 
E.  Improvement fund: Out of the remaining revenues in the receiving fund, after meeting the requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, the redemption fund (including the bond reserve account), the junior lien redemption fund (including the junior lien bond reserve account) and the replacement fund, there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to be designated water and sewer improvement fund (the "improvement fund"), which improvement fund may have several subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the issuer may deem advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or extensions to the system, including the planning thereof. 
F.  Surplus moneys: Thereafter, any revenues in the receiving fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this section may, at the discretion of the issuer, be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Transferred to the replacement fund, the improvement fund or both. 
2.  Transferred to the redemption fund and used for the purchase of bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof or used to redeem bonds prior to maturity. 
3.  Any other use permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.193. - Priority of funds. 
    In the event the moneys in the receiving fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, the redemption fund, or the junior lien redemption fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the system, except the proceeds of sale of the bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the operation and maintenance fund, and second to the redemption fund. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.194. - Depositary and funds on hand. 
    Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this chapter, except moneys in the redemption fund (including the bond reserve account), the junior lien redemption fund (including the junior lien bond reserve account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the bonds or the junior lien bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated by the issuer, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the issuer in the manner and at the times provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.195. - Investments. 
    Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the bonds, may be invested by the issuer in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any investments now or hereafter permitted by Act 94 or other controlling law. Investment of moneys in the redemption fund or the junior lien redemption fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of the bonds or of the junior lien bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the bonds or the junior lien bonds. Investment of moneys in the bond reserve account and the junior lien bond reserve account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five (5) years from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the funds established hereunder shall be deposited in or credited to the fund having realized the profit or earned the interest (unless otherwise expressly provided in this ordinance or as determined by the issuer), such deposit or credit to occur periodically but not less often than at the end of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.196. - Bond proceeds. 
    Upon delivery of the Series 2000 Bonds there shall be first immediately deposited from the proceeds of the Series 2000 Bonds in a separate account in the redemption fund and/or the junior lien redemption fund, respectively, an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on delivery of the Series 2000 Bonds. With respect to the Series 2000 Bonds, there shall next be deposited in the bond reserve account and/or junior lien bond reserve account an amount sufficient to satisfy the reserve amount, if required; provided, however, that alternatively the bond reserve account or the junior lien bond reserve account may be funded from monthly deposits from net revenues over not more than a five-year period from the delivery date of the Series 2000 Bonds, as determined by an authorized officer. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Series 2000 Bonds shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the city treasurer, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of section 15 of Act 94, in an account designated 2000 Sewer Projects Construction Fund (the "construction fund"). Moneys in the construction fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the project and any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof, and shall be fully expended on project costs within three (3) years after the date of delivery of the Series 2000 Bonds. Payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall determine that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has not been previously paid for. 
    Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Series 2000 Bonds remaining after completion of the project in the construction fund shall, in the discretion of the city council, be used either for further improvements, enlargements and extensions to the system, if, at the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law, or for the purpose of purchasing bonds on the open market at not more than fair market value thereof, but not more than the price at which bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the bonds upon maturity or calling bonds for redemption. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 13, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 13, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.197. - Bond form. 
    The Series 2000 Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND 
CITY OF SOUTHFIELD 
    WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REVENUE BOND (JUNIOR LIEN), SERIES 2000 (LIMITED TAX GENERAL OBLIGATION) 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: _______ Dollars ($_______,000) 
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: September _______, 2000 
    The CITY OF SOUTHFIELD, County of Oakland, State of Michigan (the "City"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, but only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached to the Purchase Contract, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $_______,000 is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. Interest is first payable on _______ 1, 2000, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of _______ and _______ of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    The Bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of Bank One; N.A.; or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory second lien thereon is hereby recognized and created, subject to the senior lien of any additional Bonds of the City hereafter issued, as set forth in the Ordinance (hereinafter defined). The City has reserved the right to issue such additional Bonds which shall be superior and senior in all respects as to the Net Revenues with respect to the Bonds of this issue. 
    Purchasers of the Series 2000 Bond, by their acceptance of the Series 2000 Bond or a beneficial ownership interest therein, shall be deemed to have consented to the subordination of their interest in and lien upon the Net Revenues upon the issuance of Bonds subsequent to the delivery of the Series 2000 Bond. 
    The bonds of this issue are of equal standing and priority of lien as to the net revenues with the city's water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien), Series 1998A (limited tax general obligation), dated November 12, 1998, the city's water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien) Series 1998B (limited tax general obligation), dated December 17, 1998, and the city's water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bond (junior lien), Series 1999 (limited tax general obligation), dated September 20, 1999 (collectively, the "outstanding bonds"). 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 1438 duly adopted by the City Council of the City, as amended and supplemented, and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the System. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinances. 
    This bond is primarily a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, primarily from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. As additional security, the City has pledged its limited tax full faith and credit for payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds of this issue, which includes the Issuer's obligation to levy taxes, if necessary, within applicable constitutional, statutory and charter tax limitations. 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue, the Outstanding Bonds; and any additional Bonds, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by said Ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Southfield, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, by its City Council, has caused this bond to be executed with the manual signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF SOUTHFIELD 
By _____ Mayor (Seal) Countersigned: _____City Clerk  
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, § 14, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, § 14, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 2.198. - General covenants. 
    The issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the bonds that so long as any of the bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest: 
(a)  The issuer will maintain the system in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the system required by the Constitution and laws of the state, the issuer's Charter and this chapter. 
(b)  The issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the issuer, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. The issuer shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the system for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which the issuer is complying with the requirements of the ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall be completed and so made available not later than four (4) months after the close of each operating year except as such period may be extended in conformance with the rules of the Michigan Department of Treasury. 
(c)  The issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the system and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of water supply and sewage disposal systems, including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing bonds. 
(d)  The issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the system, or any substantial part, until all of the bonds and junior lien bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The issuer will operate the system as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the system in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the system in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the bonds and the junior lien bonds. 
(e)  The issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a system that will compete with the system and the issuer will not operate a system that will compete with the system. 
(f)  The issuer will cause the project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.199. - Additional bonds. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the issuer shall not issue additional bonds of equal or prior standing with any initial series of bonds issued hereunder. 
    The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to issue additional bonds payable from the revenues of the system which shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the net revenues of the system with any bonds hereafter issued, but only for the following purposes and under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  To complete a project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the issuer, it shall be the duty of the issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(b)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system or for the purpose of refunding part of any bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the bond reserve account. Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph (b) unless the adjusted net revenues of the system for the then last two (2) preceding twelve-month operating years or the adjusted net revenues for the last preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least one hundred twenty (120) percent of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding bonds and on the additional bonds then being issued. If the additional bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional bonds. For purposes of this subparagraph (b) the issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than sixteen (16) months prior to the date of delivery of the additional bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than twenty-eight (28) months prior to the date of delivery of the additional bonds. Determination by the issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional bonds shall be conclusive. No additional bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues of the system shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph if the issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the operation and maintenance fund or the redemption fund. 
(c)  For refunding a part of the outstanding bonds and paying costs of issuing such additional bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the bond reserve account. No additional bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, at any time and without limitation, to issue an initial series of bonds and any additional junior lien bonds in such amount, and on such terms, as the issuer may from time to time determine, payable from the net revenues of the system, provided that the pledge of net revenues and the statutory second lien thereon granted to secure the junior lien bonds shall at all times be and remain subordinate and inferior to the pledge of net revenues and the statutory lien thereon granted to secure the bonds. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 2.200. - General provisions. 
(a)  Management. The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the city council. 
(b)  Application to MDEQ and authority. The authorized officers are hereby authorized to make application to the authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the series 2000 bonds authorized by subsection 2.186(a) with the authority. The authorized officers are further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2000 Bonds for the state revolving fund including, but not limited to, a purchase contract with the authority and a supplemental agreement among the issuer, the authority and the MDEQ in substantially the form on file with the director of financial services. In the event of a sale of the Series 2000 Bonds to the authority, an authorized officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 2000 Bond contained in section 2.197 hereof as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA 227 ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2000 Bonds are sold to the authority, the taxes collected by the state and returned to the issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2000 Bonds, and an authorized officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute and deliver an agreement with the authority for payment of such taxes to the authority or to a trustee as provided in section 23 of Act 227. 
(c)  Covenant regarding tax exempt status of the bonds. The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exemption of the interest on the bonds from general federal income taxation (as opposed to any alternative minimum or other indirect taxation) under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. 
(d)  Continuing disclosure. In the event that Series 2000 Bonds are publicly sold as contemplated by subsection 2.186(b) hereof, the issuer hereby agrees that it shall execute a continuing disclosure undertaking in form and substance satisfactory to bond counsel (the "undertaking") to provide or cause to be provided, in accordance with the requirements of Rule 15c2-12 promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, on or prior to the last day of the sixth month after the end of the fiscal year of the issuer, commencing with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2001, (i) certain annual financial information and operating data, including audited financial statements for the preceding fiscal year, (ii) timely notice of the occurrence of certain material events with respect to the bonds and (iii) timely notice of a failure by the issuer to provide the required annual financial information on or before the date specified in (i) above to enable prospective purchasers of the bonds to meet their obligations under the rule, and any two (2) of the authorized officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver the undertaking. 
(e)  Approval of bond details. The authorized officers are hereby authorized to adjust the final bond details set forth herein to the extent necessary or convenient to complete the transaction authorized herein, and in pursuance of the foregoing are authorized to exercise the authority and make the determinations authorized pursuant to section 7a(1)(c) of Act 94, including but not limited to determinations regarding interest rates, prices, discounts, maturities, principal amounts, denominations, dates of issuance, interest payment dates, redemption rights, the place of delivery and payment, and other matters, provided that the principal amount of bonds issued shall not exceed the principal amount authorized in this chapter, the interest rate per annum on the bonds shall not exceed eight (8) percent, and the bonds shall mature in not more than twenty-five (25) years. 
(f)  Establishment of unitary system. The council, having reviewed the operation and financial performance of the water supply system and of the sewage disposal system of the issuer, hereby determines that it would be prudent and financially advantageous to the issuer to combine the water supply system and the sewage disposal system into a unitary water supply and sewage disposal system, thereby enabling the bonds to be issued primarily in anticipation of the revenues of such a unitary system, and such unitary system is hereby created and established. The system shall include all facilities of the respective water supply system and sewage disposal system as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the project, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
(g)  Publication and recordation. This ordinance [Ord. No. 1456] shall be published in full in the Southfield Eccentric, a newspaper of general circulation in the issuer qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the ordinance book of the issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1449, §§ 10, 16-19, 22, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 1456, §§ 10, 16-19, 22, 8-28-00) 
CHAPTER 22. - UTILITY FRANCHISE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1013, enacted October 15, 1979, contained provisions granting a utility franchise and is set out herein as ch. 22. Section 2 of that ordinance provided that: 
"Nothing in this grant shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any street, highway, alley or public place or any portion thereof, neither shall anything herein be construed in any manner as a surrender by the City of Southfield of its legislative power with respect to the subject matter hereof, or with respect to any other matter whatsoever; nor as in any manner limiting the right of the said City of Southfield to lawfully regulate the use of any street, alley, highway or public place within its jurisdiction." 
Provisions formerly designated as ch. 22 by Ord. No. 997, enacted June 18, 1979, were amended and redesignated as ch. 23 by Ord. No. 1041, enacted August 18, 1980. 
Charter reference- Utilities, franchises, permits, § 10.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, § 4.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2.201. - Permission to operate. 
    Pursuant to the applicable provisions of state law and the Charter of the city, there is hereby granted to the Detroit Edison Company, a New York corporation, its successors and assigns, permission to construct, maintain and operate in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places within the corporate limits of the city all necessary poles, towers, wires, conduits and other necessary appurtenances requisite for the transmission and distribution of electric power for public and private use, subject to reasonable and necessary conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 2.202. - Conditions governing franchise. 
(1)  Before entering upon any street, alley, highway or other public place for the purpose of erecting and or constructing any poles, wires, conduits or other appurtenances necessary to the efficient operation of the franchise, the grantee shall notify, in writing, the director of the department of public services, or his authorized representative, and shall present such plans and specifications showing the nature and extent of the proposed improvement. 
(2)  The grantee shall obtain such permits and pay such fees as set forth in chapter 33 of this Code, when in the opinion of the city engineer the scope of the work to be performed necessitates such permits and fees. 
(3)  No street, highway, alley or other public place shall be allowed to remain open or encumbered by construction work of the grantee for a period longer than is necessary to execute such work; grantee shall provide suitable barricades and signs in such numbers and at such locations as are necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public. 
(4)  In those operations affecting public trees or shrubs, trimming shall be limited to the extent necessary to make lines safe and accessible; no public tree or shrub shall be removed without the written approval of the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
(5)  Before starting construction in any public space in which underground utilities may be located, the grantee shall ascertain the nature and location of such utilities, if any exist, to prevent disruption or inconvenience to users thereof. 
(6)  The grantee shall indemnify and save the city harmless from any loss, including all defense costs, from all actions, proceedings, claims, liabilities and damages arising from or in connection with construction undertaken by grantee in any public place. 
(7)  The grantee shall make due provision upon five (5) days' notice, in writing, by raising its wires or otherwise, for the passage of any structure or buildings on or over any street, highway or public place occupied by wires, poles or other apparatus of the grantee. 
(8)  The grantee shall reimburse the city for the cost of inspections as are required by this Code or other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 2.203. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the granting of this franchise, grantee agrees that its rates and charges for electric service in the city shall not exceed its rates and charges for like service elsewhere in its service area, as evidenced by its uniform rate schedule at the time on file with and approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. It is understood that the grantee is subject to regulation by the Michigan Public Service Commission and that any order, rule or regulation by that commission, or its successor, will prevail over any regulation contained in this chapter or provided for in case of conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 2.204. - Effective date. 
    This grant shall take effect if the grantee shall, within fifteen (15) days from October 15, 1979, file with the city clerk its written acceptance of the terms of the same, and upon the confirmation of this grant, by the affirmative vote of a three-fifths majority of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular election to be held on Tuesday, November 6, 1979, as provided for by the statutes and the state constitution. If not confirmed by the electors voting at such election, this franchise grant shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-15-79) 
Sec. 2.205. - Franchise term. 
    This franchise ordinance shall be and remain in force for thirty (30) years from and after the date of its confirmation by the electors of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-15-79) 
CHAPTER 23. - STREET LIGHTING SERVICE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1167, § 1, enacted March 11, 1985, deleted ch. 23 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 23 in lieu thereof. Formerly, ch. 23, §§ 2.301-2.307, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 997, § 1, enacted June 18, 1979, as amended by Ord. No. 1041, § 1, enacted August 18, 1980. 
Charter reference- Public utilities, § 10.12. 
Cross reference- Streets generally, § 4.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2.301. - Jurisdiction. 
    All street lighting facilities in the city shall be under the jurisdiction of the department of public services, transportation division. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 2.302. - Payment of service costs. 
    The owner of any improved premises abutting a street which is served with street lighting or is located within any special assessment lighting district shall pay for such services the rate as charged to the city by the utility company furnishing such service plus a five-percent administrative cost which is to include the anticipated annual cost of maintenance and/or replacement of the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 2.303. - Rates. 
    Rates charged for street lighting services furnished in the city shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Charter reference- Utility charges to be fixed by council, § 10.13. 
Sec. 2.304. - Billing. 
    The charges for street lighting services shall be rendered at the same time as the city water bill is rendered and shall represent charges due for the period immediately preceding the date of the bill. All bills shall be due and payable within twenty (20) days from the date thereof. A penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount billed shall be assessed by the city on all bills not paid within twenty (20) days from date thereof. If the owner of the premises does not receive a water bill from the city, a statement for the charges for street lighting services shall be forwarded to the owner or his duly designated representative at the address as shown on the city assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 2.305. - Vacant premises. 
    Vacant premises shall be considered as improved within the meaning of this chapter as soon as a building permit is issued for any construction on the premises by the department of building and safety engineering. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 2.306. - Amendment of rates. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of the department of public services or his designated representatives to periodically review the rates the city is being charged for the furnishing of electricity to the city for street lighting and shall report any increase or decrease in such rates to the city council at least once per year. Council may, by resolution, adopt new rates based upon the annual review. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 2.307. - Enforcement. 
    The charges for street lighting services shall be considered a lien on the premises obligated to pay for such services and shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the enforcement of payment of water bills under section 2.155 of chapter 20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 3-11-85) 
CHAPTER 24. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCE AUTHORITY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, § 9.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Taxes, tit. XI. 

Sec. 2.400. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(a)  Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the city assessor in accordance with section 2.403 of this chapter. 
(b)  Captured assessed value means the amount in any one (1) year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the city development area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
(c)  Development area shall mean the area described on the map in the development plan marked "Map #2-Development Area Boundaries." 
(d)  Development plan means the "Tax Increment and Development Plan-City of Southfield Development Area" dated December 1981, as amended and transmitted to the city council by the city tax increment finance authority for public hearing, and confirmed by this chapter, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  Tax increment finance authority means the City of Southfield Tax Increment Finance Authority. 
(f)  Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the development area at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 1081. 
(g)  Project fund means the tax increment finance authority project fund established pursuant to section 2.405 of this chapter. 
(h)  Taxing jurisdiction shall mean each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the development area. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 2.401. - Approval and adoption of development plan. 
    The development plan is hereby approved and adopted. The duration of the plan shall be for a period of six (6) years except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the plan and this chapter. A copy of the plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office and cross-indexed to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.402. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of the city development area as set forth in the development plan are hereby adopted and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.403. - Preparation of base year assessment roll. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 1081, the city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The initial base year agreement roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the city development area is located, the initial assessed value of the city development area on the effective date of Ordinance No. 1081 and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development area. 
(b)  The assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, tax increment finance authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the tax increment financing plan in the development plan approved by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.404. - Preparation of annual base year assessment roll. 
    Each year within fifteen (15) days following the final equalization of property in the city development area, the assessor shall prepare an updated base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.405. - Establishment of project fund; approval of depositary. 
    The treasurer of the tax increment finance authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depositary bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the director of finance of the city, to be designated the tax increment finance authority project. All monies received by the tax increment finance authority pursuant to the development plan shall be deposited in the project fund. All monies in that fund and earnings thereon shall be used in accordance with the development plan and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.406. - Payment of tax increments to tax increment finance authority. 
    The city and county treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that have captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value to the treasurer of the tax increment finance authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city and county treasurers are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.407. - Use of monies in the project fund. 
    The money credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall annually be used in the following manner and following order of priority: 
    First, to pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
    Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal and interest on bonds issued or which may be issued pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to one-fifth of the largest combined annual principal and interest payments due on bonds issued pursuant to this plan until the amount to the credit of the reserve account is equal to the largest combined annual principal and interest requirements on bonds issued pursuant to this plan. Any amounts to the credit of the reserve account at the beginning of a fiscal year in excess of the requirements of the preceding sentence shall be considered tax increment revenue for that year. 
    Third, to pay the administrative and operating costs of the tax increment finance authority and city for the development area, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the tax increment finance authority. 
    Fourth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the tax increment finance authority and approved by the city, the cost of improvements as set forth in the development plan to the extent those costs are not financed from the proceeds of bonds. 
    Fifth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the development that are determined necessary the tax increment finance authority and approved by the city council. 
    Sixth, to reimburse the city with interest for funds advanced to acquire property, clear land, make preliminary plans and improvements necessary for the development of the development area in accordance with this plan. Interest reimbursement for funds advanced by the city shall be equivalent to the percentage return on other general fund investments. 
    Seventh, to provide a pool of funds which may be necessary to finance the relocation plan as specified in the development plan. 
Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under the preceding paragraphs would revert to the taxing jurisdictions or would be used for future development activities within the development area, as defined in the development plan pursuant to amendment or modification of the development plan and this tax increment financing plan pursuant to applicable provisions of Act No. 450 of 1980 and other laws. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.408. - Public hearing. 
    Prior to any construction plans being developed and following preliminary design plan preparations for (a) the bridge replacement, (b) the drainage system and/or (c) Civic Drive expansion, the city council shall conduct public hearings to obtain citizen input on the details relative to the design elements of each improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.409. - Development area citizens council. 
    The appointment of the development area citizens council shall be expanded to a total membership of thirteen (13) from the development area and shall remain in effect during the duration of the tax increment finance development plan and any vacancies will be replaced by appointments by the city council. The development area citizens council shall be advisory to the tax increment finance authority and city council during each stage of the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.410. - Annual report. 
    Within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, the tax increment finance authority shall submit to the city council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial assessed value of the city development area, the captured assessed value of the city development area, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the city council or deemed appropriate by the tax increment finance authority. The secretary of the tax increment finance authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.411. - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
    Any surplus money in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the tax increment finance authority, shall be paid by the authority to the city or county treasurer, as the case may be, and rebated by them to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 2.412. - Revenue bonds. 
    The tax increment finance authority may not issue revenue bonds or tax increment finance bonds without first receiving the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 12-17-81) 
CHAPTER 25. - CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities, franchises, permits, § 10.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, § 4.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2.501. - Grant. 
    The city hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "grantee," the right, power, and authority to lay, maintain, and operate gas mains, pipes, and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the city for a period of thirty (30) years. The city hereby grants an extension of the right, power, and authority given to Consumers Power Company, a Michigan Corporation, its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, and operate gas mains, pipes, and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the city for a period of an additional thirty (30) years. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 2.502. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.503. - Interference with right-of-way, notice. 
    No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during work, construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition, or better, as when said work was commenced. All of grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes, and that Consumers Power Company will provide the city director of public services, or his authorized representative, with fourteen (14) days' written notice of any blockage or partial blockage of a public right-of-way except in cases of emergency, and in that case as soon as is practical. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.504. - Hold harmless. 
    Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the city free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of the structure and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the city on account of the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice, defend the city and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such construction, maintenance or repair, including damages or actions arising from construction, repair, or replacement of the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.505. - Restoration and maintenance of right-of-way, notice. 
    In the event the city is not satisfied with the restoration of the right-of-way following the construction or maintenance of facilities by the company, the city shall provide the company with written notice of any alleged deficiencies. In the event the company fails to correct such deficiencies within the time provided in the notice, the city shall have the right to enter the right-of-way and perform work it may determine necessary to such restoration and to assess reasonable costs for said work to the company. Failure of the company to correct alleged deficiencies in the restoration of the right-of-way claimed by the city within a reasonable time provided in the notice may be taken by the city as an authorization for the city to perform the work and as an agreement by the company to pay the reasonable cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.506. - Applicable laws, construction. 
    Said grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said city, and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations as set forth by the City Code of Ordinances, administrative rules and state and federal laws, and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.507. - [Grant] nonexclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.508. - Service. 
    [It shall be the responsibility of the grantee] to provide continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.509. - Joint use of right-of-way. 
    [It shall be the responsibility of the grantee] to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, bridges and other public places by the city, and by other utilities, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable, and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor to Consumers Power Company and in the absence of agreement, upon application by Consumers Power Company, provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.510. - Rates. 
    Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said city for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said city, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said city, acting by its city council, or by said grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.511. - Termination. 
    The franchise granted by this chapter is subject to revocation upon sixty (60) days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.512. - Service, public service commission. 
    Said grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas service in said city. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.513. - Condemnation, costs. 
    Consumers Power Company will be liable for any condemnation costs necessary in obtaining any necessary easements for Consumers Power Company including actual attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.514. - Plans. 
    All plans for construction will be submitted to the city engineer fifteen (15) days prior to the commencement of any nonemergency work by Consumers Power Company and [said company shall] obtain any such permits and pay any fees set forth in chapter 33 of this Code when in the opinion of the city engineer the scope of the work performed requires such permits and fees. Any costs or fees involved with review of these plans will be paid by Consumers Power Company. No nonemergency work may be commenced prior to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.515. - Signing, lighting, barricading. 
    All lighting, barricading, fencing and signing as provided in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, which is necessary to protect the public health and welfare from any work done under this agreement will be provided by Consumers Power Company. Consumers Power Company will reimburse the city for the costs including labor for providing any of these items not provided by Consumers Power Company and which the city deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.516. - New facilities. 
    Any installation of new equipment or facilities, or the replacement of any existing equipment or facilities within the public right-of-way, shall be placed underground unless a written waiver is obtained from the city engineer prior to installation or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 2.517. - Annual report. 
    Consumers Power will provide the city clerk with an annual report as they become available. 
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 8-25-86) 
CHAPTER 26. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2.601. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Southfield Downtown Development Authority Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 2.602. - Establishment. 
    In recognition of the fact that it is in the best interest of the public to halt property value deterioration in the downtown business district of the city, to eliminate the causes of such deterioration and to promote economic growth in the downtown business district, a downtown development authority is hereby established pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 2.603. - Organization. 
    The city downtown development authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board consisting of the mayor of the city and twelve (12) members appointed by the mayor of the city subject to the approval of the city council. At least seven (7) of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. At least one (1) of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown district has one hundred (100) or more persons residing within it. Of the members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years, three (3) for three (3) years, and three (3) for four (4) years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, members shall serve for a term of four (4) years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor of the city for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. A chairperson of the board shall be elected by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 2.604. - Powers and duties. 
    The city downtown development authority shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 2.605. - Financing. 
    The activities of the authority shall be financed from one or more of the following sources: 
(a)  Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions. 
(b)  Proceeds of a tax pursuant to section 12 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. 
(c)  Money borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by section 13 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. 
(d)  Revenues from any property, building or facility owned, leased, licensed, or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the limitations imposed upon the authority by trusts or other agreements. 
(e)  Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under sections 14 to 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. 
(f)  Proceeds from a special assessment district created as provided by law. 
(g)  Money obtained from other sources approved by the city council. 
(h)  Money received by the authority and not covered under subsections (a) through (g) shall immediately be deposited to the credit of the authority, subject to disbursement pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975. Except as provided in Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, the city shall not obligate itself, nor shall it ever be obligated to pay any sums from public funds, other than money received by the city pursuant to this section, for or on account of the activities of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 2.606. - Boundaries. 
    The authority shall exercise its powers within the following described area: 
Bounded on the north by the north right-of-way line of Nine Mile Road, on the east by the centerline of Greenfield Road, on the south by the centerline of Eight Mile Road and on the west by the centerline of Southfield Road then north to the rear of the properties fronting on the north side of Northland Park Drive then easterly to Northwestern Highway then northwesterly along the west right-of-way line of Northwestern Highway to Nine Mile Road. The proposed authority district shall also include the north Nine Mile Road frontage between Providence Drive and Greenfield Road and the west Greenfield Road and the west Greenfield Road frontage between Nine Mile Road and Providence Drive. (As depicted in Exhibit "A" and incorporating those properties described in Exhibit "B" which exhibits are attached to Ordinance No. 1246 and made a part hereof.) 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 6-13-88) 
CHAPTER 26A. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN 
ARTICLE I. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 2.607. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the city assessor in accordance with section 2.611 of this chapter. 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one (1) year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
    Development area shall mean the area described on the map in the development plan marked "Development Area Boundaries." 
    Development plan means the development plan of the SDDA development area dated March 1996, transmitted to the city council by the SDDA for public hearing, and confirmed by this chapter, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Initial assessed value means the assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the development area on December 31, 1994. 
    Project fund means the SDDA project fund established pursuant to section 2.612 of this chapter. 
    Southfield Downtown Development Authority (SDDA) means the City of Southfield Downtown Development Authority. 
    Tax increment finance plan means the tax increment finance plan of the SDDA development area dated March 1996, transmitted to the city council by the SDDA for public hearing, and confirmed by this chapter, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Taxing jurisdiction shall mean each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the development area. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.608. - Duration of development plan. 
    The duration of the development plan shall be for a period of twenty (20) years except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of this Ordinance No. 1390. A copy of the Development Plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office and cross-indexed to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.609. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of the Southfield downtown development authority development area as set forth in the development plan are hereby adopted and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.610. - Preparation of the base year assessment roll. 
(a)  After the effective date of this chapter, the city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll of the development area. The initial base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the development area is located, the initial assessed value of the development area on the effective date of this chapter and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development area. 
(b)  The assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment roll of the development area to the city treasurer, county treasurer, SDDA and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the tax increment finance plan approved by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.611. - Preparation of annual assessment roll of the development area. 
    Each year following the final equalization of the assessed value of all taxable property in the development area, the assessor shall prepare an updated assessment roll of the development area. The annual assessment roll of the development area shall show the information required in the base year assessment roll of the development area and the current assessed value and the captured assessed value of the development area for that year. Copies of the annual assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.612. - Establishment of project fund; approval of depositary. 
    The treasurer of the SDDA shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depositary bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the director of finance of the city, to be designated "project fund." All monies received by the SDDA pursuant to the tax increment finance plan shall be deposited in the project fund. All monies in that fund and earnings thereon shall be used in accordance with the development plan and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.613. - Payment of tax increment revenues to the SDDA. 
    The city and county treasurer shall transfer all tax increment revenues (as defined in the Act) collected from the development area to the treasurer of the SDDA for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city and county treasurers are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.614. - Use of monies in the project fund. 
    The money credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall annually be used in accordance with annual budgets approved as required by the Act in the following manner and following order of priority: 
First, to pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding dollars loaned pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
Second, to reimburse the city with interest for funds advanced to acquire property, clear land, make preliminary plans and improvements and other activities deemed necessary to achieve the purposes of the development plan. Interest reimbursement for funds advanced by the city shall be equivalent to the percentage return on other general fund investments. 
Third, to pay the administrative and operating costs of the SDDA and the development area, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the SDDA. 
Fourth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the SDDA and approved by the city council, the cost of improvements as set forth in the development plan to the extent those costs are not financed from the proceeds of bonds. 
Fifth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the development that are determined necessary by the SDDA and approved by the city council as described in the plans. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.615. - Annual report. 
    Within ninety (90) days after the end of the fiscal year, the SDDA shall submit to the city council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund as required by section 15(3) of the Act. The secretary of the SDDA shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city as required by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 2.616. - Refund of surplus tax increment revenues. 
    Any surplus tax increment revenues in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the SDDA, shall be paid by the authority to the city or county treasurer, as the case may be, and rebated by them to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction in accordance with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-8-96) 
ARTICLE II. - RESTATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 2.617. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "2017 Restated Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.618. - Definitions. 
    The terms used herein shall have the same meaning given them in Act 197 (defined below), unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    2017 restated plan shall mean the 2017 development plan and tax increment financing plan, submitted by the authority to the city council pursuant to Act 197 and approved by the ordinance from which this article derives as it may be hereafter amended. 
    Act 197 shall mean Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended, as now in effect or hereinafter amended, being known as the Michigan Downtown Development Authority Act. 
    Authority shall mean the Southfield Downtown Development Authority. 
    Authority board shall mean the board of the authority, its governing body. 
    City council shall mean the city council of City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, a municipal corporation of the state of Michigan. 
    Development area shall mean the development area designated in the development plan as amended by the 2017 restated plan. 
    Development plan shall mean the development plan portion of the plan. 
    Plan shall mean the authority's development plan and tax increment financing plan, as amended by the 2017 restated plan. 
    Tax increment financing plan shall mean the tax increment financing plan portion of the plan for the collection of tax increments. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.619. - Public purpose. 
    The city council finds and confirms the continued necessity to halt property value deterioration, to eliminate the causes of such deterioration and to promote economic growth, and hereby determines that the 2017 restated plan adopted by the authority board on November 17, 2017 and presented to and revised by the city council constitutes a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.620. - Considerations. 
    In accordance with section 19 of Act 197, the city council has considered the factors enumerated in that section and herein stated, making the following determinations: 
(a)  The city council has received and considered the findings of the development area citizens council. 
(b)  The development plan meets the requirements set forth in section 17(2) of Act 197. 
(c)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(d)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197. 
(e)  The land included within the development area which may be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the development plan and of Act 197 in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(f)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the city's master plan. 
(g)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area. 
(h)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.621. - Meetings. 
    Representatives of all taxing jurisdictions within which all or a portion of the development area lies have had reasonable opportunity to present their opinions and comments regarding the 2017 restated plan to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.622. - Public hearing. 
    The city council has held a public hearing on the 2017 restated plan with notice properly given in accordance with section 18 of Act 197, and the city council has provided an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard regarding the 2017 restated plan. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.623. - Approval. 
    The 2017 restated plan as revised by the city council is hereby approved in the form attached hereto as exhibit A (a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk). 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.624. - Development area. 
    The development area designated in the development plan as amended by the 2017 restated plan is hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Sec. 2.625. - Transmittal of revenues. 
    The city treasurer shall transmit to the authority that portion of the tax levy of all taxing bodies paid each year on real and personal property in the development area on the captured assessed value as set forth in the tax increment financing plan. 
(Ord. No. 1694 , § 1, 5-17-18) 
Title III - PARKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish and maintain parks and recreational facilities, § 4.12. 
Cross reference- Administration, tit. I; special assessments for public improvements, § 1.221 et seq. 

CHAPTER 27. - PARKS, GENERAL REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of parks and recreation, § 1.138. 

Sec. 3.1. - Injury to park property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground on injure, mar or damage in any manner any building, monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplace or other public property within or pertaining to any park or playground. 
Sec. 3.2. - Waste containers. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, papers or miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for that purpose. 
Cross reference- Proper placement of litter in public receptacles, § 2.9. 
Sec. 3.3. - Ball games. 
    No baseball, football or softball throwing, or other violent or rough exercises or play shall be engaged in any public park or other public place except in such areas or spaces designated for such purposes or play by the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
Sec. 3.4. - Picnics. 
    Picnics may be held in such places of any park as shall be designated for that purpose by the superintendent of parks and recreation subject to any rules or regulations pertaining thereto. 
Sec. 3.5. - Open fires. 
    It shall be unlawful to kindle or build fires in any park or playground except in fireplaces or stoves in any park provided for that purpose. Upon leaving such fire, it shall be the duty of the person using it to see that the fire is extinguished. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 
Sec. 3.6. - Vehicles in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive or park any vehicle in any park or playground except in places and areas designated therefor by the superintendent of parks and recreation. Driving and parking on all street and public ways within any park or bordering on the same shall be subject to all the provisions of chapter 126 of this Code regulating traffic generally and to such additional rules and regulations as the city shall adopt pursuant to this chapter. 
Cross reference- Traffic regulations, § 10.1 et seq. 
Sec. 3.7. - Intoxicating liquors. 
    It shall be unlawful to consume, possess, or bring any alcoholic beverage into any public park or grounds except as provided in section 3.9, chapter 27, title III, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 6-9-86) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor regulations, § 9.151 et seq. 
Sec. 3.8. - Additional rules. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation is hereby empowered to make such additional rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the parks and recreation commission, pertaining to the conduct and use of the parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to protect property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
Sec. 3.9. - Application for liquor permits. 
    Any person, group, organization, society or corporation wishing to consume, possess, or bring any alcoholic beverage into any public park or grounds must meet each of the following criteria: 
(1)  Make written application to the superintendent of parks and recreation, said application stating: 
a.  The name, address and phone number of the person, group, organization, society, or corporation making application. 
b.  The date(s) for which the permits are being sought. 
c.  The event for which the permit is being sought, and the sponsors if different than those making application. 
(2)  File with the superintendent of parks and recreation, and the city clerk, a liability insurance policy in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) indemnifying the city for any damages or causes of action arising out of the event for which a permit is being sought. 
(3)  A copy of the liquor control commission liquor license for the event for which said permit is being sought. 
(4)  That all of the requirements in subsection (1) above be met within ten (10) days prior to the date(s) for which the permit is being sought. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 6-9-86) 
Cross reference- Liquor licenses and related permits, § 7.190 et seq. 
Sec. 3.10. - Issuance of permits. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation may issue a liquor permit to any person, organization, society, or corporation who has met the criteria set forth in section 3.9, chapter 27, of title III. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 6-9-86) 
Sec. 3.11. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days in jail, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 6-9-86) 
CHAPTER 28. - TREE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of parks and recreation, § 1.138; tree requirements in subdivisions, § 5.347. 

Sec. 3.21. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter: 
(1)  The word "highway" shall include all the land lying between the property lines on either side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys. 
(2)  The words "superintendent of parks and recreation" shall include his duly authorized agents. 
(3)  The word "park" shall include all public parks, and all areas owned by the city or to which the public has free access as a park. 
(4)  The words "public place" shall include all other grounds owned by the city. 
(5)  The words "trees and shrubs" shall include all woody vegetation. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 3.22. - Administrator and duties. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation, or such other authority as may be hereinafter set forth by the city council, shall direct, regulate and control the planting, insect and disease control, fertilizing, mulching and removal of all trees and shrubs growing now or hereafter in any public highway, parkway, park or other public areas of the city. He shall also direct the maintenance and culture of turf areas, both established and newly seeded, that belong to the city. The department of parks and recreation shall be charged with the routine maintenance and care of the trees, shrubs and turf areas under the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent of parks and recreation shall cause the provisions of this chapter to be enforced. He shall discharge any and all duties that may be required of him by the city council. 
Sec. 3.23. - Planting and control of trees. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation shall have the exclusive power to plant, maintain and remove trees, shrubs and herbaceous material, both living and dead, in any highway, park or public place of the city. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation shall assume complete responsibility for the selection, planting, maintenance and removal of all trees and shrubs growing now or hereafter in any highway, park or public place of the city, as promptly as financial and labor conditions will permit. 
    Permits for planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs may be granted as specified in sections 3.26 and 3.27. 
Sec. 3.24. - Varieties of trees. 
    No willow (salix, all varieties except horticultural varieties), Poplar (populus sp.), Soft (silver) Maple (Acer saccharinum), Box elder (Acer negundo), Tree of Heaven (silanthus altissimus), Wild chestnut (castanea sp.), Chinese Elm (ulmus parvifolia), American Elm (ulmus americanna) or other trees, shrubs and vines determined to be undesirable by the superintendent of parks and recreation shall hereafter be planted in the public highways, parks or public places in the city. 
Sec. 3.25. - Location of planting, height of branches. 
    There shall be a minimum distance of forty (40) feet between trees planted in the parkway. No tree shall be planted in the parkway between the sidewalk and the curb less than three (3) feet from the curb or sidewalk lines. However, where the parkway is less than six (6) feet but not less than four (4) feet in width, a tree may be planted midway between the curb and the sidewalk. Any exceptions to these requirements will be determined by the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
    No trees shall be planted which are less than one and one-half (11/2) inches in diameter six (6) inches above the ground. 
    A branch of any tree or shrub located on private property which overhangs a sidewalk or bike path shall have an under-clearance of at least eight (8) feet, and if under eight (8) feet in height, a side-clearance of at least six (6) inches. A branch of any tree or shrub located on private property which overhangs a street shall have an under-clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet; and if under fourteen (14) feet in height, a side-clearance of at least six (6) inches. In the event of a violation of the above under-clearance or side-clearance requirements, the superintendent of parks and recreation shall notify the owner or occupant of the property on which the tree or shrub is located in writing, of the existence of such violation with instructions for its correction within such time as the superintendent of parks and recreation shall deem reasonable; and if the owner or occupant fails to comply with such notice, the superintendent of parks and recreation shall cause such violation to be removed or corrected and the expense of such correction shall be collected in the manner set forth in section 3.34. 
    All trees, plants, and shrubs located on the triangle formed by two (2) property lines at the intersection of two (2) streets, and extending for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet each way from the intersection of the rights-of-way lines on any corner lot within the city, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than three (3) feet above the surface of the roadway, in order that the view of the driver of the vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees may be planted and maintained in this area provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight (8) feet above the roadway surface. A violation of the above intersection requirements may be corrected by the superintendent of parks and recreation in the same manner as described in this section for under-clearance and side-clearance violations. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 3.26. - Permit to plant, treat or remove. 
    No person shall hereafter plant, move, spray, fertilize, brace, trim, do surgery work, cut aboveground or below ground, cut any branch or root therefrom or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city, nor cause such acts to be done by others, without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of parks and recreation, who shall issue the permit if in his judgment the desired work is necessary, and the proposed method of workmanship thereof is of a satisfactory nature. The person receiving such permit shall abide by the specifications and standards of practice adopted by the city. 
Sec. 3.27. - Conditional permit for removal of trees and shrubs. 
(1)  As a condition to any permit to remove any tree or shrub, the superintendent of parks and recreation may require that the permittee plant a tree or shrub in place of the one removed. Whenever any such tree has been destroyed or removed, it shall be a misdemeanor for the permittee to fail, refuse or neglect to plant another tree or shrub of the type and size, and at the location specified in the permit, within six (6) months or within the next planting season from the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(2)  Every permit granted by the superintendent of parks and recreation shall describe the work to be done, specify the species or variety, size, grade, location, briefly specify the method of planting, method of support and trimming of all trees or shrubs concerned, and contain a definite date of expiration. Any permit may be declared void if its terms are violated. 
Sec. 3.28. - Obstructions; fences. 
    No person shall take down, climb over, interfere with, disturb nor displace any rails, posts, boards, chains or fences enclosing or protecting any park, highway or public place. 
Sec. 3.29. - Fastening materials to trees. 
    No person shall fasten any sign, wire, rope or other material to or around, or run any wire or rope through, any trees or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city, except by written permit granted by the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
Sec. 3.30. - Protection of trees and shrubs. 
    No person shall break, injure, climb, peel, cut, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city; no person shall pluck, break, trample upon or interfere with any flower or shrub on any highway, park or public place; nor shall any person dig, remove or carry away any sward, gravel, sand, turf or earth in any such park or highway; no person shall knowingly permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main within the root zone of any such tree or shrub; no person shall lead, ride or drive any animal, nor operate any automobile or other vehicle in any manner so as to injure or deface any such park, highway or public place; no person shall permit any toxic chemical, either solid or liquid, to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub; no person shall knowingly permit any wire designed to carry electric current to come in contact with any such tree or shrub unless protected by approved methods; and, no person shall attach any electric insulation to any tree or shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of five (5) feet from any tree or shrub without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of parks and recreation. Whenever the superintendent of parks and recreation determines it to be necessary, in order to prune or remove any tree or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city, or for any other reason temporarily to protect, move or cut off the electricity from any service wire, he shall serve written notice on the owner of such wire to protect, move or cut off the electricity from such wire and the owner shall comply with such order within twenty-four (24) hours after the service of such notice. 
    In the erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building or structure, the owner or owners thereof shall place or cause to be placed such guards around all nearby trees on the public property as will effectually prevent injury to such trees. 
Sec. 3.31. - Regulation to govern diseased trees. 
    Regulation No. 613 of the Michigan Department of Agriculture, adopted in accordance with section 6, Act 72 of the Public Acts of 1945, declares elm trees and wood infected by Dutch Elm Disease to be a public menace. In connection with other public acts of the state, this regulation provides the framework for municipal control of diseased trees on private as well as public property. 
(1)  Trees of all species and varieties of elm and planera affected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as determined by laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be removed and properly disposed of within ten (10) days following notification of the discovery of such infection. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of property whereon such a tree is situated, to possess or keep such a tree after the expiration of thirty (30) days following notification of the discovery of such infection. 
(2)  Trees or parts thereof of elm or planera in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle, Scolytue multistriatus, or the American Elm Bark Beetle, Hylurgopinus rufipes, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for the person owning property whereon the same is situated to possess or keep the same. 
(3)  The director of parks and recreation, or his designee, is charged with enforcement of this chapter, and to that end may enter upon private property at all daylight hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties under this chapter, or to interfere with such director of parks and recreation, or his designee, in the lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  If trees on private property are found to be infected, the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, shall give to the owner of the premises where such tree or trees are situated written notice of the existence of such disease, and requiring the removal and disposal of such trees within a period of thirty (30) days following such notice, such removal and disposal to be under the direction and supervision of the director of parks and recreation, or his designee. Such notice shall notify the owner of the premises that unless such tree is removed and disposed of in compliance with the terms thereof within such thirty-day period, the city will proceed with the removal and disposal of such trees, and the collection of the expense thereof. 
(5)  Service of such notice shall be made on the owner and occupant of the premises in the manner prescribed in chapter 1, section 1.14 of this Code. 
(6)  It shall thereupon become the duty of the owner of such premises to cause such tree to be removed and properly disposed of under the direction and supervision of the director of parks and recreation or his authorized deputy or employee. In lieu thereof, the person charged with such removal and disposal may request that the same be done by the director of parks and recreation, or his designee. If the city shall remove and dispose of any trees, all expenses in connection therewith shall be collected in the manner set forth in section 3.34. 
(7)  Trees on public lands within the city shall be removed at the expense of the city. 
(8)  Proper disposal of infected trees shall mean cutting down the infected tree and burying it in a sanitary landfill or cutting down the infected tree and chipping it or any other manner of disposal prescribed by the director of parks and recreation, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 7-8-85) 
Sec. 3.32. - Permits to public utilities. 
    All permits issued for the installation of public utilities shall be certified by the city engineer. When a permit is given by the superintendent of parks and recreation to a telephone, telegraph, electric power or other public service corporation or utility to trim trees, or perform other operations affecting public trees or shrubs, the amount of such trimming or extent of the other operations shall be limited by the actual necessities of the service of the company and such work shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner and according to specifications outlined by the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
Sec. 3.33. - No interference with the superintendent of parks and recreation. 
    No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the superintendent of parks and recreation or any of his assistants in the execution of enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit a public hearing on any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
Sec. 3.34. - Collection of expenses. 
    Any expenses due to the city in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be certified by the superintendent of parks and recreation to the city council on or before April 1 of each year. Such expenses shall be certified by the council to the city assessor and assessed against the premises on whose behalf the expenses were incurred and shall be collected or returned in the same manner as municipal taxes are assessed, collected and returned. 
Sec. 3.35. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any lawful order issued in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as prescribed in chapter 1 of this Code. Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect the costs of removal of such tree in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Charter in such case made and provided, where it is necessary for the city to remove such tree in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1.15. 
CHAPTER 29. - CITY CEMETERIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish cemetery regulations, § 4.13. 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of parks and recreation, § 1.138. 

Sec. 3.51. - City cemeteries. 
    The cemeteries which have been or may be hereafter established or maintained by the city either within or without the city, of which plats have been or shall be filed in the office of the superintendent of parks and recreation, shall be known as the city cemeteries. 
Sec. 3.52. - Management. 
    The superintendent of parks and recreation, in this chapter called the superintendent, subject to the direction of the parks and recreation board, shall manage, supervise, maintain and improve such cemeteries. He shall cause the city cemetery grounds to be laid out in lots and walks, the lots to be numbered, and the avenues and walks therein to be named and plats thereof to be made and, when approved by the parks and recreation board, to be filed in his office together with a plan for perpetual care of the lots platted. The city council shall from time to time by resolution determine the price of lots. The superintendent shall sell such lots and all deeds thereof shall be executed on behalf of the city by the mayor and the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to enforce this chapter and the rules and regulations of the parks and recreation board relative to the city cemeteries. 
Sec. 3.53. - Lot purchases. 
    Any person desiring to purchase a lot in any city cemetery shall make application to the superintendent and, if the same be granted, the applicant shall pay the required amount for such lot to the treasurer, and upon filing a receipt therefor with the superintendent the deed to such lot shall be duly executed and delivered on behalf of the city. All lots shall be held subject to the provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the parks and recreation commission under this chapter. 
Sec. 3.54. - Records. 
    The superintendent shall keep proper records in which any deed to any such lot shall be recorded at length. The superintendent shall certify upon every such instrument the time when it was recorded and the liber and page where it was recorded. 
Sec. 3.55. - Index. 
    The superintendent shall keep a general index to each of such libers, in which he shall note alphabetically the name of each party to every instrument recorded by him with reference to the liber and page where it is recorded. He shall also keep a register, showing all deed issued, the date, to whom issued and the description of the property conveyed. 
Sec. 3.56. - Recording fee. 
    Every person offering any conveyance for record shall pay to the superintendent a recording fee of one dollar ($1.00) which sum shall be credited to the cemetery fund. 
Sec. 3.57. - Interments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to inter or cause to be interred the corpse of any person anywhere in this city except within a cemetery. 
Sec. 3.58. - Permits. 
    No corpse shall be interred in any cemetery or disinterred or removed from the city until a permit for such interment, disinterment or removal shall have been obtained from the health officer. Such permit shall be issued upon application made by the undertaker or other interested person, and the application shall state such information in regard to the deceased as may be required by the board of health. The superintendent shall cause to be kept a register of all interments and disinterments made in any city cemetery, in which shall appear the name of the deceased, the date and place of interment or disinterment, and such other information as may be required in the application for the permit. 
Sec. 3.59. - Fees. 
    The superintendent shall charge and cause to be collected on behalf of the city such fees for work performed in the cemeteries as may from time to time be determined by resolution of the city council. All such fees shall be credited to the cemetery fund. 
Sec. 3.60. - Opening graves. 
    No person other than an employee of the city acting under the direction of the superintendent shall dig or open any grave, nor shall any person grade or fill in any lot in any city cemetery unless such work shall be done under the supervision of the employee in charge of such cemetery. 
Sec. 3.61. - Trespass. 
    No person shall commit trespass or do any act upon the grounds of any such cemetery prohibited by state law or this Code. No person shall desecrate or in any manner violate the sanctity of any cemetery or the appurtenances thereof. No person shall pick or cut flowers or shrubs except on his own lot. No person shall cut down any tree within any such cemetery without first procuring a permit to do so. 
Sec. 3.62. - Cemetery funds. 
    All sums of money which may hereafter be paid into the city treasury for the perpetual care and preservation of cemetery lots or any monuments, tombs, headstones, markers, urns or other property used in connection therewith shall be held in a special fund, in trust, to be used solely for cemetery purposes and for no other purpose whatever. 
Sec. 3.63. - Regulations. 
    The parks and recreation board shall from time to time make such rules and regulations for the burial of the dead, for the care, management and protection of the grounds, monuments and appurtenances of the city cemeteries and for public use and orderly conduct of persons visiting the same as it may deem necessary. 
CHAPTER 30. - CITY OF SOUTHFIELD/SOUTHFIELD PUBLIC SCHOOLS JOHN GRACE COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 1.151 et seq. 

Sec. 3.75. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.76. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to create a community recreation center and a board in cooperation with the Southfield Public Schools, a Michigan municipal corporation, as permitted by Public Act 156 of 1917 (MCL 123.51 et seq.), Public Act 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq.), and Section 6.10(d) of the Charter of the city and to delegate the operation of the facility of the City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.77. - Conduct of programs. 
    The city council does hereby join with the Southfield Public Schools for the conduct of community recreational programs as permitted by law, and in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.78. - Joint recreation board created. 
    The City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.79. - Membership. 
    The City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board shall consist of five (5) members. The chairman shall be selected by the John Grace Citizens Advisory Committee. One (1) member shall be selected by the Southfield Optimists Club. One (1) member shall be selected by the mayor of the city with the confirmation of the city council. One (1) member shall be selected by the Southfield Chamber of Commerce. One (1) member shall be selected by the Superintendent of the Southfield Public Schools. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, which term shall commence on the effective date of Ordinance No. 1074. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.80. - Duties. 
    The City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board shall be responsible for: 
(a)  Approving an operating budget for programs, and approving a budget for building and grounds maintenance at the John Grace Elementary School, being Lots 7, 9, and the north 140 feet of Lot 11 of Thomas Hitchman's Subdivision, in the city; 
(b)  Appointing a program director who shall serve at the pleasure of the City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board, and whose duties shall be determined by the board; 
(c)  Establishing a policy for the utilization of the John Grace Elementary School, including the nature and extent of programs and other services conducted; 
(d)  Meeting regularly to review all phases of the community recreation center's operation and development, and ensuring that the city and school district representatives meet at least annually for the purpose of making a review and accommodation to their respective governing bodies regarding continuation of the programs. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Sec. 3.81. - Conduct of meetings. 
    Meetings of the City of Southfield/Southfield Public Schools John Grace Community Center Board shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, PA 267 of 1976, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 10-26-81) 
Title IV - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Special assessments for public improvements, § 1.221 et seq.; utility franchise, § 2.201 et seq.; zoning and planning, tit. V; design standards in subdivisions, § 5.325 et seq.; building regulations, tit. VIII. 

CHAPTER 33. - STREETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of council re streets, § 4.10. 
Cross reference- Duties of department of public service, § 1.132; street lighting service, § 2.301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4.1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Street shall mean all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
(2)  Department shall be deemed to refer to the department of public service of the city. 
(3)  Director shall mean the director of public service of the city. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 4.2. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this chapter. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this chapter, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
Sec. 4.3. - Permits and bonds. 
    Where permits are authorized in this chapter, they shall be obtained upon application to the director, upon such forms as he shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge of one dollar ($1.00) for each such permit, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. Such permit shall be revocable by the director for failure to comply with this chapter, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, and the lawful orders of the director or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in not less than the following amounts, except as otherwise specified in this chapter: 
(1)  On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one (1) accident ..... $100,000.00 
(2)  On account of any one (1) accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one (1) person ..... 300,000.00 
(3)  On account of damage to property in any one (1) accident ..... 5,000.00 
A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit under this chapter, such deposit shall be in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), except as otherwise specified in this chapter, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six (6) months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
Sec. 4.4. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the director. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 4.3. 
Sec. 4.5. - Emergency openings. 
    The director may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this chapter shall be complied with. 
Sec. 4.6. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight (8) hours after notification to do so. 
Sec. 4.7. - Rubbish receptacles. 
    Rubbish receptacles conforming to the requirements of chapter 17 may be placed in a public alley or public place providing such rubbish receptacle or receptacles do not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Cross reference- Container specifications, § 2.4; location of dumpsters, § 2.12; screening dumpsters from public view, § 2.13. 
Sec. 4.8. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the director shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the director. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the director shall from time to time direct. 
Sec. 4.9. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
Sec. 4.10. - New paving. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the director shall, not less than thirty (30) days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
Secs. 4.11-4.17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURB CUTS 

Sec. 4.18. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the director. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than thirteen (13) feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk perpendicular to the street shall be five (5) feet. 
(3)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(4)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director. 
Sec. 4.19. - Agreement to install driveway apron. 
    No permit to cut any curb shall be issued by the department unless the applicant shall agree in such application, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to install a driveway apron of concrete or other material of comparable quality within six (6) months after completion of the cut. 
Sec. 4.20. - Driveway aprons; construction required. 
    Any existing driveway apron which is not paved with concrete or other comparable material shall be so paved within thirty (30) days after the director shall have given the owner or occupant notice to pave the same and if such person shall neglect or refuse to do so then the director shall cause such driveway apron to be paved and the cost and expense of performing this work shall be collected in the manner prescribed in chapter 1, section 1.13. 
Sec. 4.21. - Unsafe driveways and crosswalks; repair. 
    Whenever any driveway, crosswalk or other paved area between the sidewalk and the curb is so defective that it is not reasonably safe or fit for travel and in the opinion of the director the same should be immediately repaired, he shall give the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to such driveway, crosswalk or other paved area notice to repair the same within thirty (30) days, and in default thereof the director may cause the same to be repaired. The cost and expense shall be charged to such owner or occupant in the manner provided in chapter 1, section 1.13. 
Sec. 4.22. - Access to other than single-family residences; design approval. 
    No person shall construct, alter or change any driveway or private street or road from any property used or to be used for other than single-family residential purposes opening upon any public street, road or highway within the city without first procuring a permit from the department of public works. The department of public works shall not issue such a permit unless such driveway, private street or road is designed to minimize vehicular traffic and pedestrian danger and congestion. When the department of public works determines that acceleration and deceleration lanes are necessary to alleviate vehicular traffic and pedestrian danger and congestion, it shall require the installation of acceleration and deceleration lanes as a condition of the granting of the permit. 
Secs. 4.23-4.25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 4.26. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to such street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the director and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 4.3. 
Sec. 4.27. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least five (5) feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with chapter 102 of this Code shall be provided around such obstruction. 
Cross reference- General building regulations, § 8.201 et seq. 
Secs. 4.28-4.30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Unguarded excavations declared a nuisance, § 9.3. 

Sec. 4.31. - Safeguards. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three (3) feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over fifteen (15) feet apart. 
Sec. 4.32. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
Secs. 4.33-4.35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE MOVING 

Sec. 4.36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1108, enacted September 27, 1982, repealed former § 4.36, which pertained to transporting buildings and oversize vehicles over streets and was derived from the 1976 codification. 
Secs. 4.37-4.40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4.41. - Additional regulations. 
    The city administrator may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions and house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
Sec. 4.42. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in chapter 1, section 1.13. 
Sec. 4.43. - Suspension of objects prohibited. 
    No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or within any street area unless expressly authorized by this Code or the city council, except an awning or marquee no part of which is less than ten (10) feet above the sidewalk grade. 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 1, 9-14-81) 
Sec. 4.44. - Temporary street closings. 
    The director shall have authority to temporarily close any street or portion thereof when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on such street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over such street except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the director. 
Sec. 4.45. - Snow emergency, parking prohibition. 
(1)  Parking on any public street shall be prohibited whenever: 
(a)  The director of the department of public works (the "director") finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snowplowing or other similar purposes, the director shall cause to be put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all city streets, as necessary, by declaring it in the manner prescribed herein; or, 
(b)  Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. snow or ice has accumulated to a depth of four (4) inches or more on any part of a city street, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on that part of such street one (1) hour after such condition exists. 
(2)  Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the director in accordance with this section, except that any street area which has become substantially clean of snow and ice from curb-to-curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded from such parking prohibition. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other ordinance of this city. 
(3)  Whenever a vehicle becomes disabled for any reason on any city street during such time as there is in effect a parking prohibition as herein provided, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall abandon or leave a vehicle in the roadway during a snow emergency parking prohibition except for the purpose of securing assistance relative to the removal thereof. 
(4)  The police department or any member thereof is hereby authorized to remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle found parked in violation of this section and such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the police department by means of towing the same or otherwise to a vehicle pound or to a point or place where parking is permitted. Whenever available police facilities are insufficient, the chief of police is authorized to engage the services of any private operator of towing cars to remove vehicles under the direction of a member of the police department where the same are found in violation of this section. Furthermore, the removal of any vehicle found in violation of this section shall be effected pursuant to the provisions of MCL 257.252, as amended. The city and/or its authorized agents may remove or cause the removal of any vehicle under the circumstances enumerated within the state law as amended, in particular, MCL 257.252(d). The police department, its agents and its members shall follow the policies, procedures and requirements of the aforementioned state statute in effecting the removal, seizure, impoundment and storage in respect to any motor vehicle seized pursuant to this section or to state law. All owners or persons in charge of motor vehicles removed pursuant to this section or state law shall be responsible for the payment of any applicable towing and/or storage fees or charges accumulated in respect to such vehicles as provided by the aforecited state statute, as amended. 
(5)  The director shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to this section to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts, cablecasts, or telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and he may cause such declaration to be further announced in local newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the director, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. 
(6)  Whenever the director shall find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this section no longer exist, he may declare this prohibition terminated. 
(7)  Any provision of this section, while temporarily in effect, shall take precedence over other conflicting provisions of any ordinance normally in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1186, § 1, 10-15-85) 
CHAPTER 34. - SIDEWALKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4.61. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the words defined in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Sidewalk shall mean the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(2)  Director shall mean the director of public service of the city. 
Sec. 4.62. - Specifications and permits. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the director. 
Sec. 4.63. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The director shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work, but this shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the director. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a charge of one dollar ($1.00) per stake shall be paid. 
Sec. 4.64. - Sidewalk specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall conform to the design standards established in chapter 48 of this Code. 
Sec. 4.65. - Permit revocation. 
    The city administrator may suspend any permit issued under the terms of this chapter for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this chapter, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established under the provisions of this chapter for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk. The city administrator may cause work to be stopped under any permit granted for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk for any of the causes enumerated in this section, which stop order shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the city council and if confirmed by the council, at its next regular meeting, such stop order shall be permanent, and shall constitute a revocation of the permit. 
Sec. 4.66. - Ordering construction. 
    The city council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 1.14 of this Code, to the owner of such lot or premises requiring him to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
Sec. 4.67. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in the notice, and within the time and in the manner required thereby, the director is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided in section 1.13 of this Code. 
Sec. 4.68. - Sidewalk maintenance. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
Sec. 4.69. - Sidewalk repair. 
    Whenever the city administrator shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalk of such determination, which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1.14 of this Code. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner to place the sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven (7) days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk within the time limited therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this chapter, the city administrator shall have the sidewalk repaired. If the city administrator determines that the condition of the sidewalk is such that immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, he may dispense with the notice. The cost of repairs under this section shall be charged against the premises which the sidewalk adjoins and the owner of such premises, and shall be collected as provided in section 1.13 of this Code. 
Sec. 4.70. - Sidewalk required in certain subdivisions. 
    No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the city under the provisions of this Code for a new single-family residence in any platted subdivision containing five (5) percent or more lots of less than eleven thousand (11,000) square feet in area or less than one hundred (100) feet in width unless there is constructed in front of the residence a sidewalk in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code and rules and regulations of the city, or in lieu thereof, a cash bond is deposited with the city in an amount to be set by the department of building and safety engineering to cover the estimated cost of the sidewalk and to guarantee construction of the sidewalk within eight (8) months of the date of issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy. The provisions of this section shall not apply to single-family residences constructed in a platted subdivision to which the provisions of chapter 48 are applicable and the provisions of this section shall not apply to any platted subdivision in any zoning district having a minimum lot size of eleven thousand (11,000) square feet or more, nor to any platted subdivision in which more than one-half of the lots within the subdivision have constructed thereon single-family residences without sidewalks at the time of the issuance of the building permit for such single-family residence. 
Cross reference- Subdivision regulations, § 5.301 et seq. 
Secs. 4.71-4.74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEARING SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 4.75. - Sidewalks to be cleared. 
    The occupant of every lot or premises adjoining any street, or the owner of such lot or premises if same are not occupied, shall clear and keep cleared all sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises from snow, ice, filth and other obstructions. 
Cross reference- Depositing ice or snow in sidewalks, § 2.11. 
Sec. 4.76. - Failure to clear. 
    If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to clear ice, snow, filth or other obstructions from the sidewalk adjoining his premises, for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours or more, he shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and in addition the director may cause such sidewalk to be cleared and the expense of clearing shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises and shall be collected as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 1.13 of this Code. 
Title V - ZONING AND PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning department, § 6.11. 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of building and safety engineering, § 1.135; responsibilities of planning department, § 1.141; streets and sidewalks, tit. IV; building regulations, tit. VIII. 

CHAPTER 45. - ZONING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The Southfield Zoning Ordinance, being Ord. No. 678, adopted October 6, 1969, as amended through Ord. No. 1554, enacted November 19, 2007, is set out herein as chapter 45. Amendatory legislation has been cited in history notes following each amended section. Absence of a history note indicates said section derived from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Text appearing in brackets has been added by the editor for clarification purposes only. 

ARTICLE 1. - SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 5.1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the City of Southfield Zoning Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5.2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used or occupied." Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Sec. 5.3. - Definitions (A-B). 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are herewith defined: 
(1)  ADULT BOOKSTORE: an establishment wherein more than twenty (20) percent of its stock in trade is comprised of books, magazines, and other periodicals having as dominant theme matter, depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this chapter, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
(2)  ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this chapter for observation by patrons therein. 
(3)  ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL SERVICES: any non-chartered financial institution offering check cashing services, currency exchange, pay-day loans and/or similar services as its primary function. 
(4)  AN ALLEY: is a dedicated public way of less than thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters) in width affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(5)  ARCADES: any place of business or amusement, or any place of business or amusement located within a building or any portion thereof in which more than three (3) tokens, coins or otherwise operated mechanical and/or electrical amusement devices are installed, whether or not intended as a principal use or accessory use of that building or structure, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 81, recreation, amusement and games, section 7.286 and section 7.287 of the Southfield City Code. 
(6)  ATTIC: the space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable floor and the roof. 
(7)  A BASEMENT: a portion of a building partially underground, but having less than half its clear height below the grade plane (see cellar). 
(8)  BIORETENTION: a stormwater management practice that utilizes landscaping and soils to treat stormwater runoff by collecting it in shallow depressions before filtering through an amended soil medium. 


(9)  BOARD OF APPEALS: shall mean the Zoning Board of Appeals of the city of Southfield. 
(10)  BONA FIDE PHYSICIAN-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP: a treatment or counseling relationship between a physician and patient in which all of the following are present: 
(a)  The physician has reviewed the patient's relevant medical records and completed a full assessment of the patient's medical history and current medical condition, including a relevant, in-person, medical evaluation of the patient. 
(b)  The physician has created and maintained records of the patient's condition in accord with medically accepted standards. 
(c)  The physician has a reasonable expectation that he or she will provide follow-up care to the patient to monitor the efficacy of the use of medical marihuana as a treatment of the patient's debilitating medical condition. 
(d)  If the patient has given permission, the physician has notified the patient's primary care physician of the patient's debilitating medical condition and certification for the use of medical marihuana to treat that condition. 
(11)  BUFFER: a strip of land of definitive width and location reserved to separate existing uses or districts from proposed uses located within an ODD. The buffer may include existing topography, vegetation, and waterways; right(s)-of-way; and landscaped site features (including walls and decorative fencing). 
(12)  BUFFER STRIP: a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for planting of shrubs and trees to serve, either solely or in combination with fencing or walls, as an obscuring screen. A buffer strip may incorporate the installation or preservation of plantings capable of filtering and managing stormwater runoff. 

(13)  BUILDING: any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
(14)  BUILDING, ACCESSORY: is a building subordinate to the main or principal building on the lot and used for the purposes customarily incidental to those of the main building. 
(15)  BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: the height of a building is the vertical distance from the established grade at the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line for mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
(16)  BUILDING LINE: a line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line. 
(17)  BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: a building in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which it is situated. 
(Ord. No. 1102, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1603 , § 1, 4-7-13; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.4. - Definitions (C-D). 
(1)  CABARET: any place wherein food and any type of alcoholic beverage is sold or given away on the premises and the operator thereof holds a yearly license to sell such beverages by the glass and which features topless dancers, go- go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
(2)  CARPORT, PRIVATE: a permanent roofed structure, not exceeding one (1) story in height, permanently open on at least two (2) sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger motor vehicles. 
(3)  CELLAR: that portion of a building partially or wholly, underground, having half or more than half of its clear height below the grade plane. A cellar shall be uninhabitable and shall not be counted as a story. 
(4)  CHECK CASHING FACILITY: (See also alternative financial services) A person or business that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. "Check cashing facility" does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. "Check cashing facility" also does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cash checks or issue money orders for a minimum flat fee as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
(5)  CHILD CARE CENTER (OR DAY CARE CENTER): a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more preschool-age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, where parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child care center or day care center includes a facility that provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before-or after-school program, or drop-in center. 
A child care center or day care center does not include the following: 
(a)  A Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are attending for not more than three (3) hours per day for an indefinite period or for not more than eight (8) hours per day for a period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a 12-month period. 
(b)  A facility operated by a religious organization where children are in the religious organization's care for not more than three (3) hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services. 
(c)  A program that is primarily supervised school-age child-focused training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to: dancing, drama, music, or religion. This exclusion applies only to the time a child is involved in supervised, school-age-child-focused training 
(d)  A program that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age children sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but not limited to: youth clubs, scouting, and school-age recreational or supplementary education programs. This exclusion applies only to the time the school-age child is engaged in the group athletic or social activities and if the school-age child can come and go at will. 
(6)  CHILD CARE HOME, FAMILY: a private home in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides for the care of fewer than seven (7) minor children unrelated to the care provider for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year unattended by the children's parents or legal guardians, and must be licensed and/or registered by the state. 
(7)  CHILD CARE HOME, GROUP: a private home in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides for the care of more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children unrelated to the care provider of periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year unattended by the children's parents of legal guardians, and must be licensed and/or registered by the state. 
(8)  CHILD CARE, PRIVATE HOME: a private residence in which the licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child placing agency. 
(9)  CIGAR BAR: an establishment or area within an establishment that is open to the public and is designated for the smoking of cigars, purchased on the premises or elsewhere. 
(10)  CISTERN: containers designed and installed to store quantities of stormwater above or below ground, with a capacity greater than that of a rain barrel, as defined in this chapter, and generally between one hundred twenty (120) and six thousand five hundred (6,500) gallons. 

(11)  COMMISSION: shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Southfield. 
(12)  COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT: an informational document, the purpose of which is to provide the city with detailed information about the effect which a proposed rezoning or a proposed project is likely to have on the environment and the community; to list ways in which any adverse effects of such a rezoning or proposed project might be minimized. 
(13)  COUNCIL: shall mean the City Council of the City of Southfield. 
(14)  A COURT: is an open, unoccupied space other than a yard and bounded on at least two (2) sides by a building. A court extending to the front lot line or front yard, or the rear lot line or rear yard, is an outer court. Any other court is an inner court. 
(15)  CURRENCY EXCHANGE (See also alternative financial services): A commercial use that exchanges common currencies, sells money orders or cashier's checks, and cashes checks as its principal business activity. This shall not include a properly chartered financial institution. 
(16)  DEBILITATING MEDICAL CONDITION: means one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Cancer, glaucoma, positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, hepatitis C, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Crohn's disease, agitation of alzheimer's disease, nail patella, or the treatment of these conditions. 
(b)  A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its treatment that produces one (1) or more of the following: cachexia or wasting syndrome; severe and chronic pain; severe nausea; seizures, including but not limited to those characteristic of epilepsy; or severe and persistent muscle spasms, including but not limited to those characteristic of multiple sclerosis. 
(c)  Any other medical condition or its treatment approved by the department, as provided for in Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, P.A. 2008, Initiated Law 1 (MMMA), as amended. 
(17)  DEPARTMENT: the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(18)  DEPARTMENT STORE: a department store is defined as one (1) retail store providing shopping goods, general merchandise, apparel and home furnishings in full depth and variety or one (1) retail store containing a minimum floor area of forty-five thousand (45,000) usable square feet (4,185 square meters). 
(19)  DETENTION BASIN: any constructed basin that temporarily stores water before discharging into an approved location. 

(20)  DEVELOPMENT AREA: a tract of land of five (5) acres (2.025 hectares) or more which may be subsequently subdivided into parcels of less than five (5) acres (2.025 hectares). The development area may be owned by or controlled by one (1) or more parties who are acting with the single purpose of developing the contiguous parcels in accordance with the provisions of a single zoning district. 
(21)  DISPLAY, OUTSIDE: the outdoor standing or placement of immediately usable goods which are available for sale, lease, or rental and which are displayed in such manner as to be readily accessible for inspection and removal by the potential customer. 
(22)  DISTRICT: a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
(23)  DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: is a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
(24)  DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY HIGH RISE: a multiple family dwelling of three (3) or more stories in height. 
(25)  DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY LOW RISE: a multiple family dwelling not more than two (2) stories in height. 
(26)  DWELLING, ONE FAMILY: is a building designed exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, one (1) family. 
(27)  DWELLING, TWO FAMILY: is a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
(28)  DWELLING UNIT: is a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
(29)  DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY TYPE: a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one (1) room in addition to kitchen and sanitary facilities and containing not less than four hundred and twenty-five (425) square feet (39.525 square meters) of usable floor area. 
(Ord. No. 1331, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 1588 , § 1, 12-25-11; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1613 , § 1, 8-18-13; Ord. No. 1619 , § 1, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.5. - Definitions (E-F). 
(1)  EMERGENCY SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS: a facility which provides congregate-style temporary lodging with or without meals and supportive services on the premises to primarily the homeless for more than four (4) weeks in any calendar year. An emergency shelter does not provide such lodging to any individual (1) who is required because of age, mental disability or other reason to reside either in a public or private institution or (2) who is imprisoned or otherwise detained pursuant to either federal or state law. 
(2)  ENCLOSED LOCKED FACILITY: an indoor closet, room, or other comparable, stationary, and fully enclosed area equipped with secured locks or other functioning security devices that permit access only by a registered primary caregiver or registered qualifying patient. 
(3)  A FAMILY: is any number of persons living together in a room or rooms comprising a single housekeeping unit, doing their cooking on the premises and related by blood or marriage and including the domestic employees thereof. Any group of persons not so related, but inhabiting a single house, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be considered to constitute one (1) family for each five (5) persons, exclusive of domestic employees, contained in such group. 
(4)  A FARM: is a parcel or parcels of contiguous unplatted land of not less than ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) which is directly farmed or used in the normal pursuits of agriculture by one (1) farmer, and which may include establishments operating as greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, or apiaries. But establishments operating as fish hatcheries, stockyards, recreational parks, stone quarries, gravel pits, breeding or raising furbearing animals or game, or keeping more than the normal number of dogs or livestock usually kept on a farm shall not be considered farms hereunder as to the particular part or portion of the premises used or engaged in the operation of said enterprises; and provided, any other matter which emits an offensive odor and/or is obnoxious, detrimental, or dangerous to the public health or safety, or interferes with the peaceful enjoyment of property, shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, on a parcel of land of less than ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares); the growing and selling of produce, animals, and fowl, and the keeping of bees shall be permitted under this chapter, provided same is produced on said parcel of land and does not become a nuisance or obnoxious to the public health, morals, general welfare, or safety of the community. 
(5)  FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: a bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office, or automated teller machine, which is chartered under federal or state law. Financial institutions shall not include a currency exchange. 
(6)  FLOODPLAIN: the land adjacent to a body of water which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwaters which has the same boundaries as the one-hundred-year base flood level as delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the City of Southfield, Community Panel No. 260179-0010 B, prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and the profiles prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration in conjunction with said map. Specifically, the floodplain controls apply to the main River Rouge, Pebble Creek, Franklin Branch, Evans Ditch, Farmington Branch, and Carpenter Branch. 
(a)  REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas designated by the profiles in the flood insurance study, for the City of Southfield, Michigan 1978, and prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood, or that flood which has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(b)  FLOODPLAIN FRINGE: that portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodplain (one hundred-year flood) and designated as Zone "B" (one hundred- to five-hundred-year flood) on the flood insurance rate maps and the flood insurance study. 
(6)  FLOOR AREA: is the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the dwelling unit and shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, common halls, and stairways in two-family or multiple family structures, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
(7)  FRONTAGE: that portion of any property abutting a street; a corner lot and a through lot have frontage on both abutting streets. 
(8)  FRONTAGE BLOCK: for the purposes of this chapter, a frontage block shall mean all land fronting on both sides of a street between the nearest streets intersecting said streets. 
(Ord. No. 1347, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1654 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 5.6. - Definitions (G-K). 
(1)  GARAGE, PRIVATE: a private garage is a structure enclosed on all sides by walls which extend up from the ground to the full height of the structure for the storage principally of private passenger motor vehicles, or for the private use solely of the owner or occupant of the principal building on a lot, or of his family or domestic employees and shall be not more than one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) in height. No service for profit may be conducted within the structure. A carport is not a garage. 
(2)  GASOLINE STATION: 
(a)  Gasoline filling station: a place for only the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuel and related automotive accessories such as windshield washer fluid, motor oil, wipers, scrapers, etc. directly to users of motor vehicles. Retail sales of single containers of various beverages excluding alcoholic liquor, beer and wine, are permitted as are individual packages of sundries such as gum, candy, cigarettes, newspapers etc. 
(b)  Gasoline service station: a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuel and related automotive accessories such as windshield washer fluid, motor oil, wipers, scrapers, etc. directly to users of motor vehicles. Retail sales of single containers of various beverages excluding alcoholic liquor, beer and wine, are permitted as are individual packages of sundries such as gum, candy, cigarettes, newspapers, etc. Also permitted is the servicing of, and minor repair of, motor vehicles. 
(c)  Gasoline filling/service station with ancillary retail sales area: a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuel directly to users of motor vehicles and the servicing of, and minor repair of, motor vehicles. Ancillary retail sales of automotive and non-automotive related products shall be acceptable under the following guidelines: automotive accessories such as windshield washer fluid, motor oil, wipers, scrapers, etc.; non-automotive related products of single containers of various beverages excluding alcoholic liquor, beer and wine and individual packages of sundries such as gum, candy, cigarettes, newspapers etc. along with milk, eggs, bread and/or other general grocery items, pre-prepared food items that are not subject to licensing by the Michigan Department of Agriculture or the Oakland County Health Department. Non-perishable item such as clothing, footwear, hats, music and other general retail items not associated with the dispensing of motor fuel are prohibited. 
(3)  A GRADE: is a ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of the building. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by computing the average elevation of the ground for each face of the building and taking the average of said total averages. 
(4)  GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE OR LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): activities, landscaping measures, and stormwater management measures designed to mimic natural hydrologic conditions and to infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain stormwater runoff close to its source. Green infrastructure shall include, but not be limited to, cisterns, and green roofs, as defined in this chapter. 

(5)  GREEN ROOF: an engineered roofing system that includes vegetation planted in a growing medium above an underlying waterproof membrane material, designed to reduce the volume of storm water runoff from building roofs. 

(6)  HOSPITAL: an installation used primarily for the inpatient medical or surgical care and treatment of sick and disabled persons. 
(7)  HOTEL: a building, or part of a building, or a group of buildings, containing rooms designed to provide transient lodging for compensation which shall include as minimum services, but not limited to: bellboy service, room service, maid service, telephones, desk service, full-service restaurant, meeting and conference facilities with a joint capacity of at least the same number of people as there are rooms in the hotel. 
(8)  HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY: an installation other than a hospital, hotel or nursing home which provides dwelling units for persons where at least one (1) occupant per unit shall be at least sixty-two (62) years of age at the time of occupancy with the exception that units occupied by the physically handicapped must have at least one (1) occupant fifty (50) years of age or older. Such housing shall include the following: 
(a)  Non-skid bathtubs. 
(b)  Electrical outlets at levels at least twenty-four (24) inches (60.96 centimeters) above the floor. 
(c)  Grab bars around bathtubs and showers. 
(d)  Lever type faucets and door handles. 
(e)  At least one (1) emergency signal in each unit which is audible and visible at a central location. 
(f)  All buildings over one (1) story shall contain an elevator for the tenants. 
(9)  IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: a surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground such as roofs, streets, sidewalks, driveways, and parking lots. 
(10)  INDUSTRIAL PARK: a planned industrial development containing a minimum of four (4) or more buildings under single ownership characterized by architecturally similar building styles on landscaped sites and served only by one (1) internal street, either private or public. 
(11)  INFILTRATION PRACTICE: a stormwater control measure or measures designed to allow stormwater to soak into the soil mantle. 
(12)  JUNKYARD OR JUNK STORAGE: the outdoor standing or placement of waste or scrap materials including, but not limited to, scrap iron or other metals, cans, automobiles, machinery, paper, rubber, rags, tires, lumber, concrete products, building materials, or bottles. 
(Ord. No. 1220, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 1502, 5-30-04; Ord. No. 1523, 11-13-05; Ord. No. 1606 , § 1, 6-2-13; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.7. - Definitions (L-M). 
(1)  LANDSCAPING: the treatment of the ground surface with live materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines, and other growing horticultural material. Landscaping shall include vegetated stormwater management measures including bioretention areas, swales, and infiltration practices as defined in this chapter. In addition, the combination or design may include other decorative surfacing such as wood chips, or mulch materials not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the total for any landscape area. Structural features such as fountains, pools, statues, garden walls less than three (3) feet (0.915 meters) in height, and benches shall also be considered a part of landscaping but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of landscaping. In addition, artificial plant materials shall not be permitted in required landscape areas. 
(2)  LOADING SPACE: an off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
(3)  A LOT: is a parcel of land on which a principal building and its accessories may be placed, together with the required open spaces. 
(4)  LOT, CORNER: a corner lot is a lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut a street, provided that such two (2) sides intersect at an angle of not more than one hundred and thirty-five (135E) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection are not more than one hundred and thirty-five (135E) degrees. In the case of a corner lot with a curved street line, the corner shall be considered to be that point of the street and lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents herein described. 
1.  LOT, INTERIOR: an interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot. 
2.  LOT, THRU: a lot having front and rear lot lines abutting a street. 
3.  LOT OF RECORD: a parcel of land delineated on a plat recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. 
4.  LOT LINE, FRONT: in the case of a lot abutting upon one (1) street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of any other lot, one (1) such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this chapter, provided it is so designated by the building plans filed for approval with the director of the department of building and safety engineering. 
5.  LOT LINE, REAR: the rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be that assumed line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
6.  LOT LINE, SIDE: a side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior lot line. 
7.  A MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: is any street with an existing or proposed right-of-way of one hundred and twenty (120) feet (36.6 meters) or more. 
8.  MARIHUANA: that term as defined in section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
9.  MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc or any charge thereof, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical or electrical machines, and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated and in accordance with the provisions of chapter 81, recreation, amusements and games, section 7.286 and section 7.287 of the Southfield City Code. 
10.  MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITY: a licensed facility, building or structure used, maintained or occupied to provide the medical use of marihuana for use by qualifying patient(s) and a primary caregiver as provided and authorized by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and in exchange for compensation for reimbursement of costs associated with assisting a registered qualifying patient in the medical use of marihuana. A medical marihuana facility is located on land that is owned, leased, or rented by either the registered qualifying patient or a person designated through the departmental registration process as the primary caregiver for the registered qualifying patient or patients for whom the marihuana plants are grown; and equipped with functioning locks or other security devices that restrict access to only the registered qualifying patient or the registered primary caregiver who owns, leases, or rents the property on which the structure is located. A medical marihuana facility shall meet all the requirements of a special land use in designated zoning district(s). 
11.  MEDICAL USE: the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
12.  MOBILE HOME: a structure designed or used for residential occupancy built upon, or having, a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached by which it may be moved upon a highway, whether or not such structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached or is supported by blocks or skirted. 
13.  MOTEL: a building or buildings of attached, semidetached or detached rental units, containing a bedroom and a bathroom, designed for overnight lodging and which may not be used as a domicile. The term motel may include rooms with cooking facilities, suites, motor courts, tourist courts, motor lodges, residence inns, or residence hotels which lack the full service requirements of a hotel in section 5.6 (5). 
(Ord. No. 1062, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 1220, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 1434, 9-24-98; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.8. - Definitions (N-S). 
(1)  NONCONFORMING BUILDING: a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and/or the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  NONCONFORMING USE: a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this chapter, or amendment thereto, became effective, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter nor to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  NURSING HOME: an installation other than a hospital, having as its primary function the rendering of nursing care for extended periods of time to persons afflicted with illness, injury, or infirmity. 
(4)  ONE FAMILY ATTACHED: a building or structure for more than one (1) dwelling unit, where each dwelling unit is separated from the abutting dwelling unit by a party wall extending up from the ground the full height of the building. Each dwelling unit shall have direct access from outdoors from at least the front and rear or side of the unit. 
(5)  OVERLAY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (ODD): the overlay development district (ODD) means a unified site design for one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land to be developed as a single entity, the plan for which may propose density or intensity transfers, density or intensity increases, mixing of land uses, or any combination thereof, and that provides flexibility to lot size, bulk, or type of dwelling or building use, density, intensity, lot coverage, parking, required common open space, public art or other standards to zoning use district requirements that are otherwise applicable to the area in which it is located. 
(6)  PARKING: the standing or placement of motor vehicles currently used to transport people, goods, or materials in the conduct of normal daily activities provided that such standing or placement is limited to periods of less than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(7)  PARKING SPACE: the area required for parking an automobile which shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long, but not including drives and aisles. 

(8)  PAWN SHOP: a business or establishment which loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
(9)  PAY DAY LOANS: (See also alternative financial services) An establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for personal checks as collateral. 
(10)  PERMEABLE SURFACING: a material or materials and accompanying subsurface layers designed and installed specifically to allow stormwater to drain through the material, thereby reducing the volume of stormwater runoff from a hard surfaced area. Permeable surfacing may include without limitation: paver blocks, "grasscrete" or similar structural support materials, and permeable concrete or asphalt. 

(11)  PHYSICIAN: an individual licensed as a physician under Part 170 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17001 to 333.17084, or an osteopathic physician under Part 175 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17501 to 333.17556. 
(12)  PLANTER BOX: a structure with vertical walls and an open or closed bottom, which may be attached to a building or structure, that is planted with a soil medium and vegetation intended to collect, absorb, and treat runoff from impervious surfaces. 

(13)  PRIMARY CAREGIVER OR CAREGIVER: a person who is at least twenty-one (21) years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has not been convicted of any felony within the past ten (10) years and has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs or a felony that is an assaultive crime as defined in section 9a of chapter X of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 770.9a. 
(14)  PUBLIC UTILITY: any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public, under governmental regulations: electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water, communication, or sewage disposal. 
(15)  QUALIFYING PATIENT: a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition. 
(16)  RAIN BARREL: a structure designed and installed to collect roof runoff in containers typically ranging from 50 to 100 gallons in size, with subsequent release to landscaped areas. 

Examples of rain barrels 
(17)  REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER: the regional shopping center is designed to provide a large concentration of comparison shopping needs for persons residing in a densely settled urban area. The regional shopping center shall provide shopping goods, general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home furnishings in full depth and variety. The regional shopping center will contain a minimum of three hundred thousand (300,000) gross square feet (27,900 square meters) of commercial building area and will include at least one (1) department store. 
(18)  REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD: a document issued by the department that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver. 
(19)  RESTAURANTS: 
(a)  DINING ROOM: a structure which is maintained, operated, and advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served, and consumed, primarily within the structure. Such food and beverage are served primarily in non-disposable (reusable by the restaurant) containers. 
(b)  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: a drive-in restaurant is any establishment where food, frozen dessert, and/or beverages are served to customers while seated in their motor vehicles upon the premises. It shall also include any establishment where the customers may serve themselves and are permitted to consume food and beverages in a motor vehicle parked on the premises or at other facilities which are provided for the use of the patron for the purpose of consumption and which are located outside of the building or structures. 
(c)  FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: a structure which is maintained, operated, and advertised or held out to the public as a place where food, beverage, and/or desserts are served to customers from a serving counter in disposable (not reusable by restaurant) containers or wrappers. Such food, beverage, and/or desserts may be consumed: inside the building; outside, at facilities provided; or "carried out" for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  CARRYOUT RESTAURANT: a structure which is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food, beverage, and/or desserts are served in disposable containers or wrappers from a serving counter for consumption exclusively off the premises. 
(e)  BAR/LOUNGE: a structure or part of a structure designed, maintained, and operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The selling of food and/or snacks may also be permitted. If the bar/lounge area is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated and/or operated. 
(f)  OUTSIDE DINING: seasonal outside dining is permitted in conjunction with the above uses when the use complies with the following conditions. 
1.  Seasonal outside dining, for the purposes of this chapter, will be defined as beginning on the first day of May through the last day of October. 
2.  The hours of operation for outside dining will be consistent with the hours of operation of the inside restaurant, with the exception of establishments which hold a liquor license in which case the designated outside dining area shall close at midnight. 
3.  That there is adequate parking for the outside dining area in accordance with the parking provisions of Article 4, Section 5.30 of this Ordinance. 
4.  That the outside dining area is separated from sidewalks and driveways by means of landscaping, planter boxes, and/or fences and railings. 
5.  That all tables, chairs and trash receptacles will be removed at the end of the summer season. 
6.  Appropriate trash receptacles shall be provided within the designated outside dining area. 
7.  Outside entertainment, whether live or recorded, is expressly prohibited unless approval is granted by the city council. 
(20)  SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: is any earth station antenna of parabolic or spherical design for the reception or transmission of earth radio and/or television signals to/or from satellites or other orbiting facilities. 
(21)  SCHOOL: a building or part of a building, which is owned or leased by, or under the control of, a public or private school or school system for the purpose of instruction as required by section 1561 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which is occupied by six (6) or more students, and which is used four (4) or more hours per day or more than twelve (12) hours per week. 
(a)  Drug-free school zone: an area inclusive of any property used for school purposes by any publicly funded primary school, whether or not owned by such school, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any such property, and within or immediately adjacent to school buses. 
(22)  SETBACK: the distance required to obtain the minimum front, side, and rear open space provisions of this chapter. 
(23)  SMOKE OR SMOKING: the lighting, inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of any lighted cigar, cigarette, tobacco, plant, or other similar article or combustible substance in any form. 
(24)  SMOKING LOUNGE: an establishment which, in whole or in part, includes as part of the business, or otherwise, permits the smoking of tobacco or other substances including, but not limited to, establishments commonly known as or referred to cigar bars/lounges, hookah bars/cafes, tobacco bars/cafes, or smoking parlors. 
(25)  SOUP KITCHEN: a facility regularly used to furnish meals without cost or at very low cost to needy and destitute persons, however, lodging is prohibited. A soup kitchen shall not be considered to be a restaurant. The preparation of meals in any building or structure, or portion thereof, for distribution at another site or location shall not be considered to be a soup kitchen. 
(26)  SPECIAL EXCEPTION: a use permitted when the facts and conditions specified in this chapter, as those upon which the exception is permitted, are found to exist by the appropriate administrative officer or body. 
(27)  SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: for the purposes of this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (1) human genitals, pubic region, (2) buttock, and (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(28)  SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: for the purposes of this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(b)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. 
(c)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
(29)  STORAGE, NEW VEHICLES: the standing or placement of new operable automobiles or trucks not previously used. 
(30)  STORAGE, OUTSIDE: the outdoor standing or placement of usable and potentially usable goods or equipment other than for display and not including waste or scrap materials. 
(31)  STORMWATER: water from rainfall, snowmelt or other precipitation that runs over or off of a surface rather than being absorbed or infiltrated. 
(32)  STORY: that portion of a building, but not including a cellar, as defined in this chapter between one (1) floor level and the ceiling next above it and which portion meets the requirements of the Building Code (Chapter 98) for a habitable room. 
(33)  A STREET: is any thoroughfare or way, other than a public alley, dedicated to the use of the public and open to public travel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle, place, court, terrace, or any similar designations. 
(34)  STRUCTURE: anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachments to something having location on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1191, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 1430, 9-24-98; Ord. No. 1331, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 1336, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1603 , § 2, 4-7-13; Ord. No. 1619 , § 1, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1654 , § 2, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.9. - Definitions (T-Z). 
(1)  TOBACCO SPECIALTY RETAIL STORE: an establishment in which the primary purpose is the retail sale of tobacco products and smoking paraphernalia, and in which the sale of other products is incidental. Tobacco specialty retail store does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
(2)  TRAILER COACH (MOBILE HOME): is a vehicle designed, used, or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons. 
(3)  TRAILER COURT, TRAILER CAMP: any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more trailer coaches are parked or where public parking space for two (2) or more trailer coaches is provided with facilities for residential occupancy. 
(4)  URBAN OPEN SPACE: open space shall consist of urban open space: 
(a)  Urban open space: the following are examples of urban open space, which are located in the ODD districts: A public space that functions as a gathering space or part of a downtown, special subarea (e.g. Southfield City Centre, Southfield Downtown Development Authority, or Southfield Technological Corridor, etc.), or other area within the public realm that helps promote social interaction and create a "sense of place." Possible examples may include such space as: plazas, "town" squares, parks, marketplaces, public commons and malls, public greens, special areas with convention centers or grounds, sites within buildings (such as lobbies, concourses, or public spaces within public and private buildings). 
(5)  USABLE FLOOR AREA: shall be the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of all the floors of the building or structure and of all accessory buildings measured from the interior face of the exterior walls and which may be made usable for human habitation but excludes the horizontal floor area of heater rooms, mechanical equipment rooms, attics, unenclosed porches, light shafts, public corridors, public stairwells, and public toilets. 
(6)  USABLE MARIHUANA: the dried leaves and flowers of the marihuana plant, and any mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and roots of the plant. 
(7)  USE, ACCESSORY: a use subordinate to the principal use and for purposes clearly incidental to those of the principal use. 
(8)  USE, PRINCIPAL: the primary use to which the premises are devoted and the primary purpose for which the premises are used. 
(9)  VEGETATED SWALE (also known as a rain garden): a stormwater conveyance system routing stormwater flows through vegetated areas, a natural elongated depression or a constructed channel. A vegetated infiltration swale differs from a conventional drainage channel or ditch in that it is constructed specifically to promote infiltration. 

(10)  VISITING QUALIFYING PATIENT: a patient who is not a resident of this state or who has been a resident of this state for less than thirty (30) days. 
(11)  WRITTEN CERTIFICATION: a document signed by a physician, stating all of the following: 
(a)  The patient's debilitating medical condition. 
(b)  The physician has completed a full assessment of the patient's medical history and current medical condition, including a relevant, in-person, medical evaluation. 
(c)  In the physician's professional opinion, the patient is likely to receive therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of marihuana to treat or alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
(12)  YARD, FRONT: is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line, unoccupied from the ground upward. 
(13)  YARD, REAR: a rear yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line unoccupied from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified. 
(14)  YARD, SIDE: a side yard is an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and of a uniform width measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified. 
(15)  ZONING VARIANCE: is a modification of the literal provision of this chapter granted when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause practical difficulty or undue hardship owing to the circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of a variance are practical difficulty, undue hardship, and unique circumstances applying to the specific property involved. A variance is not justified unless all elements are present in each case. 
(Ord. No. 1603 , § 3, 4-7-13; Ord. No. 1619 , § 1, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1637 , § 1, 4-5-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 1, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 

Sec. 5.11. - Districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Residential Zoning Districts 
R A Single-Family 
R 1 Single-Family 
R 2 Single-Family 
R 3 Single-Family 
R 4 Single-Family 
R E Single-Family 
RMH Mobile Home Park 
R-T Attached Single-Family 
RM Multiple-Family (Low Rise) 
RMM Multiple-Family (Medium Rise) 
RMU Multiple-Family (High Rise) 
Nonresidential Districts 
O-S Office-Service 
ERO-M Education-Research-Office-Limited 
ERO Education-Research-Office 
TR Technical-Education-Research 
TV-R Television-Radio-Office-Studio 
NS Neighborhood Shopping 
RS Regional Shopping 
RC Regional Center 
B-1 Neighborhood Business 
B-2 Planned Business 
B-3 General Business 
I-L Light Industrial 
I-1 Industrial 
P Vehicular Parking 
Sec. 5.12. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of said districts, shown upon the map marked and designated zoning district map of the city, which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as designated on said zoning district map; said map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all fully set forth and described herein. 
(1)  Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts are lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, or such lines extended, and the limits of the city. 
(2)  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning district map accompanying this chapter, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or confliction as to the intended location of any district, boundary lines shall be interpreted upon written application to, or upon its own motion by, the board of appeals, after recommendation by the planning commission. 
Sec. 5.13. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street or alley shall be vacated, such street or alley or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches. 
Secs. 5.14-5.17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5.18. - Scope. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no building or land or part thereof located in the city shall be used, altered, constructed, reconstructed, moved within or into said city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter which apply to the district in which it is located. Any lawful, nonconforming use existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter may be continued, provided that the building or land or use thereof shall not be structurally changed, altered, enlarged or moved, unless such altered, enlarged, or moved building or use shall conform to the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. No nonconforming use, if discontinued or changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall be resumed or changed back to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be deemed discontinued for the purpose of this section if no nonconforming use is made of the property for a period of one (1) year. 
Sec. 5.19. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    No dwelling shall be built upon a lot having a width, at the minimum required building line, of less than the lot width as required in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.20. - Transfer of requirements. 
    Where any structure or use is permitted in a district other than the district in which such structure or use is first permitted under this chapter, such structure or use shall be subject to all of the requirements and regulations as are set forth in this chapter in the district in which such structure or use is first permitted. 
Sec. 5.21. - Retention of jurisdiction. 
    In all instances where a review and/or a finding by any city agency is required under the provisions of this chapter, that agency shall retain jurisdiction over such review and/or finding and that any variation from said review and/or finding shall require approval from that agency. 
Sec. 5.22. - Site plan requirements. 
    Whenever in this chapter a site plan is required, the following information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)  A scale of not less than 1" = 20' (2.54 centimeters = 6.1 meters) if the subject property is less than three (3) acres (1.215 hectares) and 1" = 100' (2.54 centimeters = 30.5 meters) if three (3) acres (1.215 hectares) or more. 
(2)  Date, north point, and scale. 
(3)  The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
(4)  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the subject property. Structures include the location and size of all existing trees and utility lines on and directly adjacent to the site. 
(5)  The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
(6)  The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
(7)  A landscaping plan shall be required in accordance with article 4 section 5.31(21)(b), including an itemized plant materials schedule of all materials and trees to be installed on the site as well as areas of existing vegetation and trees to be protected during construction and conserved. The itemized plant materials schedule shall include botanical and common names of materials, sizes, quantities, and the name, address and registration number of the registered landscape architect who is responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. 
(8)  The names, addresses and registration number of the professionally registered architect, planner or engineer responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(9)  Once a site plan has been approved, that site plan shall be strictly adhered to and maintained as approved, including the landscaping, and shall not be altered or modified in any way without first securing permission of the approving body. 
(10)  The city planner shall be authorized to review and approve amendments to previously approved site plans, when said amendment is for expansion of floor space in an existing building which was previously approved by the city council which expansion is no greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross square footage of the building area and not to exceed 10,000 square feet (930 square meters) of floor space of the previously approved building, or construction of a customary accessory structure, such as a garage, shed, carport, or dumpster screen, to an existing building when the site is already the subject of an existing or previously approved site plan by city council, provided that the accessory structure does not exceed ten (10) percent of the building area and not to exceed one thousand (1000) square feet, (93 square meters) and provided the amendment meets all the requirements of this chapter, and does not require the granting of any variance by the zoning board of appeals in order to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1153, 11-26-84; Ord. No. 1618 , § 1, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.22-1. - Special use procedure. 
    Whenever in this chapter there are uses permitted subject to special approval, the following procedure shall be followed: 
The petitioner shall submit an application, documentation, and site plans to accurately reflect the requested use to the planning department. The matter will be referred to the planning commission by the city council who may request additional information to assist in the review of the request. Such additional information may consist of floor plans, signing, building elevations, traffic studies, etc. 
A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MZEA), Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, with notice being given to the owners of the property that is the subject of the request, all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the request and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the zoning jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in the MZEA, and legal notice of the public hearing shall be given in a local newspaper of general circulation. Notice of the public hearing shall be given within the time prescribed pursuant to section 103 of the MZEA. The planning commission may recommend favorably, unfavorably, or favorably with conditions to the city council and shall state the reasons for their recommendation. 
Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the MZEA with notice being given to the owners of the property that is the subject of the request, all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the request and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the zoning jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in the MZEA, and legal notice of the public hearing shall be given in a local newspaper of general circulation. Notice of the public hearing shall be given within the time prescribed pursuant to section 103 of the MZEA. The city council may approve, deny, or approve with conditions the special use request and shall specify the basis for their decision. 
(Ord. No. 1260, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1591 , § 1, 5-6-12) 
Sec. 5.22-2. - Conditional rezoning. 
(1)  Intent, application for and processing of conditional rezoning. 
(a)  This section is intended to implement section 405 of the Zoning Enabling Act (MCL125.3405) authorizing conditional rezonings. 
(b)  An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. The offer shall be contained in a proposed conditional rezoning agreement, as described in this section, below. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a later time during the rezoning process; however, the offer shall in all events be considered by the planning commission prior to being acted upon by the city council. 
(c)  The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
(d)  The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 
(e)  Approval under this section shall not obviate the requirement for special land use approval, variance relief and/or site plan approval. 
(f)  If the city is in the process of proceeding with a conditional rezoning under this section, and the applicant has not voluntarily offered the condition(s) being considered, the applicant shall inform the city clerk in writing of such fact prior to the final action of the city council granting the conditional rezoning. 
(2)  Standards for approval. The following standards, among other factors deemed relevant by the planning commission and city council shall be considered in determining whether to approve a rezoning with conditional rezoning agreement, provided, the determination on whether the underlying rezoning itself should be granted shall be deemed to be a legislative decision of the city council equivalent to city council action on other amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Compatibility with the policies and uses designated for the land and area in the city's future/master land use plan; 
(b)  Compatibility of the uses and improvements allowed under the proposed rezoning with conditional rezoning agreement with other zones and uses in the surrounding area; 
(c)  Availability and adequacy of public services and facilities, and whether there is likely to be any adverse impact from a development or use allowed under the rezoning with conditional rezoning agreement; and 
(d)  Whether the development that would be approved shall advance the public interest, weighing the reasonably expected burdens likely to result from allowing the development against the reasonably expected benefits to be achieved by the development. 
(3)  Approval and effect. 
(a)  If the city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, determines in its discretion that the proposed rezoning with conditional rezoning agreement should be approved, the conditional rezoning agreement shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the city council to accomplish the requested rezoning with conditional rezoning agreement. 
(b)  The conditional rezoning agreement, as initially submitted, or as may be modified during the course of the rezoning process, shall: 
i.  Be in a form recordable with the register of deeds for oakland county or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable affidavit or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the conditional rezoning agreement in a manner acceptable to the city attorney. 
ii.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
iii.  Contain a statement and acknowledgement that the terms and conditions of the conditional rezoning agreement shall run with the land be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner and city, and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees. 
iv.  A specification of all conditions proposed by the land owner to be applicable to the use and development of the land, including the following to the extent relevant: 
1.  The location, size, height or other measure for and/or of buildings, structures, improvements, setbacks, landscaping, buffers, design, architecture and other features. 
2.  Permissible uses of the property, and a specification of maximum density or intensity of development and/or use, expressed in terms fashioned for the particular development and/or use, for example, and in no respect by way of limitation, units per acre, maximum usable floor area, hours of operation, and the like. 
3.  Preservation of natural resources and/or features. 
4.  Facilities and design approaches to address any relevant traffic, storm water management and water quality issues, including the location, design and sizing of stormwater management measures. 
5.  Provisions for maintenance of areas on the land, as relevant. 
v.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the conditional rezoning agreement or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city with the register of deeds for Oakland County. 
vi.  Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that the conditional rezoning agreement, as the same may have been modified during the rezoning process (if applicable) has been freely, voluntarily and knowledgeably offered by such owners, and agreed upon in its entirety. 
(c)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with a conditional rezoning agreement. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands rezoned with a conditional rezoning agreement. 
(d)  The approved conditional rezoning agreement or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof shall be filed by the city with the register of deeds for Oakland County. 
(e)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements of the zoning district and conditional rezoning agreement. 
(4)  Compliance with agreement. Any failure to comply with a condition contained within the conditional zoning agreement shall constitute a violation of this zoning ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
(5)  Time period for establishing development or use. Unless a longer or shorter time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land authorized in the conditional rezoning agreement shall be commenced within twelve (12) months from the effective date of the rezoning and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon written request of the land owner be extended by the city council if (1) it is demonstrated by the land owner and determined by the city council in its discretion that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion and (2) the city council determines in its discretion that there has not been a change in circumstances that would render the current zoning with conditional rezoning agreement incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
(6)  Termination of conditional rezoning agreement. If the approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under subsection e, above, or if the property owner makes a request in writing for termination of the conditional rezoning agreement prior to making any improvements pursuant to the conditional rezoning agreement, then the rezoning and conditional zoning agreement shall be deemed to be immediately terminated except in the city's discretion as to that part of the land, if any, that has been developed. In the event of such termination, no new development or use of the land shall be permitted until a new zoning classification is approved by a rezoning of the land. Upon such termination, the planning department shall immediately initiate the process to rezone the land in whole or in part to its prior or other appropriate zoning classification. The procedure for considering and adopting this rezoning shall be the same as applied to all other zoning requests. Once the rezoning has occurred, the city shall, upon request of the land owner, record with the register of deeds for Oakland County a notice that the conditional rezoning agreement, except in the city's discretion as to that part of the land, if any, that has been developed, is no longer in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1, 11-19-07; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.22-3. - Overlay Development District (ODD). 
A.  Purpose, intent and qualifications: 
1.  General purpose. Because traditional zoning separates uses into different districts using restrictive placement controls, it does not allow for creative development incorporating a variety of uses. The purpose of the overlay development district (ODD) is to encourage development of those parcels of land which, because of their size; their location being uniquely situated with regard to (higher density) adjoining uses; or their unique environmental features, a more flexible development scheme could foster creative development design, or preserve desirable natural features, significant historical landmarks and architectural features located within the ODD. Therefore, the ODD modifies the traditional form of zoning and permits variety in design, site configuration, setbacks, layout, use, and encourages efficiency in use of land and natural resources, while ensuring compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
In return for greater flexibility in site design requirements, ODD's are expected to deliver exceptional quality community designs that provide above-average pedestrian amenities, incorporate creative design in the layout of buildings, focus on pedestrian space and circulation; incorporate public art; assure compatibility with surrounding land uses and neighborhood character; incorporate green infrastructure stormwater management measures and the restoration of natural functions through landscaping, tree planting or soil amendment; and provide greater efficiency in the layout and provision of roads, utilities, and other infrastructure. 
Finally, ODDs authorized under this chapter (see attached map) shall provide a better and more desirable living and physical environment than what would be possible under the zoning regulations that apply to the development or traditional zoning district, while implementing the policies and objectives of the comprehensive master plan, as amended. 
2.  General intent. The adoption of an ODD is intended to encourage creativity through the unified development of property utilizing mixed residential, commercial and non-residential uses that provide adequate housing and employment opportunities. It is the intent of this article to allow rezoning of qualifying properties to ODD. The specific objectives of the ODD are to: 
a.  Encourage innovation in land uses and variety of design, layout and type of structures constructed. 
b.  Promote low impact development (LID) and green infrastructure stormwater management techniques, as defined in this chapter. 
c.  Achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the provision of public services and utilities. 
d.  Permit flexibility in the placement, setbacks, lot area and building type regulations, and combination of uses while assuring the application of sound site planning standards. 
e.  Encourage the provision of pedestrian amenities and more extensive landscaping, particularly landscaping that restores natural functions through enhanced soil quality, tree canopy restoration, and use of native plantings where appropriate. 
f.  Provide opportunities for improvements to public streets or facilities, pathways, and infrastructure. 
g.  Promote the development of walkable, mixed-use developments that will result in more sustainable and healthy community. 
h.  Achieve consistent and coordinated site design and higher quality architectural design and materials. 
i.  Encourage the use, reuse, redevelopment and improvement of existing sites. 
j.  Encourage the use and improvement of land where site conditions make development under conventional zoning difficult and less desirable. 
k.  Incorporate public art. 
3.  Intent of requiring development agreement. It is recognized that because of the complexity and uniqueness of each parcel or tract of land proposed for ODD rezoning, it is beneficial to the city and the development process if a development agreement which includes all conceptual plans, architectural elevations, development standards and specified conditions tailored to the particular parcel of property, are submitted together with the application for rezoning. This approach is intended to accomplish the objectives of the zoning ordinance by incorporating a land development project review process into the rezoning procedure to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area. 
4.  Eligibility for ODD rezoning; qualifying conditions. To be eligible for ODD rezoning as provided by this article, all of the following conditions must exist with regard to the proposed ODD site: 
a.  Rezoning to ODD shall not be granted in situations where the same land use objectives may be established by the application of applicable conventional zoning provisions or standards. 
b.  The land proposed to be included within the ODD must consist of sufficient acreage as recommended by the planning Commission to meet the objectives of this chapter: 
 Southfield City Centre & Downtown Development Authority subareas: one (1) acre(s) or greater 
 Southfield Technology Corridor Subarea, Smartzone and other areas identified on ODD eligible areas map: two (2) acres or greater 
An ODD may have a lot size of less than what is specified above in items A.4.b. above, if the city council finds: 
1.  That an unusual physical or topographic feature of importance to the area as a whole, such as wetlands, exists on the site or in the surrounding neighborhood that will contribute to and be protected by the ODD; or, 
2.  That the property or the surrounding area has an historic character of importance to the community that will be protected by the ODD; or, 
3.  That the proposed ODD is adjacent to an approved ODD that has been completed and will contribute to the amenities and values of the neighboring ODD; or, 
4.  That the ODD is located in an area that is being redeveloped and will implement the policies of the redevelopment plan or subarea plan identified in the comprehensive master plan. 
c.  The land proposed to be included in the ODD shall have features that the preservation of which will be enhanced through development as an ODD; or is uniquely situated with regard to adjoining uses which would permit variety in design, site configuration, layout and use; or has unique historical or environmental features or other characteristics which could foster creative development design and preserve desirable natural features. In developed urban areas, the ODD shall offer higher standards of architectural design, innovative layout and pedestrian amenities, including public art, than what would be achieved under conventional zoning. 
d.  The proposed land use patterns must be compatible with surrounding land uses and provide decorative screening or transitional buffers to residential areas. 
e.  The proposed land use patterns encourage efficiency in use of land, natural resources, provide for open space or pedestrian amenities and minimize impervious surfaces, wherever feasible. 
f.  The ODD site must be served by public water and sanitary sewer service that meets or exceeds the existing city requirements for a development of the proposed size. 
g.  The ODD site must abut and have direct access to a public thoroughfare. 
h.  The proposed ODD shall be harmonious with the surrounding land uses and serve the public health, safety and welfare of the city as a whole. 
i.  The proposed ODD shall not cause a negative or environmental impact or loss of a historic structure (unless determined by the city to be unsalvageable) on the subject site or surrounding land. 
j.  The proposed ODD is not merely an attempt to circumvent the strict application of the applicable zoning standards. 
B.  Uses Permitted in an ODD: 
1.  Principal permitted uses. In designing and developing an ODD, compatibility of land uses both within the development and surrounding the development is very important to meeting the objectives of this article. In order to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area, certain uses will be permitted and others will be prohibited. Subject to review and approval under the procedures and standards contained in this article, the following uses may be eligible for inclusion in the ODD District (See Table 1): 
Table 1: Permitted Table of Uses 
Districts Uses: Southfield Tech 
Corridor City Centre District Downtown 
Development District Smart Zone ODD 
Corridors Accessory and complementary uses to permitted uses P P P P P Banks P P P P P - w/drive thru P * P * P Educational Facilities X P P P P General Businesses P P P P P Government Offices P P P P P Hotels (excluding Motels),Convention Centers and Banquet Facilities P P P P P Medical Facilities, Urgent Care, Medical Research P P P P P Micro-brewery P P P P P Mixed-Use Residential P P P P P Health, Wellness & Fitness P P P P P Hospitals P P P P P Office (general) P P P P P Recreational uses and Facilities, including Parks P P P P P Residential uses, including Multi-Family, Nursing Homes, Senior Congregate & Assisted Living X P P P P Retail Facilities P P P P P Research Facilities P P P P P Restaurants P P P P P Restaurants with Drive-thru P * P * * Pharmacies P P P P P - w/drive-thru P * P P P Personal Services X P P P P Professional Business and Offices P P P P P Public Safety P P P P P Self-Storage Facilities as an accessory use P P w/interior units and single point access P P w/interior units and single point access P w/interior units and single point access Technical, Research & Development Centers with accessory (less than 50) manufacturing & assembly. P P P P P Universities and Colleges P P P P P Libraries and Civic Organizations X P P P P  
*When attached to a retail center or mixed-use development 
2.  Prohibited uses. In order to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area, certain land uses have been determined to be incompatible with the intent to provide the above permitted uses in an ODD. Therefore, the following uses are prohibited in ODD: 
 Wholesale, not open to the general public and intensive business. 
 Industrial and developmental manufacturing (Southfield Tech. Corridor). 
 Uses involving the processing of raw materials for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial or commercial operation at another location. 
 Warehouses and storage yards. 
 Outdoor storage or display of materials, equipment, or vehicles other than approved outdoor retail sales as an accessory to a permitted principal use. 
 Automotive repair, service and sales, new and used. 
 Automotive washes, self-serve and automatic, except those customarily an accessory to a permitted principal use. 
 Sanitariums. 
 Pawn shops, check cashing and pay-loan facilities. 
 Sexually oriented businesses (e.g. adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, cabarets, etc.). 
 Mobile home parks. 
 Funeral homes. 
 Crematorium. 
 Cemeteries. 
 Dog kennels. 
 Public stables and farms. 
 Social halls. 
 Boarding rooms, lodging and tourist homes. 
 Motels. 
 Outdoor drive-ins. 
 Flea markets. 
 Tattoo parlors. 
 Arcades, golf ranges and golf domes. 
 Medical marihuana facilities. 
C.  Rezoning procedure. 
1.  Applicable regulations. The ODD is an overlay zoning district which imposes site configuration, building layout, architectural design, density, set back, height, use, access, parking and other development regulations that apply to this district only. All other non-conflicting regulations and standards of this chapter shall also apply to this district. In the event of a conflict between a regulation in the Code of Ordinances or a standard contained in the approved master development plan or development agreement and any other applicable regulation in this chapter, the approved master development plan or development agreement standard shall prevail. 
2.  Rezoning. Rezoning a parcel or tract of land in the ODD may be initiated either by the request or with the authorization of the owner(s) of land proposed to be included in the ODD; by the planning commission; or the city council as authorized by the Zoning Enabling Act. Any rezoning to ODD shall be subject to the eligibility criteria and qualifying conditions contained in this article. A preliminary master development plan and a development agreement containing specific development standards and site plan drawings must be submitted with the application to rezone. Upon approval of the application to rezone, the final master development plan and the development agreement must be approved by the city council and recorded as required by this article prior to commencing development of any land proposed for rezoning to ODD. 
3.  Application to rezone in an ODD. The application to rezone shall include the following information and documents: 
a.  Ownership . The application form must be signed by the applicant, and authorized by all owners of any land to be included within the ODD and include the address telephone number and e-mail address of all applicants. 
b.  Qualification . The application shall include a narrative statement describing the overall objectives of the proposed ODD; demonstrate that the proposed site meets the qualifying conditions for an ODD rezoning; and explain why the property may not be developed as currently zoned. 
c.  Development impact . The application shall include a development impact statement addressing impact of the proposed development on: 
i.  Surrounding land uses. 
ii.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
iii.  Preservation of natural or historic features. 
iv.  Public utilities. 
v.  Public services. 
vi.  Economic impact. 
vii.  Special design features (e.g. low impact development/green infrastructure stormwater techniques, architectural features, etc.) 
viii.  Plan for landscaping, tree planting, and preservation or enhancement of existing soils, trees and vegetated areas, including the integration of these measures with stormwater management for the site 
d.  Master development plan . The application shall include a proposed master development plan encompassing all phases of the proposed ODD, containing all information required by the planning commission and city council and prepared at an acceptable scale. 
e.  Development agreement . The application shall include a proposed development agreement which shall include specific standards tailored to the ODD and use of the property in conjunction with the rezoning. The provisions contained in the agreement shall, upon approval and execution, be binding upon both parties. The agreement shall be in a form recordable with the Oakland County Register of Deeds, or in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable memorandum prepared and signed by the property owner(s) giving notice of the ODD development agreement in a manner acceptable to the city attorney. The agreement shall, at a minimum, include the following provisions: 
i.  Agreement and acknowledgment that the developer submitted and the city accepted the development proposal as set forth in the application to rezone, the master development plan, the site plans, architectural elevations and the development agreement as submitted, and granted the rezoning based on the terms set forth therein. Further, that all provisions and conditions contained in the application to rezone, master development plan and development agreement are authorized by applicable law; that the agreement is valid, and was entered into on a voluntary basis, representing a permissible exercise of authority by the city and the applicant. 
ii.  Agreement that the property shall not be developed or used in a manner inconsistent with the approved master development plan and development agreement. 
iii.  Agreement that the approved rezoning, master development plan and development agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner(s), the city and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees. A list of all approved uses shall be provided. 
iv.  Because of the complexity and uniqueness of the parcel or tract of land proposed for the ODD, the development agreement shall include specific standards for site configuration tailored for the proposed development, including: 
 Roadways; ingress, egress and other access including sidewalks and pedestrian pathways. 
 Building and structure placement, mass, bulk, height, articulation and setbacks. 
 Installation and extension of utilities; including a preliminary stormwater management plan, prepared by a licensed professional engineer; the stormwater management plan shall meet the standards set forth by the city engineer and shall clearly depict the integration of landscaping and any permeable surfacing with the plan for the ODD. 
 Parking and circulation. Pedestrian pathways and linkages to the public sidewalk system. 
 Landscaping (including tree planting, restoration areas, and vegetated stormwater management areas), public art, ornamental fencing and buffers. 
 For residential uses: Maximum density and intensity of use for each proposed use addressing units per acre. For non-residential uses: Maximum useable floor area. 
 Preservation of no less than twenty-five (25) percent of undeveloped primary or secondary open space for residential uses and fifteen (15) percent of urban open space, pedestrian amenities, or landscaped areas for non-residential uses unless waived by a two-thirds (?) vote of the city council. Open space to be preserved shall be calculated prior to making any site improvements to be performed on site and shall exclude existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
 Preservation of natural features and provisions addressing the maintenance of natural resources and open space, which may include provisions in the maintenance agreement accompanying the stormwater management plan, if applicable. 
 Lighting. 
 Permissible uses of the property consistent with this chapter. 
 Any areas proposed for commercial operations with twenty-four-hour operations shall be located fifty (50) feet from residential areas and shall be provided with buffering and screening to protect the compatibility of the uses. The fifty (50) foot measurement shall be calculated from the closest building envelope edge of the twenty-four-hour operation to the lot line of the closest residentially zoned property or residential building footprint, whichever is closer. 
 All utilities, other than surface stormwater management measures, including electricity, telephone and cable, shall be installed underground or otherwise installed out of sight to the surrounding community, excluding main transmission lines. 
v.  Architectural design and building materials. 
vi.  Proposed association and condominium documents, if applicable. 
vii.  Site plan drawings including proposed site elevation contours; Typical elevation drawings, with identification of facade materials of all sides of each principal building included in the ODD, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equal to one hundred (100) feet or other scale acceptable to the planning director. 
viii.  An affidavit from a qualified environmental engineer that an environmental assessment has been performed and the results indicate that there is nothing to preclude the development as proposed. 
ix.  Any other provisions proposed and approved by the parties. 
x.  Phasing plan, if applicable. 
f.  Fee . An application to rezone land in the ODD shall be accompanied by a fee established from time to time by the city council. 
4.  Public hearing on application to rezone; approval of master development plan and development agreement. 
a.  Upon receipt of a complete application to rezone, a master development plan and proposed development agreement, the planning department shall conduct a preliminary review of the conceptual plan and preliminary development agreement. Once the planning department has determined that the ODD application is substantially complete, then the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. 
b.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the request to rezone and approval of the master development plan and development agreement and shall consider whether the ODD as proposed meets all of the required standards. 
5.  Planning commission recommendation. After holding a public hearing and reviewing the proposed rezoning, the master development plan and the development agreement, the planning commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council. Upon a finding that the plan and agreement meet all the standards set forth in this article, the planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial, of the master development plan, the development agreement and rezoning of the property to ODD. 
6.  Review by planning commission; standards for approval. The planning commission shall recommend approval or approval with conditions upon a finding that the proposed ODD complies with all the following standards: 
a.  The application to rezone, the master development plan and development agreement contain all information required by this chapter. The applicant shall follow standard procedures for application submission to the planning commission. All applicable application fees have been paid; and, 
b.  The proposed site meets the qualifying conditions for an ODD rezoning; and, 
c.  The proposed master development plan provides safe and efficient ingress and egress to the site, including access for fire or other emergency vehicles and safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation; and, 
d.  The amount and type of traffic generated by the proposed ODD shall not create a substantial detrimental effect on neighboring properties or existing roadways; and, 
e.  The proposed development is compatible with surrounding uses of land and character of the surrounding area; and, 
f.  The design and placement of buildings and other structures, parking, lighting, refuse storage, public art, pedestrian pathways, stormwater management measures and landscaping: 1) ensures compatibility with surrounding properties; 2) ensures compatibility with properties within the proposed ODD; and 3) ensures that the development when viewed from public rights-of-way enhances the character of the surrounding area. further, the proposed development shall be consistent with the design standards and policies adopted by the planning department; and, 
g.  The uses proposed in the master development plan and development agreement are arranged in a logical relationship to each other and have sufficient buffers to prevent adverse impacts of one (1) use upon another; and, 
h.  The master development plan and development agreement is designed to the maximum extent feasible to protect the quality of natural topography, vegetation and other natural features of the site adjacent to the River Rouge Greenway in the Southfield Tech. Corridor. The development plan shall make appropriate provision for the preservation OR restoration of floodplains, wetlands, streams and stream banks, hillsides, and other natural resource areas); and, 
i.  The proposed development shall provide adequate public facilities and services, including streets, utilities, and stormwater management features to have an adequate capacity to support the proposed uses. As part of a development plan proposal, an applicant may need to offer to upgrade or otherwise provide adequate facilities to support the proposed intensity of development; and 
j.  The proposed development shall be consistent with the comprehensive master plan. 
7.  City council review of application to rezone; master development plan and development agreement. 
a.  The city council shall be provided with a copy of the planning commission's report and recommendation, minutes from the planning commission's study sessions, regular meetings and public hearing(s) and all supporting materials. 
b.  Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the application to rezone and approval of the master development plan and development agreement. 
c.  After the public hearing and review of the planning commission reports, recommendation and supporting materials provided, and a finding as to whether the ODD as proposed meets all of the standards as provided in this article, the city council shall: 
Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application to rezone to ODD, the master development plan and the development agreement. Approval of the development agreement shall include authorizing execution by the mayor and clerk pursuant to the City Charter. 
8.  Effect of approval of rezoning to ODD, approval of master development plan and development agreement. Following approval by the city council, the property shall be rezoned to ODD. Once rezoned to ODD, no improvements or construction shall be undertaken within the ODD except in conformity with the approved master development plan; the development agreement and any conditions imposed in connection with the ODD approval shall be recorded with the Oakland County Registry of Deeds. 
9.  Modification of development agreement. Changes to the approved master development plan and development agreement shall require submittal of a revised master development plan and/or development agreement for review and approval as provided by this section. 
a.  Minor modifications . The following minor modifications may be made upon approval of the planning director. Such minor modifications shall be provided in writing and upon approval shall be incorporated into the approved master development plan and/or development agreement. Minor modifications include but are not limited to: 
i.  Up to a ten (10) percent or five hundred (500) sq. ft. increase of the size of residential structures, whichever is smaller, provided there shall be no increase in the number of dwelling units and provided the additional impervious surface is accounted for in applicable calculations in the stormwater management plan for the site. 
ii.  Up to a fifteen (15) percent or seven thousand five hundred (7,500) sq. ft. or increase of the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings, whichever is smaller, and provided the additional impervious surface is accounted for in applicable calculations in the stormwater management plan for the site. 
iii.  Up to a ten (10) percent alteration of horizontal and vertical elevations of buildings. 
iv.  Areas designated as "not to be disturbed" or "open space" may be increased in area. 
v.  Substitution of plant materials included in the landscape plan by similar native types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis, provided any substituted plantings are consistent with the planting plans for vegetated stormwater management measures. 
vi.  Improvements to access and circulation systems, such as addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths. 
vii.  Changes in exterior materials, provided that any changes provide in the use of materials are of equal or higher quality than those originally approved. 
viii.  Rearrangement of parking spaces in a parking lot provided the total number of parking spaces is not changed by more than ten (10) percent and circulation hazards or congestion is not created by the redesign. 
If for any reason the planning director denies a request for minor modification, an appeal of the denial may be taken to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council of the minor modification. Upon approval of the city council, such modification shall be included with the approved master development plan and development agreement. 
b.  Major modifications . Any major modification to the approved master development plan or development agreement shall require submittal of a revised master development plan and/or development agreement for review and recommendation by the planning commission and final approval of the city council. Upon final approval, the modification shall be incorporated into the approved master development plan and development agreement. Major modifications include but are not limited to: 
i.  Addition of uses different from those approved. 
ii.  For nonresidential development, any increase greater than fifteen (15) percent or seven thousand five hundred (7,500) sq. ft. in the total square footage of all buildings, or any increase in the height by more than ten (10) percent or number of buildings. 
iii.  For residential development, any increase greater than ten (10) percent or 500 sq. ft. of the size of structures or increase in the number of dwelling units above the maximum number authorized in the development agreement. 
iv.  Major realignment of vehicular circulation patterns or change of parking spaces by more than ten (10) percent. 
A.  Reduction of open space as defined in the development agreement. 
B.  Changes in exterior boundaries except survey adjustments. 
10.  Site plan approval. Site plan approval is required prior to commencement of any site improvement or construction of buildings within the ODD. Building permits shall not be issued prior to final site plan approval. For a multi-phased project within the ODD, there shall be a separate site plan submitted and approved for each phase of the development prior to the commencement of site improvements for that phase. The city council shall review the site plan(s) submitted pursuant to this chapter for compliance with the applicable ordinances, the master development plan and the development agreement. After reviewing the site plan(s), the city council may approve the site plan(s), approve with conditions or deny the request(s). 
11.  Site improvement performance guarantees. A performance guarantee shall be required as part of ODD approval to assure that the site improvements are completed in compliance with the approved site plan(s), the master development plan, the standards set forth in the development agreement and all applicable ordinances. For a multi-phased ODD, a separate performance guarantee shall be provided for the master improvement phase and for each phase of development. The performance guarantee may consist of a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in an amount not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the projected cost of site improvements. A cash performance guarantee, if applicable, shall be deposited with the city treasurer. A surety bond or letter of credit shall remain in effect until all site improvements for the applicable site plan are completed. If requested, the city shall rebate a proportional share of any cash deposit, or reduce the amount of performance guarantee required, based on the percentage of work completed on the date of the request, as attested to by the requestor and verified by the city building official. 
D.  Construction. 
1.  Commencement of site improvements. 
a.  Once the master development plan, development agreement and final site plans are approved, the site improvements shall be commenced within eighteen (18) months after receiving approval of the final engineering plans. If the ODD is a multi-phased ODD, site improvements for any phase of development shall be commenced within two (2) years of receiving final engineering approval for the applicable phase. 
b.  If the site improvements are not commenced within the applicable eighteen (18) month period, the city council may extend the time for commencement of site improvements for an additional twelve (12) months upon the applicant requesting an extension prior to the expiration of the eighteen (18) month period and subsequent expiration dates. 
If the master development plan and development agreement are not implemented within the time periods required due to a failure to commence site improvements, a new application for approval must be submitted and the master development plan and development agreement shall be reviewed and may be revised to take into consideration any changes that may have occurred due to the passage of time. 
(Ord. No. 1603 , § 4, 4-7-13; Ord. No. 1640 , § 1, 5-10-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.22-4. - Signs and lighting. 
(1)  Necessary directional or regulatory traffic signs of not more than two (2) square feet (.186 square meters) each shall be permitted. 
(2)  No moving or flashing parts or lights or devices, or stationary light bands, shall be permitted to surround windows or doors on either the interior or exterior of the building. All incandescent light sources shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No lighting fixture shall be located or directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(3)  Lighting that has motion either constantly or at intervals, or gives the impression of motion, characteristics of running, blinking, scintillating, or expanding, contracting or changing light patterns, shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Nonconforming lighting: Any lighting which was unlawfully installed and maintained prior to the effective date of this section and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this section must be removed or a variance sought from the zoning board of appeals. 
(5)  Accent lighting on buildings: 
(a)  Subdued accent lighting on buildings, such as indirect wall lighting, up lighting, and channelized lighting behind translucent lenses, shall be allowed provided: 
1.  The lighting is an integral decorative or architectural feature of the building and not connected or gives the appearance of any connection to the overall signage of the project. 
2.  The lighting may not be exposed and used only for back lighting allowing for partial exposure toward the building and not toward the street or adjacent properties. 
3.  Approval process in all non-residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Visible neon and fiber-optic lighting on buildings: 
(a)  Visible neon, fiber-optic lighting, and similar lighting on buildings shall be allowed provided: 
1.  The lighting is an integral decorative or architectural feature of the building, and is used to accent three-dimensional architectural elements. 
2.  Is not connected or gives the appearance of any connection to the overall signage of the project. 
3.  Visible neon, fiber-optic, or similar lighting is permitted on any side of the building not facing residential districts and shall not count toward the maximum allowable sign area, provided: 
a.  The lighting does not exceed one (1) linear foot of neon or fiber-optic tube for each linear foot of building façade on the side of the building the tube is being placed upon. 
b.  Such lighting in excess of the aforesaid requirements shall be counted toward the project maximum allowable sign area. 
c.  Visible neon, fiber-optic, or similar lighting that exceeds the maximum linear footage noted in paragraph "a." above shall be calculated as sign area square footage at a rate of .5 feet times the linear feet of the tube or tubes. 
d.  Visible neon, fiber-optic and similar lighting shall be allowed only in the city centre and downtown development authority areas of the city, and properties immediately adjacent to and along the I-696, M-10 Lodge/Northwestern Highway, Telegraph Road and Southfield Fwy. corridors. 
e.  Visible neon, fiber-optic and similar lighting shall be allowed in all non-residential zoning districts. 
(7)  Decorative lighting used for the celebration of recognized holidays shall be allowed in all zoning districts and is not subject to the above regulations. 
(8)  Visible neon, fiber-optic lighting, and similar lighting shall be subject to recommendation by the Southfield Downtown Development Authority or the city centre advisory board if located within their districts. 
(9)  Shall be subject to the provisions of the development agreement if located within an overlay development district. 
(10)  No such lighting shall exceed a brightness level of .3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a preset distance. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: 
Example using one (1) square foot of lighting: 
Measurement distance = v(1 sq. ft. × 100) = 10 ft. 
Light measurement shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the lighting, or the area of the lighting emitting the brightest light. 
(11)  Maintenance. 
(a)  All signs and accent, visible neon and fiber-optic lighting shall be maintained in good working condition and shall remain fully illuminated, so as not to subject persons or property to any risk of personal injury or property damage. Any sign and accent, visible neon and fiber-optic lighting that is not so maintained at all times shall be termed a nuisance per section 9.1 of the Southfield City Code and be subject to the penalties provided in section 9.2, abatement and paragraph (12) below. 
(12)  Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Any firm, corporation or person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in chapter 15, section 1.703 of the Southfield City Code. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event for a violation by a firm, corporation or person of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1635 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 5.22-5. - Public art requirement. 
    Unless the project is exempt from this requirement pursuant to subsection 5.22-5(4) of this section, the site shall be designed and developed to contain public art as defined by subsection 1.180(a) of chapter 4, article VI, title I of the City Code and in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A budget for the public art required by this section shall be established based on the allocation of one-half (0.5) percent of the total project cost up to twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500.00) for projects between one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and two and a half million dollars ($2,500,000.00), and one (1) percent of the total project cost up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for projects in excess of two and a half million dollars ($2,500,000.00), to be committed to the procurement and display of public art on the site. 
(2)  The public art shall be a work of art as defined by section 1.180 of chapter 4, article VI, title I of the City Code and shall be approved by the city's public art commission in accordance with the definition of public art and the standards set forth in subsection 1.180(a) of chapter 4, article VI, title I of the City Code and the city council prior to site plan approval. The approval by the public art commission and city council shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(3)  The total allocation as established pursuant to subsection 5.22-5(1) shall be held in the name of the city to be held in the public art fund trust account pursuant to subsection 1.180(b)(7) of chapter 4, article VI, title I. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property in addition to the allocation established by subsection 5.22-5(1). Failure to install the public art as required by this subparagraph and in accordance with the approved site plan shall result in denial of a certificate of occupancy. In instances where due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the property owner which impedes timely installment of the work of art, such as weather, delay in fabrication or delivery of the work of art, etc., a cash bond in an amount equal to the public art allocation requirement as set forth in subsection (1) hereof (the "public art bond") may be deposited with the city planning department to ensure compliance with this section. In the event the work of art is not fully installed within the period of time as established by the city planner, the public art bond shall be forfeited to the city and the proceeds thereof shall be deposited in the public art fund established pursuant to subsection 1.180(b)(7) of chapter 4, article VI of title 1 of the City Code. Failure to properly maintain the public art in accordance with the approved site plan is a violation of the zoning code and subject to enforcement pursuant to provisions of section 5.206 of this chapter. Prior to any enforcement action a violation notice shall be sent to the responsible party. A failure to cure the violation within thirty (30) days shall constitute a violation and each day thereafter that the violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)  The following projects are exempt from the public art requirements of this section: 
(a)  Projects where the application of this requirement would constitute a governmental taking or otherwise be contrary to law, as determined by the director of planning, under the particular facts and circumstances of that case as explained in detail by the applicant. The director of planning may request additional information from the applicant if insufficient information is provided with the site plan to make a determination. The applicant has all appeal rights as would otherwise be applicable to any determination by the director of planning. 
(b)  Projects where the total project cost is less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(c)  Residential projects containing fewer than four (4) residential units. 
(d)  Projects where, upon issuance of the building permit, the applicant donates an amount equivalent to the amount required in subsection 5.22-5(1) of this paragraph to the public art fund as established pursuant to subsection 1.180(b)(7) of chapter 4, article VI title I of the City Code or donates a "work of art" to the fund that is approved by the public art commission and is of equal value to the requirements established in subsection 5.22-5(1) of this section. 
(e)  Projects that are renovations of existing building where the total project cost is less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(5)  A developer may choose to partially exempt a project from the public art requirement of this section to the extent the developer chooses to donate funds or works of art less than the amount established pursuant to subsection 5.22-5(1) of this section in which case the budget required for public art shall be reduced by a corresponding amount. 
(Ord. No. 1657 , § 1, 4-3-16; Ord. No. 1693 , § 1, 6-14-18) 
Sec. 5.22-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5.23. - Nonconforming uses and nonconforming lots. 
(1)  Intent. The enactment of this chapter shall not be deemed to affect, alter, or change any special exception or variance heretofore granted by the appropriate administrative or legislative body of the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction upon review of the action of such administrative or legislative body. 
(2)  Restoration. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a building destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or act of the public enemy, subsequent to the effective date of this chapter or shall prevent the continuance of the use of such buildings or part thereof as such use existing at the time of such impairment of such building or part thereof, provided that said restoration is made within one (1) year from the time of destruction and that the same use is made of the premises. 
(3)  Repairs and maintenance. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the strengthening or restoration of any building or wall declared unsafe by the director of the department of building and safety engineering hereinafter provided. 
(4)  Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that front, side, and rear yard dimensions, and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located, except that the required total side yards for lots of record of fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) or less in width, may be reduced six (6) inches (15.24 centimeters) for each one (1) foot (.305 meters) of lot width less than fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) regardless of the zone classification of the district in which the lot is located except further, that under no circumstances shall total side yards be less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) and, in the case of a residential building where a garage is not part of the dwelling, then at least nine (9) feet (2.745 meters) shall be provided for driveway purposes leading to the rear yard. Minimum side yard, in all cases, shall be not less than five (5) feet (1.525 meters). 
(b)  When two (2) or more nonconforming lots or parts of nonconforming lots are in single ownership at the time of, and subsequent to, passage of this chapter, they shall be considered an individual parcel for the purposes of this chapter and must meet minimum lot frontage and lot area requirements of the chapter. If, however, fifty-one (51) percent or more of the parcels on both sides of the street, between the nearest cross streets on each side of the subject parcel, are developed and do not meet the minimum lot frontage and lot area requirements, said nonconforming lots may be split, provided the lot frontage and lot area is equal to or greater than the average lot frontage and lot area of the developed parcels on both sides of the street between the nearest cross street on each side of the parcel. 
    The intent of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by preventing the overcrowding of buildings, by the preservation of light, air and open space, and by maintaining the established character of existing development, and allowing reasonable development of existing nonconforming lots. 
Sec. 5.24. - Established grade. 
    The established grade on all types of homes in the city shall be not more than twenty (20) inches (50.8 centimeters) above or below the sidewalk or crown of the road. Special cases, where natural topography has an adverse effect upon drainage and where this provision would serve no good purpose, must have special approval from the department of building and safety engineering. Said approval shall be conditioned upon a determination by the department of building and safety engineering that the proposed grade will not be injurious to the adjacent properties. 
Sec. 5.25. - Moving of structures. 
    All structures or parts of structures to be moved within or into the city shall require approval from the board of appeals. Said approval shall be based upon a finding that the structure or part of a structure will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.26. - Automobile trailer camp. 
    No new automobile trailer camps or tourist cabins shall be established subsequent to the effective date of this chapter and automobile trailers, tourist cabins, similar portable dwellings or tents shall not be permitted to be used or occupied as dwellings except when located in, and as a part of, such trailer camps or tourist cabin business enterprises as shall have been established, and in operation, at the time of the effective date of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.27. - Unlicensed and disabled motor vehicles. 
    No unlicensed motor vehicle or disabled motor vehicle shall be kept on any property for a period of more than seven (7) days except on industrially zoned (I-1) property or entirely within a building. Unlicensed motor vehicles or disabled motor vehicles shall be permitted on industrially zoned (I-1) properties only if kept within an enclosed fenced area screened from view from adjacent properties or kept entirely within a building. "Unlicensed motor vehicle" is a motor vehicle not displaying a proper current license plate or proof of registration pursuant to the Michigan State Motor Vehicle Code which is Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being MCL 257.1 et seq. "Disabled motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is inoperable by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other causes, or otherwise incapable of being propelled under its own power. 
(Ord. No. 1544, § 1, 4-30-07; Ord. No. 1648 , § 1, 12-27-15) 
Sec. 5.28. - Outside storage. 
(1)  Outside storage shall be permitted only in the industrial (I-1) district. 
(2)  Outside storage areas shall be enclosed with a completely obscuring fence or solid masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height and may be constructed up to ten (1) feet in height on a case by case basis on those sides where abutting, adjacent to, or within fifty (5) feet of residential districts or where visible from any existing or proposed street rights-of-way. 
(3)  Required screening devices are to be in accordance with section 5.35 wall, brick facing or section 5.37-1 fence regulations, article 4 general provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Outside storage materials may not exceed one (1) foot below the height of the required screening device. This height limitation does not apply to operable and licensed vehicles and trailers. 
(5)  Outside storage areas must be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any existing or proposed street rights-of-way and must not impede or encroach into required parking spaces or minimum driveway widths. 
(Ord. No. 1664 , § 1, 9-8-16) 
Sec. 5.29. - Off-street parking provisions. 
    Parking and loading. Off-street vehicular parking, in conjunction with the requirements for all land or building uses, shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as herein prescribed: 
(1)  The required off-street parking area shall be for occupants, employees, visitors, patrons and shall be limited in use to passenger vehicles not exceeding a net weight of three (3) tons (2.7210 metric tons) and shall be for periods of less than forty-eight (48) hours. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited in said area. 
(2)  Whenever a building or use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area or any other determining unit of measure and such building or use does exist on the effective date of this chapter, the minimum number of parking spaces required shall be based upon the entire building or use, including the addition. 
(3)  Required off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet (91.5 meters) of the building or use it is intended to serve, measured without crossing a major thoroughfare, from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of the required off-street parking facility. The principal use shall be permitted to continue only so long as the off-street requirements of this chapter are complied with as set forth in section 5.30. However, in the DDA and city centre districts this distance may be increased to five hundred (500) feet. 
(4)  Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
(5)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the board of appeals considers as being similar in nature. 
(6)  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(7)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use, without administrative or site plan approval. 
(8)  Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case, the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for each individual use, computed separately. 
(9)  In cases of dual functioning of off-street parking where operating hours do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant a temporary modification of the requirements. 
(10)  Where lighting facilities are provided, they shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjacent residential districts. 
(11)  For buildings or land containing more than one (1) use as designated in section 5.30, the total parking requirement shall be determined to be the sum of the requirements for each use. 
(12)  Bike racks and bike parking credit: To promote non-motorized transit and to reduce impervious surfaces, the city is encouraging alternate means of transportation. The lack of a secure bike parking space keeps many people from using their bikes, thus a minimum of four (4) bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for each non-residential and multi-family development. 
For every bike rack which accommodates four (4) bicycles, one off-street parking space, up to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total required parking may be credited by the city planner. Bicycle parking racks shall be located close to the building entrance, and shall be separated from vehicle parking areas to minimize motor vehicle damage to bicycles. Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the supporting surface, and shall be at least three (3) feet in height and able to support a locked bicycle in an upright position. 
Additional accommodations for bicyclists that may be considered and include, but are not limited to: bicycle lockers, employee shower facilities and dressing areas for employees. 
(13)  A pedestrian connection/pathway shall be installed from the public sidewalk or pathway system to the main entrance of a building. 
(14)  All adjacent transit stops shall be designed as an integral part of the development project, with direct access to the bus stop/shelter or waiting area from the development site, including public pathways. Additional pedestrian amenities, including benches, trash receptacles, shelters, etc. may be required depending on the transit usage of each stop. The transit stop shall be maintained by the developer for the life of the development project. 
(15)  Snow storage: a snow removal plan shall be submitted or adequate on-site snow storage shall be provided that does not impede on the minimum required parking spaces. Storage of accumulated snow shall not obscure site lines or cause traffic blind spots. 
(16)  It is the intent of this section to meet the reasonable parking needs of each development while increasing green space and minimizing excessive areas of pavement, which reduces aesthetic standards and contributes to the high rates of storm water runoff. Thus, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty (20) percent shall only be allowed with approval by the city. In granting such additional parking space, the city shall determine that such parking will be required based on a parking study or other documented evidence to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
Note: parking garages and structures: when calculating the twenty (20) percent maximum threshold rule above minimum parking requirements, only the ground floor parking spaces shall be included in the total parking calculations. 
(Ord. No. 1587 , § 1, 11-6-11; Ord. No. 1641 , § 1, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.30. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 
Table 5.30: Off-Street Parking Requirements 
Use # of Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure as Follows: Assembly: 
(Auditoriums, stadiums, religious institutions, theatres, private clubs, fraternities, exhibition halls, etc.) 1.0 Per 3 Seats/Occupancy or 
6 ft. of pew/bench 
+ Accessory uses Banks & Financial Institutions: 3.0 Per teller window & ATM (indoor & out) plus with Drive Thru 5.0 Per stacking spaces for first drive thru station (min. 160 linear ft. for 2 or more) Industrial: 
Storage/Warehousing; 
Industrial establishments, including manufacturing, research and testing, laboratories, creameries, bottling works, printing, plumbing, or electrical workshops 1.5 Per 1,000 S.F. G.F.A. or 
Per employees maximum shift, whichever is greater; Office: (General) 
Professional 
Computer Processing 4.0 
  
1.0 Per 1,000 S.F. G.F.A. 
500 S.F. U.F.A. Medical (doctors, dentist, or similar) 
Hospitals 
Convalescent 5.0 
  
1.0 
1.0 Per 1,000 S.F. GFA 
/1 bed 
/2 beds 
Plus 4.0 stacking spaces for drive through pharmacy Personal Service: 
Barber Shop 
Beauty Parlor   
2.0 
1.0 Per chair/stations + 
Per employee Residential: Assisted Living/Elderly/Congregate 0.5 Per bed/unit, plus 1 space/2 employees @ max. shift Multi-Family 1.5 Dwelling Unit (2 beds or less); 2.0 D.U. (3 beds or more), plus 1/employee max. shift Single/Two Family 2.0 Per Dwelling Unit Hotel/Motel 1.3 Per unit plus applicable accessory uses Restaurants: Fast Food/High Volume 
(incl. drive through coffee shops) 1.0 
1.0 Per 100 s. f. GLA or 
Per 4 seats, whichever is greater With Drive Thru/Drive-ins Plus required stacking (B) Dining room/banquet 1.0 Per 100 s. f. GLA or 
Per 4 seats, whichever is greater Bar/lounge 1.0 Per 100 s. f. GLA or 
Per 4 seats, whichever is greater Carry out 1.0 Per 100 s. f. GLA or 
Per 4 seats, whichever is greater Retail/Commercial: 
(incl. A.F.S./pawn shops, smoking lounge) 
Furniture, appliance & similar (household equipment repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, clothing and shoe repair and laundry, motor vehicle sales showroom 4.0 
  
1.0 Per 1,000 S.F. GFA 
Per 800 S.F. U.F.A. Convenience Center (less than 30,000 S.F.) 4.0 Per 1,000 S.F. GFA(a) Neighborhood Center (30,000-250,000 S.F.) 4.0 Per 1,000 S.F. GLA(a) Community/lifestyle center (250,000-600,000 S.F.) 4.25 Per 1,000 S.F. GLA(a) Regional Center (600,000-1,000,000+ S.F.) 4.5 Per 1,000 S.F. GLA(a) Car Wash 6.0 Per stacking approach lane (min. 140 L.F. for 2 or more) + 1/employee Gas Filling 1.0 
2.0 Per pump+1/Employee + other uses 
Per Service Bay Gas Service 1.0 
2.0 Per pump +1/Employee + other uses 
Per Service Bay Recreation: 
Including the following: 1.0 Per 4 Occupants/Capacity/Seats 
+ 1/Employee (F) Arcade " Bowling Alleys " Courts " Dance " Health & Fitness " Indoor Recreation " Skating Rink " Schools: Child Care Centers 1.0 Per every ten (10) children + 
1.0/Employee + Sufficient Space for Parent Parking/Drop-Off Elementary & Junior 2.0 Per Classroom + assembly(c) High School 4.0 Per Classroom + assembly(d) Colleges/Universities 1/5 students based upon max. # of students at any one time, plus 1 Per 2 faculty/Employees (D & E) Misc. Uses: Per I.T.E. (G) or Best practice (H) Outdoor Dining Seating (30 seats or less) On "weather Permitting basis" no additional parking required (I) Emergency Shelter for the Homeless 1.0 /3 Beds Soup Kitchen 1.0 /3 Seats  
(A)  Figures are for center w/less than twenty (20) percent of GLA devoted to restaurants, entertainment and cinema space. If these uses constitute more than twenty (20) percent of GLA, then shared parking methodology is recommended for computation. 
(B)  Measured from the transaction (pay) window. The first transaction window shall have a minimum of eight (8) spaces and two (2) or more ordering stations shall have a minimum of two hundred and forty (240) linear feet of stacking. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide and twenty feet in length, shall not extend onto any public street, and shall be distinctly separated from on-site parking so as not to interfere with ingress and egress to parking spaces. 
(C)  Additional bike parking shall be provided for ten (10) percent of students 
(D)  Additional bike parking shall be provided for six (6) percent of students 
(E)  Additional parking may be required if determined necessary for assembly and dormitory (two (2)/unit) 
(F)  Additional bike parking shall be provided for twelve (12) percent of required vehicular parking spaces 
(G)  Institute of traffic engineers (I.T.E.) 
(H)  For uses not listed, the city planner or planning commission shall make a determination of the minimum required parking or stacking space, based upon review of information submitted by the applicant, city staff, and consultants. 
(I)  Outdoor dining areas for more than thirty (30) patrons or those that use awnings, roofs, or similar permanent or temporary structures then the following standards apply: 
1)  If the outdoor seating is twenty-five (25) percent or less of the indoor seating capacity, no additional parking is necessary. 
2)  If the outdoor seating is twenty-six (26)-fifty (50) percent of the indoor seating capacity, then the restaurant may be required to provide up to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the parking required for the indoor space. 
3)  If the outdoor seating is over fifty (50) percent of the indoor seating capacity, then the restaurant may be required to provide up to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the parking required for the indoor space. 
(Ord. No. 1101, 8-23-82; Ord. No. 1221, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 1587 , § 1, 11-6-11; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1619 , § 2, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1641 , § 1, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1654 , § 3, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.31. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction, and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 5.30 require the building of an off-street parking facility or where vehicular parking districts are used for parking purposes, such off-street parking lots shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  No building, structure, or land shall be erected or used for parking or driveway purposes for more than three (3) required parking spaces unless a site plan therefor has been approved by the city planner or the traffic engineer. 
(2)  No parking lot shall be constructed without a proper permit issued by the department of building and safety engineering. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the department of building and safety engineering in such form as may be determined by the department of building and safety engineering and shall be accompanied by not less than two (2) sets of site plans for the development of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this chapter will be fully complied with. 
(3)  The parking facilities shall be not less than the following minimum requirements. For parking angles falling between those given in the chart, dimensions used will be the larger of the two (2) values bracketing the desired angle. 
English System Angle of 
Parking Space in 
Degrees Aisle Width in Feet Typical Width of Two Tiers of Parking Plus Aisle in Feet Typical Width of One Tier of Parking Plus Aisle in Feet Wall to Wall Cen. to Cen. Wall to Wall Cen. to Cen. 1-Way 2-Way 1-Way 2-Way 1-Way 2-Way 1-Way 2-Way 90 22* 24* 60 60 62 62 42 42 80 21 22 63.5 64.5 62 63 42.5 41.5 70 20 22 64 66 61 63 42 40.5 60 18 22 61.5 65.5 57 61 40 37.5 50 15 22 57.5 64.5 51.5 58.5 36 33.5 45 15 22 56 63 50 57 35.5 32.5 40 15 22 54.5 61.5 48 55 35 31.5 30 15 22 50.5 57.5 43 50 33 29 20 15 22 45.5 52.5 37 44 30.5 26 Parallel 15 22 33 40 33 40 24 24 *The required aisle width may be reduced by not more than four (4) feet (1.22 meters) provided that the width of each parking space shall be increased by a dimension not less than the reduction of the aisle width for that portion of the parking area so reduced.  
(4)  Except for parallel parking, all parking spaces shall be clearly striped with double lines twenty-four (24) inches (60.96 centimeters) apart to facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly parking arrangement. 
(5)  Where parking abuts a sidewalk or other pavement five (5) foot (1.525 meters) minimum width, two (2) feet (.61 meters) may be credited toward the total required parking space dimension (except for parallel parking). 
(6)  All parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet (2.745 meters) in width, center to center, and eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(7)  Barrier free parking shall meet the requirements of the state adopted Michigan Building Code and its referenced standards, as amended. It is the intent of this section that an integrated and connected accessible route be provided from the 
Barrier free parking space(s) to the accessible building entrance, including the access aisles(s), accessible route(s) and accessible entrance(s). Thus, access aisles shall adjoin an accessible route which shall not be within the vehicular driveways, excepting designated crosswalks. 
(8)  Parking space size option. The intent of this provision is to allow for a reduction in the hard-surfaced area for the parking of automobiles and an increase in the landscaped open space of a site. To accomplish this goal while still maintaining the required number of parking spaces for the uses on the site, the city may permit a reduction in the size of parking spaces and aisle width to accommodate compact automobiles. While this option may be applied anywhere in the city, its primary use will be in areas where the majority of automobiles are expected to be parked for periods exceeding four (4) hours. 
(a)  The city council may, after final approval of a site plan, permit a reduction in the standard size of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the parking spaces provided on a site. These spaces shall be restricted to the parking of compact automobiles and signs designating such parking for the use of compact automobiles only shall be provided and shall be placed at the entrance of each aisle providing compact car parking and at the front of each row in the amount of one (1) sign for each five (5) spaces. 
(b)  The minimum size parking space allowed for compact automobiles shall be seven (7) feet, six (6) inches (2.2875 meters) wide and fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) long. 
(c)  The minimum aisle width allowed for compact automobiles shall be fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) wide for one-way traffic and twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) wide for two-way traffic. In instances where compact and full-size automobiles use the same aisle, the minimum aisle width shall be based on the aisle width specified in section 5.31, paragraph (3) herein. 
(d)  Parking spaces and aisles for compact automobiles shall be designed in such a way that they may be restriped for larger spaces if the need for such larger spaces is determined by the city and/or the owner of the property. 
(e)  Landscaped open area equal in area to the amount of hard-surfaced parking area eliminated by the application of this option must be provided on the site. Suggested plant materials are listed in section 5.38 and may be utilized in the formation of a landscape plan. This landscaped open space shall be maintained as a vegetated surface kept free of structures, infrastructure, and utilities, so that the area may be hard-surfaced and used for parking if the need for such additional parking is determined by the city and/or the owner of the property. 
(f)  Review by the city council shall take into consideration the following items: 
Traffic and parking layout in the site. 
Location and distribution of spaces on the site. 
Improved landscaping potential of the site. 
Type of business and estimated length of parking. 
The availability of decks or parking structures. 
Any other features which may be unique to a particular site. 
(9)  Parallel parking spaces shall be twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length with a six (6) foot (1.83 meters) maneuvering space for each two (2) parking spaces. 
(10)  All parking lots shall have clearly limited and defined access from roadways and shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet in width at the right-of-way line. Interior driveways shall also be clearly defined and not less than twenty (20) feet wide for one-way and twenty-four (24) feet wide for two-way traffic. 
(11)  All parking spaces shall have access from an aisle on the site. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(12)  Vehicular access to a parking lot shall not be across any zoning district that would not permit the principal use or parking lot. 
(13)  The traffic engineer or city planner may require the posting of such traffic control signs as he deems necessary to promote vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
(14)  Bumper stops, curbing, or wheel chocks shall be provided to prevent any vehicle from damaging or encroaching upon any required wall, fence or buffer strips, upon any building adjacent to the parking lot, or upon any adjacent property. Breaks to allow the inflow of stormwater to landscaped areas and vegetated stormwater management measures shall be integrated into the design and arrangement of the protective stops or barriers. 
(15)  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed, maintained, and directed as to have no adverse effect upon adjacent properties. 
(16)  Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, the surface of the parking lot, all drives, and aisles shall be constructed in accordance with Michigan Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, section 4.11, aggregate pavement, section 4.12, bituminous concrete pavement, or section 4.13, concrete pavement. The city engineer shall have the authority to approve the use of permeable surfacing in parking lots. 
(17)  In order to insure pedestrian safety, sidewalks, of not less than five (5) feet (1.525 meters) in width, may be required to separate any driveway or parking area from a building. 
(18)  Sidewalks, not less than five (5) feet (1.525 meters) in width, shall be constructed one (1) foot (.305 meters) inside the right-of-way line of all abutting streets. However, a wider pathway (i.e. 8-10 ft. wide) may be required along designated routes pursuant to the Southfield non-motorized pathway & public transit plan (and sub-area plans), as amended. 
(19)  All interior and abutting streets shall have rights-of-way of a sufficient width to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or adequate provision shall be made at the time of the approval of the traffic plan for such sufficient width of rights-of-way. The right-of-way provided to satisfy this condition shall conform with the right-of-way standards as provided in chapter 47 of the City Code. 
(20)  Where access to the off-street parking facility is onto an unpaved street, provisions shall be made for paving one-half (1/2) of the street abutting the length of the property in accordance with the standards set by chapter 47 of the City Code. Such provisions shall consist of a cash deposit, letter of credit, or corporate surety bond in an amount equal to the estimated assessable cost of said improvement in accordance with the standard policy of the city. Said money, letter of credit, or corporate surety bond shall be returned after three (3) years if the improvement is not carried out. 
(21)  Landscaping: 
(a)  Landscaping requirements. For beyond the requirements for landscaping within building setbacks for front and side yards, parking lots with twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall require landscaped areas within the interior of the parking lot comprising a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total area of the parking lot. 

Commercial Lots & Areas 
With the exception of the RC, regional center district which has detailed landscaping provisions, this parking lot requirement is exclusive of any yard and other landscaping requirement within a given zone. 
Parking lot landscaping shall be no less than eight (8) feet (2.438 meters) in any single dimension and no less than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet (13.95 square meters) in any single area and shall be protected from parking areas with curbing, fencing, or other permanent means to prevent automobile encroachment onto the landscape areas. Areas less than these minimum requirements will not be considered as part of the landscaping requirements. 
(b)  Landscape plan and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required: A landscape plan and green infrastructure/low impact development plan for storm water infiltration into landscape areas shall be submitted to the planning department's designated representative. The landscape plan shall include an itemized plant materials schedule with botanical and common names of materials, sizes, and quantities. The arrangement of this landscaping shall be done in such a manner as to contribute significantly to safe circulation, visual orientation, storm water management, low impact design, and other positive environmental factors. 
General requirements include the following: 
1.  Landscape plans are to be prepared by a registered landscape architect for all projects. Provide name, address, signed seal with registration number on the plans. 
2.  Green infrastructure or low impact development methods will be integrated into the landscape design to provide for infiltration of storm water in landscape areas in lieu of irrigation where possible. 
3.  Existing and proposed structures (buildings) and utilities (manholes, catch basins, poles, overhead wires, underground etc.) On the project site and structures and utilities within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property lines on adjacent properties are to be located on the landscape plan. 
4.  Show exact locations of all existing trees eight (8) inches and over on site and within twenty-five (25) feet of the subject property lines on adjacent properties. Refer to article 4 section 5.56 woodlands and tree preservation for requirements on tree surveys and tree replacements. 
5.  Minimum plant material sizes are as follows: 
a.  Shade/canopy trees-Two and one half (2 1/2) inch caliper 
b.  Ornamental/flowering trees-Two (2) inch caliper 
c.  Evergreen trees-Six (6) to seven (7) foot height 
d.  Flowering shrubs-Eighteen (18) inches to thirty-six (36) inches height (depends on species) 
e.  Evergreen shrubs-Eighteen (18) inches to twenty-four (24) inches ht./spread (depends on species) 
f.  Perennials-One (1) gallon 
g.  Groundcovers-Two and one quarter (2 1/4) inches pots 
All plant material to be nursery grade #1. 
6.  Provide all applicable details on the plan including canopy tree, flowering tree, evergreen tree, shrub, perennial and ground cover planting details. 
7.  Provide detail cross-sections of earth berms, raised planters, and post installations. Earth berm cross-sections are to show proposed heights, slope dimensions and fill/topsoil depths. planters, posts and walls should be constructed with stone, brick, concrete or wolmanized timbers and with proper detailed footings. 
8.  Exceptions to the following specifications will be considered if acceptable alternatives are discussed with the planning department prior to landscape installation. Additional specifications may be added by the planning department as needed. Add the following to the landscape plan as applicable: 
a.  Prior to land clearing or construction, tree protection fencing is to be installed by the contractor and inspected by the planning department. This fencing shall be installed at the drip line of all trees and shrubs to remain, in accordance with Article 4 Section 5.56 woodland and tree preservation and the city's tree protection detail, and must be maintained as approved for the duration of the project. No cutting, filling, or trespassing shall occur inside the fenced areas without prior approval from the city planning department. 
b.  Trees to be transplanted on the site shall be so marked in the field by the landscape architect of the developer, approved by the planning department, and transplanted using only the appropriate sized tree spade per American Association of Nurseryman and City Of Southfield Standards. 
c.  Trees shown on the plan to save or transplant that are removed or damaged due to construction shall be replaced with one (1) 2 1/2"-3" caliper tree for every tree removed of eight (8) inches in diameter or less. Trees over eight (8) inches in diameter shall be replaced with one (1) 2 1/2"-3" caliper tree for every eight (8) inches in diameter removed. Type of replacement and location shall be determined by the project landscape architect or the planning department. 
d.  Plant trees and shrubs no closer than the following minimum distances from sidewalks, curbs and parking stalls. Maintain a minimum of seven (7) feet clear along pathways: 
i.  Shade/canopy trees-five (5) feet. 
ii.  Ornamental/flowering trees-ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Evergreen trees-ten (10) feet. 
iv.  Flowering/evergreen shrubs-four (4) feet. 
v.  Perennials-two (2) feet. 
vi.  Groundcovers-eighteen (18) inches. 
e.  Dig tree pits a minimum of two (2) feet larger than the tree root balls and shrubs pits a minimum of one (1) foot larger than the shrub root balls. Backfill with one (1) part topsoil and one (1) part soil from the excavated planting hole. Plant trees and shrubs at the same grade level at which they were planted at the nursery. If wet, clay soils are evident, plant trees and shrubs higher. 
f.  Remove all twine, wire and burlap from the top one third (?) of tree and shrub root balls and from tree trunks. Remove all non-biodegradable materials such as plastic or nylon completely. 
g.  Lawn trees are to be mulched with a minimum of four (4) foot wide by four (4) inch deep shredded bark rings or other approved design for trunk protection. Only natural-colored shredded hardwood bark mulch will be accepted. 
i.  Place mulch around the base of the tree in a four (4) inch layer to protect roots while still allowing water to pass through. 
ii.  Keep mulch two (2) to three (3) inches away from the trunk of the tree to avoid rotting the trunk. 
iii.  Extend the mulch out to at least the drip line (edge of the branches). 
iv.  For optimal benefits, use a one (1) inch layer of compost, covered with three (3) inch layer of shredded bark mulch. 
v.  Maintain a v-notch edge around the mulched tree to keep grass from growing into the mulch and completing with tree roots for nutrients. 
vi.  Replenish mulch each year, or as needed. 
h.  Shrub beds are to be mulched with shredded bark mulch to a minimum depth of three (3) inches. Only natural-colored shredded hardwood bark mulch will be accepted. 
i.  Sod is to be provided for all new lawn areas, especially in rights-of-way and high use areas. Peat sod is not acceptable. 
j.  Existing lawn that the owner intends to save and those areas that are damaged during construction must be inspected by the city to determine viability. If the existing lawn is found to be level, healthy, dense and free from weeds, lawn may not require replacement or renovation. If renovation is required or is part of the approved plan, then the following requirements apply: 
i.  If it is desired that a natural lawn be installed, the requirements of section 9.50b of chapter 111, police regulations shall be followed. 
ii.  Existing lawn found to be in poor condition must first be sprayed with round-up (or approved equal) to kill existing lawn and weed areas. Wait for a minimum period of seven (7) days for the herbicide to take effect, then remove all dead sod and weeds to a minimum depth of two (2) inches. Contractor to till or disc soil to four (4) inch depth. Regrade to eliminate all bumps and depressions. Add a minimum of two (2) to four (4) inches of new topsoil or topsoil from the onsite stockpile for all lawn areas. Back fill and compact topsoil to the top of all curbs and walks prior to sodding. 
iii.  Existing lawn found to be generally in good condition but with bare, sparse, or weedy areas must be renovated by filling in low areas with new topsoil or topsoil from the onsite stockpile, racking, top dressing and over seeding all sparse and bare spots and by initiating a weed and feed program. 
k.  Backfill directly behind all curbs and along sidewalks and compact to top of curb or walk to support vehicle and pedestrian weight without settling. 
l.  All landscape areas, especially parking lot islands and landscape beds next to buildings, shall be excavated of all building materials and poor soils to a depth of twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches and back filled with good, medium textured planting soil (loam or light yellow clay). Add four (4) to six (6) inches of topsoil over fill material and crown a minimum of six (6) inches above top of curbs and/or walks after earth settling unless otherwise noted on the approved landscape plan. 
m.  In natural areas the following procedures shall be followed: 
i.  Remove trees and brush per city direction only. 
ii.  Remove trash and perform surface grading (if any) only to fill in the worst low spots. Do not cut or fill around trees. 
iii.  Rake, hydro seed and mulch bare ground areas with proper seed mix (shade or sunny mix): 
1.  Pennfine perennial rye: twenty (20) percent proportion ninety (90) percent purity ninety (90) percent germination. 
2.  Kentucky 28# common bluegrass: twenty (20) percent proportion ninety (90) percent purity ninety (90) percent germination. 
3.  Penn lawn fescue: sixty (60) percent proportion ninety (90) percent purity eighty-five (85) percent germination. 
4.  Seed at three hundred (300) lbs per acre. No noxious weed seeds permitted. Fertilize lawn for 10-10-10. 
iv.  Let area revert to trees and shrubs. Mow very minimally, if necessary. 
n.  Conversion of all asphalt and gravel areas to landscape shall be done in the following manner: 
i.  Remove all asphalt, gravel and compacted soil to a depth of six (6) to eighteen (18) inches depending on the depth of the sub base and dispose off site. 
ii.  Contact the planning department to schedule an inspection prior to backfilling. 
iii.  Replace excavated material with good, medium-textured planting soil (loam or light yellow clay) to a minimum of two (2) inches above top of curb and sidewalk, add two (2) to four (4) inches of topsoil and crown to a minimum of six (6) inches above top of curb or walk after earth settling, unless otherwise noted on the approved landscape plan. 
o.  Natural lawn areas are encouraged both on-site and in rights-of-way in accordance with section 9.50b, chapter 111, police regulations, and underground irrigation is discouraged where natural lawns are installed. Otherwise, all landscape areas including rights-of-way shall be irrigated by an automatic underground irrigation system. Lawns and shrub/landscape areas shall be watered by separate zones to minimize overwatering. 
p.  All existing trees on site and in the rights-of-way shall be pruned as directed by the city to remove dead, dying and hazardous limbs or limbs which impede construction, driveways, and sidewalks. Pruning and deep-root fertilizing is to be done only by a qualified tree service company licensed with the city. Call the planning department to obtain a list of licensed tree service contractors. 
q.  The construction of detention ponds should be made with the following goals in mind: 
i.  Natural, free-form appearing grades. 
ii.  Slopes of 1:4, or flatter. 
iii.  Fencing is discouraged. 
iv.  No water levels are to be retained. 
v.  Mow slopes and allow bottom of basin to revert to natural vegetation. 
r.  Provide bumper blocks or curbs with drainways installed around all landscape areas to provide for storm water infiltration. Alternate landscape area protection such as decorative fences, retaining walls, etc., may be acceptable in lieu of curbing or may be required in addition to curbing to protect the landscape areas and properly deflect vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
All tree removals shall include stump removal (grinding below grade) and lawn or plant bed restoration. 
(c)  Maintenance. The owner of landscaping required by this section shall perpetually maintain such landscaping in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All diseased and/or dead material shall be removed within sixty (60) days following notification and shall be replaced within the next appropriate planting season or within one (1) year, whichever comes first. 
In the event the owner fails to maintain the landscape area in a neat and orderly manner, free from debris, the city may mail to the owner a written notice setting forth the manner in which there has been failure to maintain said property and require that the deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty (30) days from date of said notice. If the deficiencies set forth in the notice shall not be cured within thirty (30) days, or any extension thereof granted by the city, the city shall have a right to enter upon such property and correct such deficiencies and the cost thereof shall be charged, assessed, and collected pursuant to section 1.13 of the Southfield City Code. 
(d)  Existing plant materials. In instances where healthy plant materials exist on a site prior to its development, the city planner, or his designated representative, may adjust the application of the above standards to allow credit for such plant material if such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve, the intent of this section. 

Clear Zone Pathway 

Unobstructed Sight Area 
(Ord. No. 1072, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 1264, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1641, § 1, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.32. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse goods, display, a department store, a wholesale store, a market, a hotel, a hospital, a mortuary, a laundry, a dry cleaning establishment, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys. 
    All such loading and unloading areas, including all access drives, shall be paved or permeable surfaced in accordance with section 5.31, subsection 16, and shall be in addition to the required off-street parking area requirements. 
    Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) by forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) with a fourteen (14) foot (4.27 meters) height clearance and shall be provided according to the following table: 
Gross Floor Area in Square Feet Loading and Unloading Spaces Required in Terms of Square Feet of Usable Floor Area 0 to 3,000 (279.0000 square meters) None 3,000 to 20,000 (1,860.0000 square meters) One (1) space 20,000 to 100,000 (9,300.0000 square meters) One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 square feet (1,860 square meters) of excess over 20,000 square feet (1,860 square meters) 100,000 to 500,000 (46,500.0000 square meters) Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each 40,000 square feet (3,720 square meters) of excess over 100,000 square feet (9,300 square meters) Over 500,000 (Over 46,500.0000 square meters) Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space for each 80,000 square feet (7,440 square meters) of excess over 500,000 square feet (46,500 square meters)  
    No loading space may be on any street frontage and provision for handling all freight shall be on those sides of any building which do not face on any street or proposed street, except where such areas are obscured, from such street, with a solid masonry wall not less than six (6) feet (1.83 meters) in height. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.33. - Wall requirements and screening devices. 
    Boundary line lots: An unpierced masonry wall shall be provided in nonresidential districts where adjacent to, or across a street or alley from, residential districts in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Where a nonresidential district is separated by a street from the front yard of lots in a residential district, there shall be provided an unpierced masonry wall set back twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) from the street separating such residential and nonresidential districts before said nonresidential district property, within fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) of said street (or alley), is used for nonresidential purposes. 
(2)  Where a nonresidential district is separated by a street or alley from a side or rear yard of lots in a residential district, there shall be provided an unpierced masonry wall in such nonresidential district where contiguous to the street separating such residential and nonresidential districts before said nonresidential district property, within fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) of said street (or alley), is used for nonresidential purposes. 
(3)  Where a nonresidential district abuts, without being separated by a street or alley, a residential district, there shall be provided an unpierced masonry wall in such nonresidential district where contiguous to the residential district before said nonresidential district property, within fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) of said residential property, is used for nonresidential purposes. 
Where any wall, as required above, would be located within twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) of a street intersection, the wall shall be angled or off-set in such manner so as to comply with the corner clearance provisions of section 5.46. 
(4)  Enclosure of appliances or accessories. In all zone districts, roof appliances such as, but not limited to, cooling towers, air conditioners, heating apparatus, dust collectors, filters, transformers and any other such appliance or apparatus, other than flag poles, chimneys for carrying products of combustion and radio antenna towers, shall be enclosed within opaque walls not less in height than the height of the highest appliance, as measured from the plane of the roof surface upon which the screen device is mounted to the top of the highest appliance. However, if the screening device is mounted on the top of the parapet or other part of the building facade which extends above the roof surface, the height of the parapet or part of the building facade may be included as part of the height of the screening device as long as the sum total of the height of the parapet or other part of the building facade extending above the roof surface and the screening device is equal to the height of the highest appliance. Such walls may be louvered to permit passage of air for cross ventilation, but shall be adequate to totally screen such equipment from view. The design of the screening device shall be compatible with the architectural design of the building upon which it is located. 
Sec. 5.34. - Wall height. 
    Wherever in this chapter an unpierced masonry wall is required, the wall shall be erected to a height of not less than six (6) feet (1.83 meters) and not more than eight (8) feet (2.44 meters), measured from the average surface within the adjacent thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters) of the nonresidentially zoned property. 
Sec. 5.35. - Wall, brick facing. 
    Wherever in this chapter an unpierced masonry wall is required: 
(1)  The wall shall be faced with brick on the side facing the residentially zoned property. The brick facing is necessary to reduce the possibility of any adverse effects upon the residentially zoned property that may be caused by the development of the nonresidentially zoned property. 
(2)  Whenever an unpierced masonry wall is required to be constructed, such wall shall be constructed prior to the backfilling of any foundation or prior to any construction that extends above the foundation wall, whichever first occurs, in order to preserve the residential character and livability of the adjacent residential properties during the time of construction when the noise, dust and hazards from construction equipment are most obnoxious to residential properties. 
Sec. 5.36. - Wall modification. 
    Wherever in this chapter an unpierced masonry wall, six (6) feet (1.83 meters) in height is required, any person, commission or council, having site plan review jurisdiction, may reduce the required height or waive the requirement where said wall is required to be erected within forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) of a street right-of-way and that such person, commission or council finds that the construction of said wall, as required, would constitute a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1261, 2-27-89) 
Sec. 5.37. - Wall substitution. 
    Wherever in this chapter an unpierced masonry wall is required, a buffer strip of not less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) in width or fence or wall may be permitted in lieu of the required unpierced masonry wall upon a finding by the city council that the buffer strip or fence or wall would provide equal or greater protection to the residential district from any adverse effects from the use of the nonresidential district. 
(Ord. No. 1262, 2-27-89) 
Sec. 5.37-1. - Fence regulations. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide reasonable regulations for fence installation while allowing property owners the ability to install a fence for aesthetic, screening, separating or security purposes. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Board-on-board fence: Shall mean any fence with alternating vertical boards over horizontal structures that give the fence a finished look on both sides. 
2.  Chain-link or cyclone fence: Shall mean any fence that is constructed of some type of woven wire fence, with a minimum 111/2-gauge in residential districts and a minimum 9-gauge in non-residential districts. 
3.  Decorative fence: Shall mean any fence no more than thirty (30) inches high and no more than sixteen (16) feet in length, which are not intended for the purpose of preventing persons and/or domestic animals, from crawling or passing through the fence, except at established gateways. A decorative fence shall not include a fence constructed of chain link material or any other type of woven fence. 
4.  Fence: Shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary including but not limited to posts, boards, wire, vinyl or gates. 
5.  Fence height: The height of the fence will be measured at the grade . If the ground is not entirely level, then the grade shall be determined by computing the average elevation of the ground for each linear section of fence and taking the average of said total averages. 
6.  Lattice: Shall mean an open framework made of strips of wood or similar material overlapped or overlaid in a regular crisscross or decorative pattern. Lattice sections may not exceed one (1) foot in height and shall not exceed fifty (50) percent coverage of open viewing. 
7.  Living fence or landscape fence: A living fence or landscape fence includes a row of shrubs, hedgerows, landscape berms or similar for the purpose of enclosure, screening, or restricting the passage of air, noise or light; but shall not impede surrounding line of sight or corner clearance (clear vision zones). 
8.  Ornamental fence: Wrought iron, tubular aluminum or similar ornamental fence. 
9.  Picket fence: Shall mean any fence with in-line boards no larger than one (1) inch by three (3) inches with gaps equal to the width of the boards. 
10.  Privacy screen: Shall mean a sight-obscuring fence, erected adjacent to or around a selected use or area (such as a patio, deck, courtyard or swimming pool), designed to screen the area behind it from observation by persons outside its perimeter. 
11.  Semi - privacy fence: Shall mean a fence designed and intended to be sight-obscuring, such as a board-on-board fence. 
12.  Shadow-box fence: See Board-on-board fence . 
13.  Solid fence: Any fence that presents a solid surface without any gaps in materials. 
14.  Wall: See wall requirements sections 5.33-5.37. 
C.  Standards for approval: 
1.  Residential districts: Residential fences (R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-E) are subject to an application to the building department and the following requirements: 
(a)  Front yard: Not permitted, unless it meets the definition of decorative fence or living fence. 
(b)  Side yard: Fences, not exceeding seventy-two (72) inches shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house. 
(c)  Rear yard: Fences shall not exceed seventy-two (72) inches in the rear yard. 
(d)  Double frontage yards: On corner lots where a double front setback is required, and where there is a common rear yard relationship with a lot in the same block, a fence no greater than seventy-two (72) inches in height may be installed along the common street line from the side of the house to the rear property line. Clear vision zones shall be maintained for corner lots and adjacent driveways. 
(e)  Decorative fencing: Decorative fencing (e.g. split rail, white picket, etc.), which is less than thirty (30) inches high and less than sixteen (16) feet in length when erected as part of landscaping does not require a permit. 
(f)  Living fences shall meet the requirements for clear vision triangles. 
(g)  Permitted materials: Wood, wrought iron, tubular aluminum, vinyl coated chain link, aluminum, quality vinyl and other approved quality materials. Wood fences shall be pressure treated, painted or stained. Board-on-board, shadow-box and semi-privacy fence styles may include a one-foot high lattice top. Naturally water resistant woods (i.e. teak, redwood, cedar) may be permitted. Vinyl coated chain link fences may be permitted in the rear and side yards. 
(h)  The finish side of the fence shall face out towards adjacent residential lots and public rights-of way. 
(i)  Prohibited fences: Stockade, uncoated chain link and slats (i.e. vinyl, aluminum, etc.) inserted into chain link or cyclone fences. Fences shall not contain barb wire, razor wire, electric current or charge of electricity. Exception: Farms, permitted in the single-family residence districts (R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-E), may contain these type fences after approval by the ZBA. 
(j)  All fences shall be supported from its own structural frame system of posts and rails and not attached, connected, secured or supported by other fencing, trees, etc. in the area. Fences shall be installed in a professional manner and be plumb, straight, and true, and stepped or tapered or cut to follow the contour of the land. 
(k)  Dog runs shall be located in the rear and side yards only and shall be consistent with the requirements for residential fences. 
(l)  Electronic pet fence: Refer to Ordinance No. 1576 (codified as § 9.89). 
2.  Non-residential districts: Non-residential fences and multi-family residential are subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  A permit shall be required prior to the construction of any fence, after administrative approval is granted by the city planner. Administrative approval may not be required if the fence is approved as part of a site plan approval. 
(b)  Fences, not to exceed six (6) feet in height, may be located within any yard except the minimum front yard setback or the minimum setback of a yard abutting a street. Fences above six (6) feet in height may be requested through the zoning board of appeals. Front yard setback requirements may be waived in the City Centre and DDA districts if ornamental fencing is installed. 
(c)  Chain link fences shall be vinyl coated. 
(d)  Barb wire or other pointed materials may be used only in industrially zoned districts provided said material is over seven (7) feet above the ground and any projections at the top shall be over the fence owner's property and shall not overhang onto abutting property. 
D.  Survey: The city may require the owner of the property upon which a fence is to be constructed to establish property lines upon said property through the placing of permanent stakes by a licensed surveyor. Such property lines shall be established before such fence is erected. A survey may also be required in the event an abutting property owner disputes the permit applicant's determination of a stated property line. 
E.  Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in good, safe and stable condition in accordance with local ordinances and codes. Rotten, broken or missing components shall be replaced or repaired immediately. Fences shall be made from naturally water resistant material or be pressure treated, stained, painted, or vinyl coated and kept in a good aesthetic condition. 
F.  For pool enclosures and construction fencing see the Michigan Residential Code and/or the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1598 , 12-23-12) 
Sec. 5.38. - Landscape requirements and plant materials; buffer strip, parking lot, and right-of-way planting. 
    Whenever in this chapter landscaping treatment is required, it shall be in accordance with the specific use as mentioned in this section. All plant materials will be installed within six (6) months of the date of issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. In the instance where such completion is not possible, a cash bond, letter of credit, or corporate surety bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the landscape plan or portion thereof will be deposited with the city clerk to insure project completion. All installations of plant materials shall be in accordance with the general planting specifications as set forth by the city parks and recreation department. further, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the city planning department for review and approval prior to the installation of any required landscaping. Included on this landscape plan shall be: scale; north arrow; all permanent structures; names of all plant materials to be installed, both scientific and common; size and quantity of plant materials to be installed; existing plants on the site; ground cover to be used; hard-surfacing; other landscape materials as defined by this chapter; and name, address, and telephone number of the landscape designer. 
(1)  Buffer strip planting. Whenever a buffer strip is required or permitted, it will be installed so as to provide, within a reasonable time, an effective barrier to vision, light, physical encroachment, and sound. Reasonable maintenance will be required to insure its permanent effectiveness. Specific planting requirements are: 
(a)  The planting strip will be no less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) in width. 
(b)  Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet (1.22 meters) from the property line. 
(c)  A minimum of one (1) evergreen tree shall be planted at ten-foot (3.05 meters) intervals. 
(d)  A minimum of three (3) intermediate shrubs shall be placed between the spaced evergreens. 
(e)  Suggested plant materials: 
1. EVERGREEN Juniper All plantings shall be a minimum of 3 feet (.915 meters) to 4 feet (1.22 meters) in height with an average spread of 21 inches (53.34 centimeters) to 30 inches (76.2 centimeters) Red Cedar American Arborvitae Pyramidal Arborvitae Columnar Juniper Irish Juniper 2. SHRUB TYPE Flowering Crabs All single stem tree like plantings shall be a minimum of 13/4 inches (4.445 centimeters) to 2 inches (5.08 centimeters) caliper when installed Russian Olive Smoke Bush Clump Birch Mountain Ash Dogwood Red Bud Rose of Sharon Honeysuckle All deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum height of 2 feet (.61 meters) to 3 feet (.915 meters) in height when installed. Viburnum Mock Orange Tall Hedge Holly (Varieties) Forsythia Barberry Ninebark  
(2)  Parking lot plantings. Whenever this section is applied, the plant materials will be installed properly and provided such reasonable maintenance as required to insure their health and permanence. Except where landscaped areas are designed as vegetated stormwater control measures, suggested plant materials are: 
(a) Trees Ash (Marshall Seedless) All tree plantings shall be a minimum of 21/2 inches (6.35 centimeters) to 3 inches (7.62 centimeters) caliper at a point on the trunk 6 inches (15.24 centimeters) above the ground. Birch Linden Locust (thornless, seedless varieties only) Maple Oak  
_____ 
(b)  Shrubs: Refer to the suggested buffer strip plantings. 
(c)  Vines: Vines may be planted against screening walls and used as a ground cover. All vines shall have a minimum of three (3) runners, six (6) inches (15.24 centimeters) to eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) long when installed. 
Boston Ivy 
Climbing Hydrangea 
English Ivy 
Running Euonymus 
Common Moonseed 
Baltic Ivy 
Pachysandra 
Ajuga 
Periwinkle 
Cotoneaster 
(3)  Right-of-way planting. The "Master Street Tree Plan" of the city parks and recreation will be used as the guide for all right-of-way tree planting. Chapter 28, Tree Regulations, of the City Code shall be consulted for all right-of-way plantings. 
(4)  Vegetated stormwater control measures: 
(a)  The design and installation of vegetated stormwater control measures, which may be incorporated into required parking lot, buffer strip and right-of-way plantings, is encouraged and shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city planner. Required parking lot, buffer strip, and right-of-way plantings may incorporate vegetated stormwater control measures so long as the aesthetic objectives and the minimum dimensional requirements of the planting area are, in the judgment of the city planner, satisfied by the combination of landscaping, fencing, walls and other measures proposed. 
(b)  Applicants shall utilize the design guidance from the Southeast Michigan Council of Governments (SEMCOG) and City of Southfield Low Impact Design Guidelines in the selection, sizing and design of these areas. For any such vegetated stormwater control measures proposed, the landscape or stormwater management plan submitted to the city shall include: 
i.  A plan indicating the contributing drainage area, land use, slope, and seasonal high groundwater elevation in areas where the practices are proposed. 
ii.  Design calculations. 
iii.  Detailed planting plan. 
iv.  Construction detail and sequencing plan. 
v.  Maintenance plan. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.39. - Essential services. 
    Repealed by Ord. No. 1342, adopted June 8, 1992. 
Sec. 5.40. - Public utility facilities. 
    In all zoning districts, except industrial, public utility facilities and uses (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity, shall be permitted after review and approval of the site plan and upon a finding by the city council that the use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1263, 2-27-89) 
Sec. 5.41. - Easement use. 
    Erection of permanent structures on easements for public utilities is prohibited. "Permanent structure" shall mean, and include, a garage or other building (but shall not include a fence, retaining wall, freestanding wall, concrete walk, paving, or any similar object) which will prevent or interfere with the free right or opportunity to use or make the easement accessible for essential services. 
Sec. 5.42. - Rear yard measurement. 
    Wherever there is a public alley at the rear of a lot upon which the lot abuts for its full width, measurements of the depth of any abutting rear yard required under this chapter may be made to the centerline of such alley. 
Sec. 5.43. - Yard encroachments. 
    No yard, court, or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be used as a yard, court, or other open space for another building existing or intended to exist at the same time. 
Sec. 5.44. - Fees. 
    The city council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to petitioners for amendments to this chapter and for the review of site plans in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.45. - Nonresidential setback from residential. 
    In any nonresidential zoning district, no building or structure shall be located closer to a single-family residential district than the height of the building or structure but, in no instance, shall the setback be less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters). Provided, however, where greater setbacks are required by any other provisions of this chapter, such other provisions shall control the setback requirements. 
Sec. 5.46. - Corner clearance. 
    In order to promote safe movement of vehicles at and near street intersections and in order to promote more adequate protection of the safety of children, pedestrians, property and other vehicles and occupants, no permanent or temporary fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, vehicle, or other obstruction to vision above a height of three (3) feet (.915 meters) from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance, along each right-of-way line, of twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) from this point of intersection. 
Sec. 5.47. - Access to structures. 
    Every building or structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot abutting a public street or private street or permanent easement not less than thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters) in width. 
Sec. 5.48. - Location of principal buildings. 
    Except in the case of planned developments where a site plan is approved by the city council and except for lots used for education or religious institutions, not more than one (1) single-family dwelling shall be located on a lot as defined in this chapter nor shall a single-family dwelling be located on the same lot with any other principal building. (This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the lawful division of land.) 
Sec. 5.49. - Floodplain controls. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of the floodplain controls to apply special regulations to the use of land in those areas of the city which are subject to predictable flooding at frequent intervals and to protect the storage capacity, ground water recharge, and water purification of floodplains and to assure retention of sufficient floodplain area to convey flood flows which can reasonably be expected to occur and to better maintain environmental factors and the proper ecological balance through prohibiting unnecessary encroachments. Such regulations, while permitting reasonable economic use of such properties, will help protect the public health and reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its individuals by frequent and periodic floods, and the overflow of lands; reserve such areas for the impoundments of water to better stabilize stream flow; to better maintain the proper ecological balance; and consideration of environmental factors such as open space and aesthetic values. All lands included in such floodplain control district shall be subject to the restrictions imposed herein in addition to the restrictions imposed by any other zoning districts in which said lands should be located. The floodplains, as herein defined, are not intended for human habitation, the development of permanent structures, or any use which causes a change in the natural functional drainage grade of the floodplain. 
    Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood heights and velocities, the occupancy of the floodplain areas by uses vulnerable to floods, or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(2)  Delineation of floodplain boundaries. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Department of Homeland Security's Federal Emergency Management Agency, entitled Flood Insurance Study, Oakland County, Michigan, and Incorporated Areas dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary floodplain maps, as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Southfield, Community Number 260179, Map Panel Numbers 26125C0514F, 0518F, 0519F, 0538F, 0539F, 0652F, 0654F, 0656F, 0657F, 0658F, 0659F, 0676F, 0677F, 0678F, 0679F, dated September 29, 2006, prepared by the Department of Homeland Security's Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the profiles prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration in conjunction with said map are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at the engineering department, City of Southfield, 26000 Evergreen Road, Southfield, Michigan 48076. 
    This provision shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official maps located within the boundaries of the regulatory floodplain and floodplain fringe districts which include the main branch of the Rouge River, Pebble Creek, Franklin Branch, Evans Ditch, Farmington Branch, and Carpenter Branch of the Rouge River. 
(3)  Interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning district shall be determined by the water surface flood profile provided in the flood insurance rate map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the flood insurance rate map and flood profiles, the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation with the assistance of the state department of natural resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers when needed. 
    Any person or persons contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present the reasons for their objection to the city engineer and to submit any technical and/or material evidence in support of their objections. The city engineer, in such cases, shall submit a report to the city council outlining the area of disagreement and the conclusions reached by him. 
(4)  Appeals. The city council may, upon petition, permit minor modifications to the delineation of the floodplain boundary after review and recommendation from the city engineer. Such modifications may be approved upon the findings that: 
(a)  The flow, storage capacity, and discharge of the floodplain will be maintained or improved. 
(b)  The floodplains are not intended for human habitation and are kept free and clear of interference or obstruction which will cause any undue restriction of original capacity of the floodplain. 
(c)  The stream flow is not revised so as to affect the riparian rights of other owners or interfere with natural drainage in the area. 
(d)  The modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right. 
(e)  The modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the surrounding area in which said property is situated. 
(f)  Notification has been provided adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of copies of such notification made to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(g)  All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972. 
(h)  Assure that the floodplain carrying and storage capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(i)  A public hearing shall be held concerning the requested modification and notice shall be given in the official newspaper not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and the general location of the proposed modification. 
(j)  Alternatives to any requested modification to the floodplain boundary shall be adequately explored and presented to the city council at the public hearing. 
(5)  Establishment of floodplain zones. The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into two (2) districts: (1) Regulatory Floodplain District (RF) and (2) Floodplain Fringe District (FF). The boundaries of these districts shall be shown on the official map as regulatory floodplain and represented by "A" zones and floodplain fringe represented by "B" zones. 
(6)  Uses permitted: 
(a)  Regulatory floodplain district (RF). The following uses which have a low flood damage potential and do not obstruct flood flows shall be permitted within the regulatory floodplain to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of material or equipment. No use shall adversely affect the capacity of the channels or regulatory floodplains of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
1.  Agricultural uses such as general farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, and viticulture. 
2.  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, hiking, playgrounds, athletic fields, and bicycle paths. 
3.  Public rights-of-way, private drives, and parking areas; provided, further, that for all zoning districts, the area of the parcel of land located within the regulatory floodplain used for the provision of parking thereon shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the regulatory floodplain area of the property involved. However, in no instance shall the parking area exceed ten (10) percent of the area outside of the regulatory floodplain. 
4.  In any zoning district in which density is based upon land area, the computation of density shall not include any of the area located within the regulatory floodplain district of which the property is a part. The floodplain area may be used in computing open space and landscape requirements of any zoning district. 
5.  The erection and construction of roads, bridges, causeways, and public utilities may be permitted within the regulatory floodplain by the city council after a public hearing, which has been advertised in a local newspaper not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing stating the time, place, and date of the hearing, has been held, and the city council has made findings that such proposals will not be detrimental to the natural flow of water or disrupt the floodplain storage capacity, and provided the requirements of this section have been met. Exhibits submitted for review will provide sufficient information as required by the city council with respect to support, spacing, height, anchorage, and erosion control. 
(b)  Floodplain fringe district (FF). Permitted uses in the floodplain fringe shall be subject to the following standards provided further that the permitted uses shall meet the standards and restrictions imposed by any other zoning district in which said lands may be located. 
1.  For new construction or substantial improvement, the elevation of the lowest floor designed or intended for human habitation and/or employment (including basement) shall be at least three (3) feet (.915 meters) above the elevation of the floodplain. 
2.  Dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner is prohibited in the floodplain fringe unless, through compensating excavation and shaping, the floodplain fringe will be maintained or improved as determined by the city engineer and approved by the city council. 
3.  Any filling or modification to the floodplain fringe shall have erosion controls as approved by the city engineer to prevent soil from being washed into the regulatory floodplain or channel. 
4.  Any substantial improvements within a floodplain shall be: 
a.  Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
5.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize flood damage. 
6.  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
7.  All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
8.  Where topographic data, engineering studies, or other studies are needed as required by the city council, planning commission, or city engineer to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed site and/or the effect of a structure on the flow of water, the applicant, at his expense, shall submit such data or studies. All such required data shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer. 
9.  The city engineer shall obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basements and cellars and any openings thereto) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement or cellar. 
10.  The following uses which present difficult problems in removing or evacuating, in the event of flooding in the floodplain fringe, are prohibited: hospitals, senior citizen housing, nursing homes, schools, and the storage of toxic materials. 
(Ord. No. 1538, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5.50. - Adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, and cabaret controls. 
(1)  Purpose. Recognizing that because of their nature, some uses have objectionable operational characteristics, especially when concentrated in small areas, and recognizing that such uses may have a harmful effect on adjacent areas, special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations, and uses subject to these regulations, are as follows: 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish any adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, or cabarets except in the B-3 (General Business) and I-1 (Industrial) Districts. 
(b)  No such uses may be permitted in the B-3 (General Business) or I-1 (Industrial) Districts within one thousand (1,000) feet (305 meters) of any residential district measured from the lot line of the location of the proposed use. 
(c)  The city council may waive this location provision if the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed. 
2.  That the character of the area shall be maintained. 
3.  That all applicable regulations of this chapter will be observed. 
4.  That no adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or cabaret is located within two thousand (2,000) feet (610 meters) of the proposed location. 
(d)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the city council shall not consider the waiver of the locational requirements as hereinabove set forth until a petition shall have been filed with the city clerk and verified as to sufficiency. Such petition shall indicate approval of the proposed regulated use by fifty-one (51) percent or more of the persons owning property within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet (305 meters) of the location of the proposed use as measured from the lot line. The petitioner, or his agent, shall attempt to contact all eligible property owners within this radius and must maintain a list of all addresses at which no contact was made. 
(e)  The petition hereinabove required shall contain an affidavit signed by the party circulating such petition attesting to the fact that the petition was circulated by him and that the circulator personally witnessed the signatures on the petition and that the same were affixed to the petition by the person whose name appeared thereon and that the circulator verily believes that the signers of such petition are persons owning property within one thousand (1,000) feet (305 meters) of the premises mentioned in said petition. Such petition shall also comply with such other rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city council. 
Sec. 5.51. - Community impact statement. 
(1)  Purpose. The requirement for the submission of a community impact statement during the rezoning and/or site plan review process is to provide relevant information concerning the environmental, economic, social, and cultural effects on the community that a proposed project may have, and to provide the necessary data for the city to make a rational determination on the request. It is necessary to minimize pollution, protect wildlife and ecologically important features, retain environmental resources, and to investigate the adequacy of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, water, and transportation system. 
    A community impact statement (CIS), providing the information and data specified herein, shall be required and shall be submitted by the petitioner and at the expense of the petitioner. 
(a)  When a request for rezoning or site plan approval is submitted, whichever shall occur first, for parcels having an area of ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) or greater; or 
(b)  When a development of one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet (13,950 square meters) of gross floor area or greater is submitted for site plan review; or 
(c)  When a development of two hundred (200) dwelling units or greater is submitted for site plan review; or 
(d)  A community impact statement shall be required, regardless of the size of the property or project, when three (3) or more points are accumulated from the following table: 
1.  Displacement of community residents ..... 1 point 
2.  Site serves as a diversified habitat, food source and nesting place for numerous species of wildlife for the surrounding area as determined by the city parks and recreation department or state department of natural resources ..... 1 point 
3.  The site involves land designated as regulatory floodplain ..... 1 point 
4.  The site is considered a wetland, meaning a land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; or more than five (5) acres (2.025 hectares) in size, or is determined by the department of natural resources to be essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the department has notified the owner ..... 1 point 
5.  The site contains a natural or artificial lake, pond or impoundment; a river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain or any other body of water which has definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water ..... 1 point 
6.  The site is considered a woodland if a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the site consists of a well-stocked stand of trees with a majority of the trees having a three (3") inch (7.62 centimeters) caliper, or greater. ..... 1 point 
7.  The site has slopes or grades of twenty-five (25) percent or greater ..... 1 point 
8.  The property is located on other than a major thoroughfare ..... 1 point 
9.  The development of the property will necessitate the widening of adjacent thoroughfares ..... 1 point 
10.  The development of the property will necessitate the extension of the following public utilities to adequately serve it: 
Storm sewer ..... 1 point 
Sanitary sewer ..... 1 point 
Water main ..... 1 point 
11.  Roadway related carbon monoxide concentration exceeding federal standard of ten (10) milligrams per cubic meter for an eight-hour period ..... 1 point 
(e)  The official maps of the city which are designated for wetlands, watercourses, natural and artificial floodplains and drainage courses, rivers and streams in the city including amendments which may be made from time to time, and are on file with the city engineering department, are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by reference. 
(f)  Appeals. The requirement for a community impact statement, as provided above, may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal shall be published in an official newspaper. 
If the city council, after the hearing, determines that a community impact statement is not necessary, they shall set forth the reasons for such findings. 
(g)  Exclusions. The development of detached single family dwelling units on an individual basis is hereby excluded from the requirements of this section. 
These provisions are applicable to multistage developments whose total building area or dwelling unit count, or both, will ultimately meet or exceed these amounts. 
The requirements contained herein shall not relieve the project's sponsor from complying with other land development or environmental impact standards established by other public agencies having jurisdiction. 
(2)  Application and review. The submission of a rezoning request or site plan review shall be accompanied by a community impact statement in accordance with the above criteria. A community impact statement prepared for a rezoning request shall examine the general conditions and effects of the rezoning while the community impact statement prepared for a site plan shall examine the details and requirements of the specific proposal. If the property is presently zoned for the use intended, a community impact statement shall only be required for the site plan review process. Submission shall be made to the planning department concurrently with the payment of rezoning or site plan review fees. 
A review and summary report, which shall analyze the material and information provided by the sponsor, will be prepared by an administrative committee consisting of the planning department, department of public services, traffic engineer, and department of parks and recreation. The summary report shall include a fiscal analysis of the subject property and proposed development. The summary report and recommendations shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council prior to their consideration of a rezoning or site plan petition. 
Not less than fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing regarding the proposal and the community impact statement shall be published in an official newspaper. 
The community impact statement shall be available in the planning department for review by the public. Written comments on the community impact statement may be presented to the planning commission and/or city council prior to their public meeting on the matter. 
(3)  Information and data required. A community impact statement shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(a)  Physical conditions: 
1.  Legal description of the subject property accompanied by a survey map. 
2.  Location map indicating the location of the subject property in relation to the city thoroughfare system. 
3.  Zoning map indicating the subject property and the zoning of adjacent properties for a radius of one-half (1/2) mile (.8045 kilometers). 
4.  Land use map indicating the subject property and land uses of adjacent properties for a radius of one-half (1/2) mile (.8045 kilometers). 
5.  Site conditions of the subject property indicating; 
a.  Location and size of existing natural features such as trees, streams, bodies of water, floodplains, soil types and conditions, topography, ground water table, wildlife inventory (type) location, migration patterns, (feeding habits) and vegetation inventory (classification of existing types by general location and numbers or density as appropriate). 
b.  Location and size of existing facilities and utilities (thoroughfares, water service, sanitary sewer, storm drain, gas lines, electric lines, etc.). 
c.  Features adjacent to and directly across the street, i.e. pavement width, driveways, passing lanes, curb cuts, etc. 
6.  For any development requiring a community impact statement because of section 5.51 (1) of this chapter, the community impact statement shall include a certification by the petitioner or its agent to the city that the petitioner has consulted with appropriate representatives of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources in regard to the proposed development, and that either: 
a.  All comments or requirements received from the department of natural resources are accurately disclosed in the community impact statement, or 
b.  That the department of natural resources has failed to respond to the petitioner's proposal. 
(b)  Project description: 
1.  For rezoning, a general description of the proposed use with emphasis on the following items as they relate to the zoning ordinance: 
a.  Density limitations of zone; maximum density allowable on the site. 
b.  Parking requirements and probable directional distribution of potential peak hour traffic generation. 
c.  Open space requirements as they relate to the request and to the site. 
d.  Height limitations of site. 
e.  Owners of the property; petitioner and his representative. 
2.  For site plan approval, a detailed description of the proposal shall be submitted which shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Density of proposed project including building coverage, height, net and gross floor areas, number of dwelling units and bedroom count, parking spaces required and provided, landscaped areas required and provided, and adjacent thoroughfare right-of-way. 
b.  Anticipated number of employees, residents, school age children by school type, and senior citizens. 
c.  Projected vehicular generation and probable directional distribution. 
d.  Owners and developers of the proposed development. 
If rezoning and site plan approval are required, two (2) community impact statements are necessary in accordance with (b-1) and (b-2) above. 
(c)  Project impact analysis. The sponsor shall submit a full analysis and description of the proposed project's required levels of service from public utilities (sanitary and storm sewer, water, gas, electricity, etc.). The administrative committee shall examine and analyze this data in order to determine the availability and/or capacity of the existing utility systems to accept the demands of the proposed project. 
1.  Local economy: 
a.  Number of residents, businesses or employees displaced. 
b.  Number of new long-term and short-term jobs provided. 
c.  General employment base and/or housing marketing area with a definition of the market area. 
d.  Project cost and estimated value. 
2.  Thoroughfares: 
a.  Projected traffic volumes generated on and adjacent to the site as a result of the proposed development. 
b.  Improvements proposed as a result of the project to properly accommodate the development. 
3.  Stormwater management: 
a.  Estimated volumes of surface run-off generated by the proposed development. 
b.  A summary of the stormwater management plan and approach on the subject property, including the use of green infrastructure measures. 
c.  Proposed plan for maintenance responsibility for any on-site (private) stormwater control measures. 
4.  Water service: 
a.  Estimated minimum volumes necessary to adequately service the property and proposed development including minimum pressure and volume for not only domestic needs, but also fire hydrants, sprinklers, etc. 
5.  Sanitary waste systems: 
a.  Estimated volumes of sanitary effluent generated by development. 
6.  Solid waste collection: 
a.  Method of storage, collection, and disposal. 
7.  Power, heat and communication: 
a.  Availability of existing systems and their respective capacities. 
b.  Any energy conservation systems of the project. 
c.  Estimated requirements to adequately service the project and improvements proposed as a result of the project to properly serve the development. 
8.  Transportation facilities other than private automobiles: 
a.  Public. 
b.  Bicycle (bikepaths, bike racks, curb cuts, etc.). 
c.  Pedestrian (sidewalks, trails, etc.). 
9.  Proposed fire protection and prevention provisions including, but not limited to: 
a.  Accessibility to structures. 
b.  Special considerations; rooftop helipad, sprinkler system, fire lanes, etc. 
10.  Proposed private safety and security systems of the project: 
a.  Gate houses, lighting, surveillance (TV, security guard), regulated/parking, central alarm, etc. 
11.  Recreation and leisure time facilities and activities: 
a.  Public recreation facilities in the area (existing and proposed). 
b.  Private recreation facilities in the area (existing and proposed). 
c.  Proposed facilities to be included in the project. 
12.  Environmental considerations: 
a.  Treatment of landscaped area, including the integration of stormwater management with landscaping and the conservation of vegetation and trees. 
b.  Treatment of open space areas. 
c.  Aesthetic, environmental and ecological benefits. 
d.  Areas of unique flora and fauna, beauty, geological or historical significance. 
e.  Changes in existing flora and fauna. 
f.  Methods of minimizing or avoiding adverse environmental effects. 
The community impact statement shall contain a bibliography and a list of persons, organizations and sources consulted. Additional information may be required by the administrative review committee, planning commission, or city council and shall be provided by the petitioner at such request. 
(4)  The city, its agents, surveyors, or other employees may make reasonable entry upon any lands and waters within the city for the purpose of making any investigation, survey or study contemplated by this section. An investigation of any natural or artificial obstruction may be made by the planning department on its own initiative or on written request of any titleholder of land abutting the watercourse involved, or lands in a flood land area. 
(5)  Site plans reviewed under this section may be approved contingent upon receiving permits from various county or state agencies. If there are substantial changes to the approved site plan as a result of the review by other agencies, the site plan must be submitted back to the city council for further review. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 3-2-87; Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.52. - Site plan and traffic engineering plan expiration. 
    Whenever in this chapter a site plan or traffic engineering plan is required, it shall remain valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval unless an extension is requested by the petitioner, in writing, of the person, commission, or council having site plan review or traffic engineering review jurisdiction and such request for extension is granted. Such extension, if granted, shall not exceed a period of one (1) year. 
    The request for extension shall be reviewed in relationship to any change in ordinance or code requirements, development of surrounding land uses and adjacent properties, and the expansion or provision of public facilities and utilities (roads, storm sewer, etc.). 
Sec. 5.53. - Historic districts. 
    Upon the establishment of a "Historic District" in accordance with and pursuant to chapter 45 of title V hereunder, the city council may permit a specific use(s) in addition to that permitted by the existing zoning district applied to the land. Provided, however, such additional uses shall be limited in accordance with the following: 
(1)  With respect to parcels situated within a designated residential zoning district (as defined in section 5.11 hereunder), no additional use(s) shall be permitted hereunder unless such parcel contains frontage on a major thoroughfare as defined in the city master plan. Additional uses may be permitted with regard to parcels having frontage on a major thoroughfare, however, such additional uses shall be limited to those permitted by article 9, Office-Service (O-S) District, and article 16 of this chapter, B-1, Neighborhood Business District. 
(2)  With respect to parcels situated within a designated nonresidential zoning district (as defined in section 5.11 hereunder), such additional uses may be permitted, however, such additional uses shall be limited to those permitted by articles 9, 16, 17, and 18 hereunder (Office-Service District, Neighborhood Business District, Planned Business District, and General Business District). 
    Upon receipt of a request for the establishment of such additional use(s), the city council shall receive reports and recommendations from the planning commission and the historic district commission as to the nature, effects, suitability and acceptability of the building and/or site alterations proposed in conjunction with the requested additional uses, and the conformance of same with the intent and purpose of this chapter and chapter 50, historic preservation, of the City Code. Such reports and recommendations shall minimally contain factual evidence directly related to the specific findings required to be made of city council as hereinafter set forth. 
    The city council shall conduct a public hearing on a request for additional use(s) within a Historic District in compliance with section 5.221, special use procedure, of this chapter. In considering and acting upon requests for the establishment of such additional uses, the city council shall make the following findings: 
(1)  That the establishment of the proposed use is necessary in order to preserve the subject structure in accordance with the intent and purpose of chapter 50, historic preservation, of the City Code. 
(2)  That the proposed building and/or site alterations will be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 50, historic preservation, of the City Code, unless modified as otherwise provided in this section. 
(3)  That the proposed building and/or site alterations will be designed and implemented so as to minimize any adverse effects of such uses on the character of the surrounding area and will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding community. 
(4)  That satisfactory financial guarantees have been provided so as to ensure the removal of the building improvements and/or site improvements necessary to return the subject property to its original use should the Historic District designation be removed from the property. 
    In the absence of any of such specific findings being made by the city council, the proposed use(s) shall not be permitted. 
    Upon the approval by the city council of a proposed use as herein provided, the city council may impose such other conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to minimize any adverse effects of such use(s) on adjacent properties. 
    Site improvements, such as off-street parking and landscaping, shall be in accordance with those provisions of this chapter applicable to the uses(s) permitted and applicable to the zoning district within which such uses(s) would otherwise occur. 
    City council action in accordance with this section 5.53 shall be necessary for any succeeding change in use or change in occupancy. 
Sec. 5.54. - Satellite dish antenna. 
    Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in all single-family residential zoning districts subject to the conditions listed in article 5, section 5.69. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in all other multiple-family residential zoning districts and all nonresidential zoning districts (except the TV-R, Television-Radio-Office-Studio District), subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Satellite dish antennas-Ground-mounted. 
(a)  The placement and construction of satellite dish antennas must be approved by the department of building and safety engineering prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard as defined by article 2, section 5.9, definitions (T-Z). 
(c)  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) above the average existing grade within ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) of the antenna. 
(d)  Satellite dish antennas shall be permanently ground-mounted. No antenna shall be installed on a portable or movable structure. 
(e)  There shall be no text, pictures, logos or advertising displayed on any surface of the satellite dish antennas. 
(f)  Satellite dish antennas shall not be located within any required parking area. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas-Roof-mounted. 
(a)  The placement and construction of roof-mounted satellite dish antennas must be approved by the department of building and safety engineering prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Satellite dish antennas shall be mounted directly upon the roof of a primary or accessory structure, and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, poles, or spires. 
(c)  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed an overall diameter of fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) or an overall height of twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) above the height of the building as defined by article 2, definitions, section 5.3, definitions (A-B). 
(d)  There shall be no text, pictures, logos or advertising displayed on any surface of the satellite dish antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1192, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 5.55. - Wetland and watercourse protection. 
(1)  Findings. The city council finds that wetlands and watercourses are fragile natural resources which provide several public benefits including maintenance of water quality through nutrient cycling and sediment trapping as well as flood and stormwater runoff control through temporary water storage, slow release, and groundwater recharge. In addition, wetlands provide pollution treatment by serving as oxidation basins, open space, passive outdoor recreation opportunities, wildlife habitat and environmental niches, and greenbelts. Many of the wetlands remaining in the city are of the forested type and are associated with floodplains. 
Previous construction, land development and recent redevelopment have displaced, polluted or degraded many wetlands and forested floodplains. Preservation of the wetlands in a natural condition shall be and is necessary to maintain hydrologic, economic, recreational, and aesthetic assets for existing and future residents of the city as well as for downstream landowners. 
(2)  Purposes. The purposes of this section are to provide for: 
(a)  The protection, preservation, and proper use of wetlands and watercourses in the city; 
(b)  The coordination of and support for the enforcement of applicable federal, state, and county statutes, ordinances and regulations including but not limited to: 
1.  Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as amended), enforced by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources which is hereinafter referred to as the MDNR; 
2.  Inland Lakes and Streams Act (Act 346, Public Acts of 1972, as amended), enforced by the MDNR; 
3.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (Act 347, Public Acts of 1972, as amended), enforced by the city; and 
4.  Floodplain Regulatory Authority (Act 245, Public Acts of 1929, as amended), enforced by the MDNR. 
(c)  Compliance with the Michigan Environmental Protection Act (Act 127, Public Acts of 1970) which imposes a duty on government agencies and private individuals and organizations to prevent or minimize degradation of the environment which is likely to be caused by their activities. 
(d)  The establishment of standards and procedures for the review and regulation of the use of wetlands and watercourses. 
(e)  The establishment of penalties for the violation of this section. 
(3)  Validity and necessity. The city council declares that this section is essential to the health, safety, economic and general welfare of the people of the city, and to the furtherance of the policy set forth in article 4, section 52 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan, the Michigan Environmental Protection Act (Act 127, Public Acts of 1970) and the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as amended) which is hereinafter referred to as Act 203. 
(4)  Construction and application. The following rules of construction apply in the interpretation and application of this section: 
(a)  In the case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of this section and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(b)  Particulars provided by way of illustration or enumeration shall not control general language. 
(c)  This section shall be construed liberally in favor of the protection and preservation of natural resources of the city. 
(5)  Definition of terms. Terms not specifically defined in this section shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. The following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively given as follows: 
ACTIVITY: shall mean any use, operation, development or action caused by any person, including, but not limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development; erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material; dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water, pumping or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; vegetative clearing or excavation, mining or drilling operations. 
BOTTOMLAND: shall mean the land area of a pond or lake which lies below the ordinary high water mark and which may or may not be covered by water. 
CHANNEL: shall mean the geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing water under normal or average flow conditions. 
CITY: shall mean the City of Southfield. 
CITY COUNCIL: shall mean the Southfield City Council. 
CONTIGUOUS: shall mean any of the following: 
(a)  A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical contact with an inland lake or pond, a river or stream. 
(b)  A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection to an inland lake or pond, a river or stream. 
(c)  A wetland is partially or entirely located within five hundred (500) feet (152.5 meters) of the ordinary high water mark of an inland lake or pond or a river or stream, unless it is determined by the city or the MDNR in accordance with Rule 281.924 of the wetland administrative rules adopted in connection with Act 203 that there is no surface or groundwater connection to these waters. 
(d)  Two (2) or more areas of wetland separated only by barriers, such as dikes, roads, berms, or other similar features, but with any of the wetland areas contiguous under the criteria described in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this definition. 
DEPOSIT: shall mean to fill, place or dump. 
DEVELOPMENT: shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
FILL MATERIAL: shall mean soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, waste of any kind, or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces water retention potential. 
FLOODPLAIN: shall have the same meaning as provided for in subsection 5.5(4) of this chapter. 
LAKE: shall mean an area of permanent open water which is five (5) acres (2.025 hectares) or more in size. 
MAY: shall mean an auxiliary verb qualifying the meaning of another verb by expressing ability, permission, or possibility. The word "may" is indicative of discretion or choice between two (2) or more alternatives. 
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: shall mean the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation. 
PERSON: shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental agencies conducting operations within the city. 
PLANNING DEPARTMENT: shall mean the planning department of the City of Southfield. 
PLANNING COMMISSION: shall mean the Southfield Planning Commission. 
POND: shall mean any body of permanent open water one (1) acre (.405 hectares) to five (5) acres (2.025 hectares) in size. 
PROTECTED WETLANDS: shall mean any of the following: 
(a)  All wetlands subject to regulation by the MDNR including: 
1.  Wetlands, regardless of size, which are contiguous to any lake, stream, river, or pond, whether partially or entirely contained within the project site. 
2.  Wetlands, regardless of size, which are partially or entirely within five hundred (500) feet (152.5 meters) of the ordinary high water mark of any lake, stream, river, or pond, unless it is determined by the MDNR that there is no surface water or groundwater connection between the wetland and the water body. 
3.  Wetlands which are larger than five (5) acres (2.025 hectares), whether partially or entirely contained within the project site, and which are not contiguous to any lake, stream, river, or pond. 
4.  Wetlands, regardless of size, which are not contiguous to any lake, stream, river, or pond, if the MDNR determines the protection of the wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment or destruction. 
(b)  All wetlands subject to regulation by the city including: 
1.  Wetlands two (2) to five (5) acres (.81 to 2.025 hectares) in size, whether partially or entirely contained within the project site, which are not contiguous to any lake, stream, river or pond. 
2.  Wetlands smaller than two (2) acres (.81 hectares) in size which are not contiguous to any lake, stream, river or pond and are determined to be essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city as provided for in paragraph (18) of this section. 
RUNOFF: shall mean the surface discharge of precipitation to a watercourse, drainageway, swale, or depression. 
SEASONAL: shall mean any intermittent or temporary activity which occurs annually and is subject to interruption from changes in weather, water level, or time of year, and may involve annual removal and replacement of any operation, obstruction or structure. 
SOILS: 
(a)  Poorly drained soils are those general organic soils from which water is removed so slowly that the soil remains wet for a large part of the time. The water table is commonly at or near the surface during a considerable part of the year. Poorly drained conditions are due to a high water table, to a slower permeable layer within the soil profile, to seepage, or to some combination of these conditions. 
(b)  Very poorly drained soils are those soils from which water is removed from the soil so slowly that the water table remains at or on the surface a greater part of the time. Soils of this drainage class usually occupy larger or depressed sites and are frequently ponded. 
(c)  Hydric soils are soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the growth and regeneration of wetland vegetation. 
STRUCTURE: shall mean any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land or water, including, but not limited to, houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks, rafts, landings, dams, sheds or waterway obstructions. 
UPLAND: shall mean the land area which lies above the ordinary high water mark, or well-drained land which supports upland vegetation. 
WATERCOURSE: shall mean any waterway, drainageway, drain, river, stream, lake, pond or any body of surface water having definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
WETLAND: shall have the same meaning as provided for in section (2)(g) (not including sub-paragraphs (i), (ii), and (iii)) of Act 203 and Rule 4(2) of the Wetland Administrative Rules promulgated in connection therewith, as amended. 
WETLANDS MAP: shall mean the city's official map, as updated from time to time, which delineates the general location of wetlands and watercourses throughout the city. 
WETLAND MITIGATION: shall mean any or all of the following: (1) methods for eliminating potential damage or destruction to wetlands; or (2) creation of wetlands from uplands to offset the loss of protected wetlands. 
WETLAND USE PERMIT: shall mean the city approval required for activities in wetlands and watercourses described in paragraph (8) of this section. 
WETLAND VEGETATION: shall mean plants, including, but not limited to trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants, that exhibit adaptations to allow, under normal conditions, germination or propagation and to allow growth with at least their root systems in water or saturated soil. 
(6)  Relationship to state and federal permit requirements. Whenever persons requesting a wetland use permit are also subject to state and/or federal permit requirements, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Approvals under this section shall not relieve a person of the need to obtain a permit from the MDNR and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if required. 
(b)  Issuance of a permit by the MDNR and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall not relieve a person of the need to obtain approval under this section, if applicable. 
(c)  If requirements of federal, state, and local officials vary, the most stringent requirements shall be followed. 
(7)  Applicability to private and public agency activities and operations. The provisions of this section, including wetland use permit requirements and criteria for wetland use permit approval, shall apply to activities and operations proposed by federal, state, local and other public agencies as well as private organizations and individuals. 
(8)  Prohibited activities. Except for those activities expressly permitted by paragraph (9) it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in a protected wetland or watercourse unless and until a wetland use permit is obtained from the city pursuant to this section: 
(a)  Deposit or permit to be deposited any fill material or structures into any watercourse or within or upon any protected wetlands. 
(b)  Remove or permit to be removed any soil from any watercourse or from any protected wetland. 
(c)  Remove or permit to be removed any vegetation, including trees, from protected wetlands if such removal would adversely affect the nutrient cycling, sediment trapping, or hydrologic functions of such wetlands or cause disturbance of the soil. 
(d)  Dredge, fill or land balance watercourses or protected wetlands. 
(e)  Create, enlarge, diminish or alter a lake, pond, creek, stream, river, drain, or protected wetland. 
(f)  Construct, operate or maintain any development in or upon protected wetlands or watercourses. 
(g)  Erect or build any structure including but not limited to buildings, roadways, bridges, tennis courts, paving, utilities, or private poles or towers in or upon protected wetlands or watercourses. 
(h)  Construct, extend or enlarge any pipe, culvert, or open or closed drainage facility which discharges silt, sediment, organic or inorganic materials, chemicals, fertilizers, flammable liquids or any other pollutants to any lake, stream, protected wetland, or watercourse, except through a retention area, settling basin, or treatment facility designed to control and eliminate the pollutant. This section shall apply to all land uses except single-family uses. 
(i)  Construct, enlarge, extend or connect any private or public sewage or waste treatment plant discharge to any lake, stream, river, pond, watercourse, or protected wetland except in accordance with the requirements of the county, the state and/or the United States, to the extent that such entities have jurisdiction. 
(j)  Drain, or cause to be drained, any water from a protected wetland or watercourse. 
(k)  Fill or enclose any ditch which would result in a significant reduction of stormwater absorption and filtration into the ground or would otherwise have an adverse impact on receiving watercourses or wetlands. 
(9)  Permitted activities. Notwithstanding the prohibitions of paragraph (8), the following activities are permitted within watercourses or protected wetlands without a wetland use permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute, ordinance or regulation: 
(a)  Fishing, swimming, boating, canoeing, hiking, horseback riding, bird-watching, or other similar recreational activities which do not require alteration of wetland vegetation or grading of soils. 
(b)  Grazing and/or watering of animals. 
(c)  Education, scientific research, and nature study. 
(d)  Installation for noncommercial use of temporary seasonal docks, rafts, diving platforms and other recreational devices customarily used for residential purposes. 
(e)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, sewers, ditches, structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telecommunication, or other services, provided that such roads, sewers, ditches, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of watercourses and wetlands are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(f)  Excavation and filling of no more than fifty (50) cubic yards (38.25 cubic meters) of material if necessary for the repair and maintenance of bridges, walkways, and other existing structures, provided that such structures allow for the unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the protected wetland, except as authorized by permit. 
(g)  Improvement or maintenance of the Rouge River or its tributaries when such operations are organized or sponsored by the city and are specifically intended to preserve natural resources. Such permitted activities shall include, but not be limited to: (1) removal of materials which may cause diverted flows and bank erosion, including the removal of trees, brush, and debris; (2) bank stabilization projects which require minimal disturbance of existing conditions; and (3) wildlife and aquatic habitat improvement projects. 
(h)  A wetland use permit shall not be required for any use which is exempt from a permit under section 6 of Act 203. 
(10)  Wetlands map. The city hereby incorporates into this section and makes a part hereof by reference an official map of wetland areas and watercourses showing the general location of wetlands and watercourses in the city. Said wetlands map shall be updated when substantial new data is available or corrections are needed in order to maintain the integrity of the wetlands map. 
In revising the wetlands map, the city council shall satisfy the requirements of Act 207, Public Acts of 1921, as amended, relative to the amendment of zoning ordinance maps. The wetlands map shall serve as a general guide for locating wetlands and watercourses. Field investigations to delineate the precise boundaries of wetlands and watercourses on a project site shall be the responsibility of the applicant. In cases where the city needs additional information to complete a wetland use permit application review, the city may complete on-site investigations of protected wetlands and watercourses. 
(11)  Application for a wetland use permit. 
(a)  An application for a wetland use permit shall be filed with the planning department. Both permit application forms, the "Application for a Local Wetland Permit" and the MDNR "Application for Permit," shall be submitted to the city as required by Act 203. 
(b)  Upon receipt, the planning department shall forward a copy of each completed application to the MDNR. 
(c)  When a site is proposed for development or activity necessitating review and approval of a site plan, plat or other proposed land use pursuant to City Code, said application for a wetland use permit shall be made at the same time as the site plan, plat or other proposed land use submittal. The application for a wetland use permit shall consist of the following: 
1.  Four (4) copies of the wetland use permit application for each project. 
2.  For a wetland use permit approval required in conjunction with a site plan, plat or other proposed land use, the applicant shall, at the time of application, elect to have the application processed under either subsection (i) or subsection (ii) below: 
(i)  The wetland use permit application shall be reviewed, either prior to or concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, with the understanding that the land use review may not be completed at the time the decision is rendered on the wetland use permit application. Election of this alternative may require a reopening of the wetland use permit application if the land use approval is inconsistent with the wetland use permit approval; or 
(ii)  The wetland use permit application shall be reviewed and acted upon concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, and the ninety-day review period limitation specified in section 6(6) of Act 203, shall thereby be extended accordingly. 
3.  Twenty (20) copies of a drawing of the proposed activity for projects which require city council review and approval; or four (4) copies of a drawing of the proposed activity for projects which require administrative review and approval. Each drawing must contain the following elements: 
(i)  Title block, including the applicant's name, name of waterway, section of city, description of activity, scale of drawing, date drawing was prepared, name and professional credentials of the engineer, architect, or planner preparing the site drawing and the name and professional credentials of the wetlands scientist or environmental specialist who has delineated the wetland boundaries. 
(ii)  Location and extent of protected wetlands and watercourses as identified through field investigation and presented on a topographic map of suitable scale. A scale of at least one (1) inch (2.54 centimeters) equals fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) is required for all projects. 
(iii)  Types of wetlands on the site, e.g., forested, shrub, emergent marsh, wet meadow, and aquatic bed, identified by using methods approved by the MDNR as set forth in the Michigan "Wetland Determination Manual Draft for Field Testing" or other official publications. 
(iv)  A site plan, subdivision plat, or planning map which overlays the proposed development or project onto wetlands and watercourses. Existing and proposed structures and utilities on or directly adjacent to the site shall be clearly identified in relation to existing wetland features and topography. 
(v)  Typical cross sections of existing and proposed structures, dredge cuts and fills, including dimensions and elevations, and location of wetlands. 
(vi)  A description of construction materials such as: type (concrete, stone, wood, etc.), thickness or depth, size, weight, slope; and a description of cut, filled or dredged materials such as: type (yellow clay, sand, silt, etc.), volume, depth and areas impacted. 
(vii)  Identification of type and location of soil erosion control measures to be used during construction, including measures which will be used to trap sediment which might otherwise run off into wetlands. 
(viii)  Identification of disposal areas for dredged material, if any, vicinity map showing the disposal area if off-site disposal is proposed, and method for containing dredge material to prevent reentry into wetlands or watercourses. 
(ix)  Bridge or culvert cross section, if any, including the location of wetlands, and a profile of the proposed structure showing the proposed end treatment and bank stabilization locations. 
(x)  Identification and description of all mitigation areas, if any, whether on-site or off-site. 
4.  Four (4) copies of a cover letter signed by the applicant including the following information: 
(i)  Name of project and brief description (one (1) sentence). 
(ii)  Date upon which the activity is proposed to commence. 
(iii)  Explanation of why the project meets the wetland use permit standards and criteria contained in paragraph (18) of this section. 
(iv)  List of all federal, state, county or other local government agency permits or approvals required for the proposed project including permit approvals or denials already received. In the event of denials, the reasons for denials shall be given. Attach copies of all permits which have been issued. 
(v)  Identification of any present litigation involving the property. 
(iv)  Signature of applicant. 
(12)  Planning department review. The planning department shall process a wetland use permit application as follows: 
(a)  The planning department shall review the wetland use permit application to verify that all required information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the city, an administrative meeting may be held to review the proposed activity in light of the purposes of this section. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning department shall: 
1.  Initiate review procedures for the wetland use permit application. 
2.  Forward a copy of each application to the MDNR as required by Act 203. 
3.  Conduct or authorize a field investigation to review and verify the accuracy of information received and during such review shall refer to the wetlands map. The receipt of a wetland use permit application shall comprise permission from the owner to complete an on-site investigation. 
4.  Coordinate field investigations and data with MDNR personnel when feasible. 
5.  Modify, approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after receipt of the completed application subject to the provisions of this section. 
6.  Provide a written reason for the denial of any wetland use permit. Failure to supply complete information with an application may be reason for denial of a permit. 
7.  Notify the MDNR of its decision. 
(c)  Plans for wetland mitigation shall not be considered unless and until the requirements of paragraphs (18), (19) and (20) of this section have been met. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the planning department to employ a qualified wetlands consultant or retain qualified staff to conduct wetland field investigations and complete assessments on behalf of the city. 
(13)  Planning commission review of wetland use permit application. After the planning department has completed its review of a wetland use permit application as provided for in paragraph (12) of this section, said application shall be referred to the planning commission if it relates to a proposed development or activity which requires a site plan review by said commission pursuant to the terms of this chapter or a preliminary plat pursuant to chapter 47 of the City Code. A public hearing with regard to the wetland use permit application shall be held by the planning commission at the same meeting at which it considers the related site plan or preliminary plat with notice of such hearing being sent to owners of adjoining property by first class mail which notice shall be sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. A legal notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The planning commission after conducting the public hearing shall make a recommendation to the city council with regard to whether the wetland use permit application shall be issued and in connection with a favorable recommendation may suggest conditions or a mitigation plan in accordance with paragraphs (19) and (20) of this section. 
(14)  City council review of wetland use permit application. Upon receipt of the planning commission recommendation with regard to a wetland use permit application and the related site plan or preliminary plat or upon receipt of a wetland use permit application which relates to a proposed development or activity which requires a soil removal or landfill permit pursuant to chapter 46 of the City Code, the city council shall hold a public hearing with regard to the wetland use permit application at the same meeting at which it considers the related site plan, preliminary plat or soil removal or landfill permit application with notice of such hearing being sent to owners of adjoining property by first class mail which notice shall be sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. A legal notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The city council may approve, deny, or approve the wetland use permit application with conditions or in conjunction with a mitigation plan as provided for in paragraphs (19) and (20) of this section. 
(15)  City planner review of wetland use permit application. When a wetland use permit application is not related to a development or activity necessitating review and approval of a site plan, plat or a soil removal or landfill permit by the city council pursuant to the City Code, the city planner shall be responsible for granting or denying the application. Prior to his or her decision, notice of the wetland use permit application shall be sent to owners of adjoining property by first class mail at least fifteen (15) days before the city planner makes his or her decision which notice shall indicate where and when the wetland use permit application may be examined and which shall further indicate that said owner(s) may file a written objection thereto with the planning department. The city planner may approve, deny or approve the wetland use permit application with conditions or in conjunction with a mitigation plan as provided for in paragraphs (19) and (20) of this section. 
(16)  Appeal from decision of city planner. The city shall not issue a wetland use permit approved by the city planner until ten (10) days have passed following such approval. Any person denied a wetland use permit by the city planner, or any owner of property adjoining the property upon which the activity is proposed (including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements) when a wetland use permit is approved for issuance, may appeal to the city council. An appeal must be filed with the city clerk's office, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the decision being appealed. Timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the issuance of a wetland use permit pending the outcome of the appeal. The city council, upon review, shall determine, with findings, whether or not there has been compliance with the requirements and standards of this section, and based upon its findings, it may affirm, reverse or modify the decision rendered by the city planner. 
(17)  Wetland use permit conditions. Whenever the planning commission recommends issuance of a wetland use permit or the city council or city planner approves the issuance of a wetland use permit, the planning commission, the city council or the city planner shall: 
(a)  Attach any reasonable conditions considered necessary to ensure that the intent of this section will be fulfilled, to minimize or mitigate damage or impairment to, encroachment in or interference with natural resources and processes within the protected wetlands or watercourses, or to otherwise improve or maintain the water quality. Any conditions related to wetland mitigation shall follow the provisions of paragraphs (19) and (20) of this section. 
(b)  Fix a reasonable time to complete the proposed activities. 
(c)  Require the applicant to file with the city a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount, if any, determined necessary to ensure compliance with the wetland use permit approval conditions and this section. 
(d)  Require that final approval of a wetland use permit application shall be contingent upon receipt of evidence by the city that required state and federal permits, if any, have been obtained by the applicant. 
(18)  Wetland use permit standards and criteria. 
(a)  A wetland use permit shall be approved with respect to a noncontiguous wetland less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares) in area unless the planning department determines that the wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city. 
(b)  All noncontiguous wetland areas of less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares) which appear on the wetlands map, or which are otherwise identified during a field inspection by the city, shall be analyzed for the purpose of determining whether such areas are essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city. If there is to be a denial of a wetland use permit in a noncontiguous wetland area of less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares), then, on the basis of data presented by the applicant, or supplemental data gathered by the city, findings shall be made in writing and given to the applicant stating the basis for the determination that such wetland is essential to preservation of the natural resources of the city. In order to make such a determination, there shall be a finding that one (1) or more of the following exist within such wetland: 
1.  The site supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants, fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1974, Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of 1974, being MCL 299.226. 
2.  The site represents what is identified as a locally rare or unique ecosystem. 
3.  The site supports plants or animals of an identified local importance. 
4.  The site provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency. 
5.  The site provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland. 
6.  The site provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife species. 
7.  The site provides protection of subsurface water resources and provision of valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies. 
8.  The site provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin. 
9.  The site provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter. 
10.  The site provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish. 
(c)  The data which must be submitted by the applicant for purposes of making the determination whether the wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city shall include an election and response under subparagraph 1 or 2 below, relative to each non-contiguous wetland area less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares). 
1.  An acknowledgement that one (1) or more of the criteria in subparagraphs (b)1. through (b)10. above, exist on the wetland in question, including a specification of the one (1) or more criteria which do exist; or 
2.  An analysis prepared by the applicant's qualified wetlands consultant, with respect to each criteria in subparagraphs (b)1. through (b)10., detailing whether each of the criteria in subparagraphs (b)1. through (b)10. exist or do not exist in the wetland in question, including specific reasons for the conclusion in respect to each criteria. 
(d)  The planning commission in making a recommendation with respect to a wetland use permit application and the city council or city planner in making a determination whether to approve a wetland use permit application shall consider the following standards and criteria: 
1.  A wetland use permit shall be issued only if the proposed project or activity is in the public interest and is otherwise lawful in all respects. 
2.  In determining whether the activity is in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity, taking into consideration the local, state and national concern for the protection and preservation of natural resources from pollution, impairment and/or destruction. The following general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test: 
(i)  The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed activity. 
(ii)  The availability of feasible and prudent methods and alternative locations, other than the project site, to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity. 
(iii)  The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the protected wetland provides. 
(iv)  The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the watershed. 
(v)  The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic, ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish or wildlife. 
(vi)  The size and quality of the protected wetland being considered. 
(vii)  The amount and quality of remaining wetland in the area. 
(viii)  Proximity to any waterway. 
(ix)  Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected wetlands or drainageways is controlled. 
(x)  Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land change to the general area. 
(xi)  Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been made by federal, state or local agencies. 
3.  A wetland use permit shall not be granted unless it is shown that: 
(i)  An unreasonable disruption of aquatic resources will be avoided; and 
(ii)  The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located in the protected wetland; and 
(iii)  A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist; and 
(iv)  The manner in which the activity is proposed to be undertaken will result in the minimum negative impact upon protected wetlands, watercourses, and attendant natural resources under all of the circumstances; and 
(e)  Following approval of the application, a wetland use permit shall be issued upon determination that all other requirements of ordinance and law have been met, including site plan, plat or land use approval is applicable, and including issuance of a permit by the MDNR, if required under Act 203. In cases where a MDNR permit allows activities not permitted by the wetland use permit approval granted under this section, the restrictions of the approval granted under this section shall govern. 
(19)  Consideration of proposals for wetland mitigation. Prior to considering a proposal for wetland mitigation, the planning commission, the city council or the city planner shall make all of the following findings: 
(a)  That all feasible and prudent efforts have been made to avoid the loss of protected wetland. 
(b)  That all practical means have been considered to minimize protected wetland impacts. 
(c)  That it is practical to replace the protected wetland which will be unavoidably eliminated. 
(d)  That all alternatives for preserving protected wetlands and watercourses have been evaluated and found to be impractical, inappropriate, or ineffective. 
(20)  Criteria for approving proposals for wetland mitigation. If the planning commission, the city council or the city planner determines that it is practical to replace the protected wetlands which will be impacted, mitigation plans shall be approved only if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  That the mitigation plan provides for the substantial replacement of the predominant functional values of the protected wetland to be lost. 
(b)  That the mitigation plan provides for no net loss of protected wetland resources and watercourses unless the planning commission, the city council or the city planner determines that the net loss will result in a minimum negative impact upon protected wetlands, watercourses, and attendant natural resources under all of the circumstances. 
(c)  That the mitigation plan has been coordinated with requirements of state agencies, if applicable. 
(d)  That a plan to monitor preserved and replacement wetlands has been specified. 
(e)  Wetland mitigation and monitoring plans have been made conditions of the wetland use permit. 
(21)  Protection of wetlands and watercourses during and after construction. An applicant who has received a wetland use permit under this section shall comply with the following in connection with any construction or other activity on the property for which the wetland use permit has been issued: 
(a)  Maintain soil erosion control structures and measures, including but not limited to silt fences, straw bale berms, and sediment traps. The landowner shall provide for periodic inspections throughout the duration of the project. 
(b)  Through staking or other means acceptable to the planning department, clearly identify the locations of protected wetlands or watercourses on the project site so that such locations are visible to all construction workers. The visible identification of protected wetlands and watercourses shall be in place prior to the grading of any land or issuance of any construction permit. 
(c)  Assure that there is no encroachment of equipment or earth-moving activities into protected wetlands or watercourses except as provided in the wetland use permit. 
(d)  Prominently display at the site a copy of the wetland use permit or other evidence that a wetland use permit has been obtained. The owner shall display a copy of the wetland use permit or other certification continuously when authorized activities are conducted and for ten (10) days following completion. The owner shall allow city representatives to enter and inspect the premises at any reasonable time, and failure to allow inspections shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(22)  Fees. Applications for a wetland use permit under this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative application fee in an amount specified from time to time by resolution of the city council. In addition, an applicant shall pay an additional escrow fee in an amount determined by the planning department to pay for the estimated cost of outside consultant(s) who may be retained by the city in connection with the review of the application. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) is less than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) exceeds the amount of the escrow fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the city prior to the issuance of a wetland use permit. A denial of an application for a wetland use permit shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the escrow fee provided for in this section. 
(23)  Restoration requirements for illegal wetland alteration. In the event of a violation involving illegal alteration of a watercourse or protected wetland under this section, the city shall have the power to order complete restoration of the watercourse or protected wetland area by the person or agent responsible for the violation. If such responsible person or agent does not complete such restoration within a reasonable time following the order, the city shall have the authority to restore the affected watercourse or protected wetland to their prior condition wherever possible, and the person or agent responsible for the original violation shall be held liable to the city for the cost of restoration. Requirements and watercourse or protected wetland restorations ordered by the city shall be coordinated with state and/or federal agency requirements and specifications for watercourse or wetland restoration. 
(24)  Injunction. Any activity conducted in violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city may commence a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation, and/or requiring restoration of the protected wetland or watercourse as nearly as possible to its condition before the violation. 
(25)  Stop-work order. The city may also issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this section, including any conditions attached to a wetland use permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(26)  Relationship to floodplain regulations; conflict. In the event of conflict or disparity between any provisions and regulations of this section and those contained in section 5.49 of this chapter, floodplain controls, with respect to a proposed activity which is regulated under both sections, the more stringent provision or regulation shall apply. 
(27)  Property tax assessment. If a wetland use permit is denied, a landowner may appear at the annual board of review for the purpose of seeking a re-valuation of the affected property for assessment purposes to determine its fair market value under the use restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1315, 1-31-91; Ord. No. 1367, 6-9-94) 
Sec. 5.56. - Woodlands and tree preservation. 
(1)  Findings. The city finds that rapid growth, the spread of development and increasing demands upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the trees, woodlands and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and processes associated therewith which if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical, aesthetic, recreational, health and economic assets to existing and future residents of the city. Specifically, the city finds: 
(a)  That trees and woodlands protect public health through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, by the reduction of excessive noise and mental and physical damage related to noise pollution, and through their cooling effect in the summer months; 
(b)  That trees and woodlands are an essential component of the general welfare of the city by maintaining natural beauty, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future city residents; 
(c)  That trees and woodlands play an important role in filtering waste water which passes through the ground from the surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers; 
(d)  That trees and woodlands, through their root systems, stabilize the soil and play an important and effective part in city-wide soil conservation, erosion control, and flood control; 
(e)  That trees and woodlands appreciably reduce the carbon dioxide content and increase the oxygen content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air; 
(f)  That the protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount public concern, as provided by article IV, section 52 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Michigan Environmental Protection Act of 1970, MCL 691.1201 et seq. 
(2)  Purposes. The purposes of this section are: 
(a)  To provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of trees and woodlands located in this city in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion and siltation, a loss of wildlife and vegetation, and/or from the destruction of the natural habitat; 
(b)  To protect the trees, woodlands, and other forms of vegetation of this city for their economic support of local property values when allowed to remain uncleared and/or unharvested and for their natural beauty, wilderness character, ecological or historical significance; 
(c)  To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of this City. 
(3)  Definition of terms. The following definitions shall apply in this section: 
ACTIVITY: shall mean any use, operation, development or action caused by any person, including, but not limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development; erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material; dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting of water, pumping or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; tree removal or other vegetation removal; excavation, mining or drilling operation. 
CITY: shall mean the City of Southfield. 
DEPARTMENT: shall mean the City of Southfield Planning Department. 
DEVELOPMENT: shall mean manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
D.B.H.: shall mean diameter at breast height or the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet (1.3725 meters) above the existing grade. 
DIRECTOR: shall mean the City of Southfield Planning Director. 
DRIP LINE: shall mean an imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
GRUBBING: shall mean the effective removal of understory vegetation from a site. 
LAND CLEARING: shall mean those operations where trees and vegetation are removed and which occur previous to construction or building; e.g. road right-of-way excavation, utility excavation, grubbing, and any other necessary clearing operation. 
LANDMARK TREE: shall mean a tree of the genus and/or species and diameter listed in subparagraph (13)(a) of this section, and any tree of twenty-four (24) inches (60.96 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater, which meet the health/condition criteria of subparagraph (13)(b) of this section. 
PERSON: shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind conducting operations within the city, including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
REMOVE or REMOVAL: shall mean the act of removing a tree by digging up or cutting down, or the effective removal through damage to the tree or its root system. 
TRANSPLANT: shall mean the digging up of a tree from one (1) place on a property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property, in accordance with city tree transplanting standards and specifications. 
TREE: shall mean a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is thirteen (13) feet (3.965 meters) or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. 
WOODLANDS AREA: shall mean either: 
(a)  An area of land two (2) contiguous acres (.81 hectare) or larger which is covered by at least fifty (50) percent tree canopy from one (1) or more groups of trees which have a natural understory and the remainder of the area not within the tree canopy is covered by other natural vegetation. 
(b)  An area meeting the requirements of subparagraph (a) above but no less than one-half (1/2) (.2025 hectare) but no more than two (2) acres (.81 hectare) in size and said area must meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  The area acts as a major buffer for residential property. 
2.  The area is a significant entry landmark to a residential subdivision or other prominent public area which in its absence would have a significant negative impact on the area. 
3.  The area is an important greenbelt linkage between other natural areas for pedestrians, recreational activities and/or wildlife. 
4.  The area has high environmental value due to unusual topography, diversity of habitat, unique beauty, rare plant species or unusually large quality trees. 
(4)  Woodlands map. The city hereby incorporates into this section and makes a part hereof by reference an official map of woodlands areas showing the general location of woodlands areas in the city. Said map shall be updated at any time that new and substantial data for woodlands are available. In revising the woodlands map, the city shall satisfy the requirements of Act 207, Public Acts of 1921, as amended, relative to the amendment of zoning ordinance maps. The woodlands map shall serve as a general guide for the delineation of boundaries of woodlands areas. Field investigations to delineate the precise boundaries of woodlands areas shall be the responsibility of an applicant for a tree permit. In cases where the city needs additional information to complete a tree permit application review, the city may conduct on-site investigations of woodlands areas. 
(5)  Tree permit required. It shall be a violation of this section for any person, except as otherwise provided herein, to remove, cause to be removed, transplant or destroy a tree within the city without a tree permit issued in accordance with this section. 
(a)  A tree permit shall be required for the following except as otherwise exempted under paragraph (6) of this section: 
1.  The removal, transplanting or destruction of any tree within a woodlands area. 
2.  The removal, transplanting or destruction of any tree of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater outside of a woodlands area. 
3.  The removal, transplanting or destruction of a landmark tree. 
4.  Land clearing or grubbing within a woodlands area. 
(6)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (5), the following activities are allowed without a tree permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance: 
(a)  On occupied property for which a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued within a woodlands area, the removal or transplanting of no greater than ten (10) percent of the total number of trees on the property of less than eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. per calendar year. 
(b)  The removal or transplanting of a pear (pyrus), apple (malus), cherry (prunus), peach (prunus) or plum (prunus) tree. 
(c)  The removal of dead trees where the damage resulted from an accident or nonhuman cause. 
(d)  The trimming or care of trees or other woody vegetation provided that the work is accomplished in accordance with standardized forestry and horticultural practices as established by the American Association of Nurserymen or the National Arborist Association. 
(e)  Actions made necessary by an emergency such as tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect infestation, or other manmade or natural disaster, in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or property. 
(f)  Tree removal in order to perform maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, sewers, structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telecommunication, or other services, provided that such roads, sewers, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that the woodlands areas are not adversely impaired. 
(g)  Improvement or maintenance of the Rouge River or its tributaries when such operations are organized or sponsored by the city and are specifically intended to preserve natural resources. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to: (1) removal of materials which may cause diverted flows and bank erosion, including the removal of trees, brush, and debris; (2) bank stabilization projects which require minimal disturbance of existing conditions; and (3) wildlife and aquatic habitat improvement projects. 
(7)  Application for tree permit. Applications for a tree permit shall be filed with the department. When a site is proposed for development necessitating review and approval of a site plan, plat or any other type of permit pursuant to the City Code, said application for a tree permit shall be made at the same time as such other related application. The application for a tree permit shall consist of the following: 
(a)  Three (3) copies of the tree permit application. 
(b)  A tree location survey in a form acceptable to the department which shall bear the following information and details: 
1.  Minimum scale of 1" = 50' (2.54 centimeters = 15.25 meters). The scale shall be the same as a related site plan. 
2.  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structures and improvements, including existing and proposed utilities. 
3.  Locations and dimensions of all setbacks and existing or proposed easements. 
4.  All trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater on the project site shall be tagged in the field with identifying numbers, using noncorrosive metal tags. 
5.  Exact locations of all existing trees, determined by actual field survey, of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater including trees within the adjoining street right-of-way, trees twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) beyond the limits of the property lines including adjacent properties and all trees to be affected by the development such as trees located within areas of right-of-way improvements or off-site utility work. All such trees proposed to remain, to be relocated or to be removed, shall be so designated and the numbered trees shall be identified by size (D.B.H.), grade at the base of each tree and crown spread to scale. Such verified information shall be provided by a registered land surveyor. The survey shall be accompanied by a separate key identifying the numbered trees by size, common name/genus and condition. This information must be provided by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or forester, through an on-site inspection, who must verify the contents by seal or signature, whichever applies. 
6.  If existing trees are to be relocated, the proposed location for such trees, together with a statement as to how such trees are to be moved, protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction and how they are to be maintained after construction. 
7.  A statement showing how trees to remain are to be protected during land clearance, construction and on a permanent basis including the proposed use of tree wells, protective barriers, tunneling or retaining walls. 
8.  The number of trees to be removed which are of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater. 
9.  The requirement for a tree location survey may be waived by the department for areas fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) or more outside the construction zone. If waived, a statement indicating predominant species and estimated number and size of trees in this area shall be required. The area to remain undisturbed shall be snow fenced prior to any activity. 
(c)  For tracts of land ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) or larger, a tree location survey meeting the conditions of the above requirements shall be submitted with the following supplemental documentation: 
1.  An aerial photograph or copy thereof, of suitable quality 1" = 100' (2.54 centimeters = 30.5 meters) minimum. 
(d)  An on-site examination shall be made by the department in lieu of the tree location survey under any of the following conditions: 
1.  Where a permit is requested to remove or transplant trees on a lot which is zoned for single-family purposes and upon which is located an occupied one-family dwelling; or 
2.  Where a permit is requested in connection with the construction of a one-family dwelling on a lot which is zoned for single-family purposes and which is not located within a subdivision for which a final plat has been approved subsequent to the effective date of this section; or 
3.  Where a permit is required to remove three (3) or fewer trees. 
(8)  Review of tree permit application. The city shall process a tree permit application as follows: 
(a)  The department shall review the tree permit application to verify that all required information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the department, an administrative meeting may be held to review the proposed application in light of the purpose and review standards of this section. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the department may conduct or authorize the completion of a field investigation to review and verify the accuracy of information received and during such review shall refer to the woodlands area map, if applicable. The receipt of a tree permit application shall constitute permission from the owner of the property to conduct such on-site investigation. 
(c)  If a tree permit application relates to a proposed development or activity on a site necessitating site plan review, plat approval or any other type of permit approval by the city council, the council shall consider said application concurrent with its review of the related site plan, plat or other permit approval. If council approves a site plan, plat or other permit which conforms with the requirements of this section that approval, together with any additional terms and conditions attached thereto, will be considered to have fulfilled the requirements for a tree removal permit. 
(d)  When a tree permit application is not related to a development or activity necessitating review and approval of a site plan, plat or other permit by the city council, the director shall be responsible for granting or denying the application. In the event the tree permit application is related to development on property for which administrative site plan approval is required prior to his or her decision, notice of the tree permit application shall be sent by first class mail to all property owners adjoining the property upon which the development is proposed (including property directly across rights-of-way and easements) at least fifteen (15) days before the director makes his or her decision which notice shall indicate where and when the tree permit application may be examined and which shall further indicate that said owner(s) may file a written objection thereto with the department. 
(e)  The city shall not issue a tree permit related to an administrative site plan approval approved by the director until ten (10) days have passed following such approval. Any person denied a tree permit by the director or any owner of property adjoining the property upon which a development is proposed (including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements) when a tree permit related to an administrative site plan approval is approved, may appeal to the city council. An appeal must be filed in the city clerk's office, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the decision being appealed. Timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the issuance of a tree permit related to an administrative site plan approval pending the outcome of the appeal. The city council, upon review, shall determine, with findings, whether or not there has been compliance with the requirements and standards of this section and based upon its findings, it may affirm, reverse or modify the decision rendered by the director. 
(f)  Whenever an application for a tree permit is granted, the city council or the director shall: 
1.  Attach to the granting of the tree permit any reasonable conditions considered necessary to ensure that the intent of this section will be fulfilled. 
2.  Affix a reasonable time to carry out the activities approved in the permit; and 
3.  Require the permit grantee to file with the city a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount determined necessary to ensure compliance with tree permit conditions and this section. 
(9)  Applications which qualify for a mandatory tree permit. A tree permit application shall be granted for the following: 
(a)  Where a permit has been requested with regard to occupied property for which a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued which is less than one (1) acre (.405 hectare) in area for the removal or transplanting of three (3) trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater within a calendar year or not more than ten (10) percent of the total number of trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater on the property, whichever is less. This provision shall not apply to landmark trees. 
(b)  Where a permit has been requested with regard to occupied property for which a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued which is one (1) acre (.405 hectare) or more in area for the removal or transplanting of eight (8) trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater within a calendar year or not more than ten (10) percent of the total number of trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater on the property, whichever is less. This provision shall not apply to landmark trees. 
(10)  Applications which do not qualify for a mandatory tree permit. The following standards shall govern the granting or denial of an application for a tree permit for property which does not qualify for a permit pursuant to paragraph (9): 
(a)  The preservation and conservation of trees, woodlands areas, similar woody vegetation, wildlife and related natural resources and processes shall have priority over development when there are feasible and prudent location alternatives on the site for proposed buildings, structures or other site improvements. 
(b)  The integrity of woodlands areas shall be maintained irrespective of whether such woodlands cross property lines. 
(c)  Diversity of tree species shall be maintained where essential to preserving a woodlands area. 
(d)  Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing it shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage and utility areas, and areas necessary for the construction of buildings, structures or other site improvements. 
(e)  Where the proposed activity involves residential development, residential units shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be designed and constructed to blend into the natural setting of the landscape. 
(f)  The proposed activity shall comply with all applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(g)  The proposed activity shall include necessary provisions for tree relocation or replacement in accordance with paragraph (12) of this section. 
(h)  Tree removal or transplanting shall be limited to the following instances: 
1.  When removal or transplanting is necessary for the construction of a building, structure or other site improvement, and the permit applicant has shown there is no feasible and prudent location alternative on-site for a proposed building, structure or other site improvement; or 
2.  The tree is dead, in decline, in danger of falling, is located too close to existing buildings or structures, interferes with existing utility service or drainage, creates unsafe vision clearance or does not conform to other city ordinances or regulations. 
(11)  Tree protection prior to and during construction. 
(a)  Prior to construction and/or land clearing the applicant shall do the following: 
1.  All trees for which application is being made for removal shall be so identified on-site by fluorescent orange spray paint (chalk base) or by red flagging tape prior to field inspection by the department. Trees selected for transplanting shall be flagged with a separate distinguishing color. 
2.  Construction limit fencing shall be erected which restricts access to protected areas and tree protection devices shall be installed where required over tree roots, branches and/or tree trunks. All tree protection fencing and tree protection devices shall be installed as approved by the department. 
3.  Fences and tree protection devices installed shall be maintained and all construction materials, supplies and equipment shall be kept outside of the protected areas. 
(b)  During construction the applicant shall do the following: 
1.  Maintain all fences and tree protection devices as approved by the department and refrain from causing or permitting any activity within the drip line of any tree or group of trees including, but not limited to, the storage of equipment, supplies, excavative materials, disposal of fuels, solvents or chemicals, or causing the disturbance of any soils or vegetation within protected areas without the prior approval of the department. 
2.  No damaging attachments, wires (other than cable wires for trees), signs or permits may be fastened to any tree protected by this section. 
(c)  The department shall conduct periodic inspections of the site during land clearing and/or construction in order to ensure compliance with this section. 
(12)  Replacement or relocation of trees. Whenever a tree permit allows removal of trees of eight (8) inches (20.32 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater, the permit grantee shall relocate or replace the trees, except as provided in subparagraph (e) below, on a one-to-one basis and all replacement trees must measure two and one-half (21/2) inches (6.35 centimeters) in diameter or greater measured six (6) inches (15.24 centimeters) above grade. In lieu thereof the city and the permit grantee may agree to replacement trees of varying diameters so long as the market value of said trees would approximate the value of the replacement trees which would be required in accordance with the above formula. In addition: 
(a)  Replacement trees shall have shade potential and other characteristics comparable to the removed trees, and shall be state department of agriculture nursery grade No. 1 or better. All replacement trees, whether nursery stock or transplanted trees must be approved by the city on the project site prior to planting and must be planted in accordance with city standards for planting and transplanting including, but not limited to, staking, mulching and watering. All nursery stock and transplanted trees shall be guaranteed for one (1) year. 
(b)  The city shall approve tree relocation or replacement locations in order to provide optimum enhancement, preservation and protection of woodlands areas. To the extent feasible and desirable, trees shall be relocated or replaced on-site and within the same general area as trees removed. 
(c)  Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on-site, relocation or replacement may be made at another approved location in the city. 
(d)  Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on-site or at another approved location in the city, the tree permit grantee shall pay into the city tree fund, which fund is hereby created, an amount of money approximating the current market value of the replacement trees that would otherwise be required. The city shall use the city tree fund for the purpose of maintaining and preserving wooded areas, for planting and maintaining trees within the city and for expenses related to the administration and enforcement of this section. 
(e)  Replacement trees shall not be required for a tree which is removed pursuant to a tree permit granted pursuant to either paragraph (9) or for a reason described in paragraph (10)(h)2. of this section. 
(13)  Landmark trees. All trees within the city of twenty-four (24) inches (60.96 centimeters) D.B.H. or greater and all trees listed below by genus and/or species and minimum size D.B.H. shall be considered landmark trees if they also meet the health/condition criteria of sub-paragraph (b) below: 
(a)  Landmark trees: 
Common Name Botanical Name Size D.B.H. IN CM Arborvitae Thuja 18 45.72 Beech Fagus 18 45.72 Birch Betula 18* 45.72 Black Gum Nyssa sylvatica 12 30.48 Blue Beech Carpinus caroliniana 8 20.32 Cedar, Red Juniperus virginiana 12 30.48 Chestnut Castenea 10 25.40 Crabapple Malus 12 30.48 Dogwood Cornus 8 20.32 Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 18 45.72 Fir Abies 18 45.72 Ginkgo Ginkgo 18 45.72 Hawthorn Crataegus 12 30.48 Hemlock Tsuga 18 45.72 Hickory Carya 18 45.72 Hornbeam Ostrya 8 20.32 Horsechestnut/Buckeye Aesculus glabra carnea 18 45.72 Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus dioicus 18 45.72 Larch/Tamarack Larix 12 30.48 London Plane/Sycamore Platanus 18 45.72 Magnolia Magnolia 8 20.32 Maple, Red Acer rubrum 18 45.72 Maple, Norway Acer platanoides 18 45.72 Pine Pinus 18 45.72 Redbud Cercis canadensis 8 20.32 Sassafras Sassafras albidum 15 38.10 Serviceberry Amelanchier 8 20.32 Spruce Picea 18 45.72 Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua 16 40.64 Tulip Tree Liriodendron tulipifera 18 45.72 Walnut Juglans 20 50.80 Wild Cherry Prunus 18 45.72 Witch Hazel Hamamelis virginiana 8 20.32 * If a birch tree has multiple trunks, then its total D.B.H. shall be computed by adding the D.B.H. in inches (centimeters) of each of the trunks.  
(b)  In order to be considered a landmark tree, in addition to the above requirements, said tree shall also have a score of sixteen (16) or higher as determined by the department in accordance with the following health/condition criteria: 
CHART 
Factor Ranking 5 or 4 3 or 2 1 Trunk Sound and solid Sections of bark missing Extensive and hollow Growth/rate More than 6-inch (15.24 cm) twig elongation 2-6-inch twig (5.08-15.24 cm) elongation Less than 2-inch (5.08 cm) twig elongation Structure Sound One major or several minor limbs dead 2 or more major limbs dead Insects/diseases No pests present One pest present 2 or more pests present Crown/development Full and balanced Full but unbalanced Unbalanced and lacking a full crown Life expectancy Over 30 years 15-20 years Less than 5 years  
(c)  When landmark trees are permitted to be removed, in addition to compliance with the provisions of paragraph (12), replacement trees shall be provided to a minimum of thirty (30) percent of D.B.H. of the tree to be removed. Replacement trees, measured in D.B.H. or calipers, shall be provided either individually or on an accumulative basis to meet the thirty (30) percent D.B.H. requirement, however, if on an accumulative basis, all individual trees shall measure at least two and one-half (21/2) inches (6.35 centimeters) in diameter. 
(14)  Fees. Applications for a tree permit under this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative application fee in an amount specified from time to time by resolution of the city council. In addition, an applicant may be required to pay an additional escrow fee in an amount determined by the department to pay for the estimated cost of any needed outside consultant(s) who may be retained by the city in connection with the review of the application. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) is less than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) exceeds the amount of the escrow fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the city prior to the issuance of a tree permit. A denial of an application for a tree permit shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the escrow fee provided for in this section. 
(15)  Fee for illegally removed trees. In addition to any penalty provided for in the event of a conviction for a violation of this section, and notwithstanding whether or not the city has commenced a civil suit for injunctive relief, any person who removes or causes any tree to be removed except in accordance with this section shall forfeit and pay to the city a civil fee equal to the total value of trees illegally removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture shade tree value formula. The fee shall accrue to the city, and, if necessary, the city may file a civil action to recover the fee. The city shall place any sum collected in the city tree fund. Alternatively, the city may require replacement of illegally removed or damaged trees as restitution in lieu of the fee. Replacement will be on an inch-to-inch basis computed by adding the total diameter measured at D.B.H. in inches (centimeters) of the illegally removed or damaged trees. The city may use other reasonable means to estimate the tree loss if destruction of the illegally removed or damaged trees prevents exact measurement. The city may also require a combination of fee payment and tree replacement. 
(16)  Injunction. Any activity conducted in violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city may commence a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation. 
(17)  Stop-work order. The city may also issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this section, including any conditions attached to a tree permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(18)  Approved site plans and plats. This section shall not apply to a site plan or plat which has received final approval prior to the effective date of this section so long as the site plan or plat remains in effect and in good standing pursuant to this chapter. 
(19)  Variance for hardship. The city council may grant a variance from the provisions of this section when undue hardship may result from strict compliance thereof. 
(a)  In granting any variance, the city council shall prescribe conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest and in furtherance of the intent of this section. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of this section would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; 
2.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right by the applicant; 
3.  That the variance will further the objectives and policies of this section and chapter and the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1324, 8-26-91) 
Sec. 5.57. - Outdoor nonaccessory temporary retail sales. 
(1)  Nonaccessory temporary retail sales may be conducted outside of a permanent building in all zoning districts except that in a single-family residence zoning district such sales are permitted only if a permanent nonresidential use is situated on the property. 
(2)  Notwithstanding section 5.221 of this chapter, nonaccessory temporary retail sales, with the exception of sales conducted by a church, mosque, synagogue or school, may be conducted outside of a permanent building in the above zoning districts only after receipt of special use approval from the director of the department of building and safety engineering. A petitioner shall submit to the director an application, site plan, and such other information as the director shall request to assist in the review of the request. Prior to a decision, the public hearing and notice requirements, as provided for in MCL 125.584(a), shall be complied with. The requested use shall only be approved by the director of the department of building and safety engineering when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(a)  Standards: 
(i)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(ii)  The proposed use is of such character and the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse affect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(iii)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse affects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(iv)  The location, size, intensity, and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby uses. 
(v)  The proposed use will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(b)  Conditions: 
(i)  Parking requirements shall be determined in accordance with section 5.30, of this chapter; and, if the area for parking serves another use or uses, the requirement shall be met only from parking spaces available in excess of parking requirements for the other use(s). 
(ii)  The parking area shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of section 5.31, of this chapter. 
(iii)  The use shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) from all lot lines. 
(iv)  All areas providing a temporary use, including but not limited to: sales areas, aisles and passageways, parking, entrances and exits, shall be accessible as required under Act No. 1 of the Public Acts of 1966, as amended, being MCL 125.1351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 5-11-97; Ord. No. 1528, 2-16-06) 
Sec. 5.58. - Wireless communication facilities. 
A.  Purpose and intent. It is the general purpose and intent of the city to carry out the will of the United States Congress and the state by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the city to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values, and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests. 
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and intent of this section to: 
1.  Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities. 
2.  Establish predetermined districts of the number, shape, and in the location, considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions. 
3.  Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval, and use of such facilities. 
4.  Ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures, and buildings. 
5.  Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs. 
6.  Promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
7.  Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
8.  Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
9.  Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas, and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, and the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary, taking into consideration the purposes and intent of this section. 
10.  The city council finds that the presence of numerous tower structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness and destroy the character and integrity of the community. This, in turn, would have an adverse impact upon property values. Therefore, it is necessary to minimize the impact from the presence of numerous relatively tall tower structures having low architectural and other aesthetic appeal to most persons, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this section: 
1.  Wireless communication facilities shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building, and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. 
2.  Attached wireless communication facilities shall mean wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
3.  Wireless communication support structures shall mean structures that are designed to support, or are capable of supporting, wireless communications equipment, including a monopole, self-supporting lattice tower, guyed tower, utility pole, or building. 
4.  Collocate/collocation shall mean to place or install wireless communications equipment on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing compound. 
5.  Equipment compound shall mean an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless communications support structure and within which wireless communications equipment is located. 
6.  Wireless communications equipment shall mean the set of equipment and network components used in the provision of wireless communications services, including, but not limited to, antenna, transmitters, receivers, base stations, equipment shelters, cabinets, emergency generators, power supply cables, and coaxial and fiber optic cables, but excluding wireless communications support structures. 
7.  Planning official shall mean the Southfield City Planner. 
8.  City shall mean the City of Southfield. 
C.  Authorization. 
1.  Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in subparagraph D.1., below, wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances: 
a.  Circumstances creating permitted use treatment. In the following circumstances, a proposal to establish a new wireless communication facility or to install new wireless communications equipment shall be deemed a permitted use: 
(1)  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility, except within a single-family residential zoning district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the planning official, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance. 
(2)  (A)  In accordance with section 3514 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act ("Act"), a proposed collocation of wireless communications equipment is a permitted use of property if all of the following requirements are met: 
(i)  The wireless communications equipment will be collocated on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing equipment compound; 
(ii)  The existing wireless communications support structure or existing equipment compound is in compliance with the city's zoning ordinance or was approved by the city council; 
(iii)  The proposed collocation will not do any of the following: 
 increase the overall height of the wireless communications support structure by more than twenty (20) feet or ten (10) percent of its original height, whichever is greater; 
 increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than the minimum necessary to permit collocation; and 
 increase the area of the existing equipment compound to greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(iv)  The proposed collocation complies with the terms and conditions of any previous final approval of the wireless communications support structure or equipment compound by the city council; 
(B)  Wireless communications equipment that meets the requirements of subsection C.1.a(2)(A)(i) and (ii) but does not meet the requirements of subsection C.1.a(2)(A)(iii) and (iv) is a permitted use of property if it receives special land use approval from the city council under subsections C.1.a(2)(C) through (F). 
(C)  An application for special land use approval of wireless communications equipment described in subsection (B) above shall include all of the following: 
(i)  A site plan as required as required pursuant to section 5.22 of this chapter, including a map of the property and existing and proposed buildings and other facilities; 
(ii)  Any additional relevant information that is specifically required by the city's zoning ordinance pursuant to sections 3502 and 3504 of the Act; 
(D)  After an application for special land use approval for wireless communications equipment pursuant to subsection (B) above is filed with the planning official, the planning official is hereby designated as the official who shall determine whether the application is administratively complete. Unless the planning official proceeds as provided under subsection (E) below, the application shall be considered to be administratively complete when the planning official makes that determination or fourteen (14) business days after the planning official receives the application, whichever is first. 
(E)  If, before the expiration of the fourteen-day period under subsection (D) above, the planning official notifies the applicant that the application is not administratively complete, specifying the information necessary to amend the application administratively complete, or notify the applicant that a fee required to accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the amount due, the running of the fourteen-day period under subsection (D) above is tolled until the applicant submits to the planning official the specified information or fee amount due. The notice shall be given in writing or by electronic notification. The fee required for review of a site plan for wireless communications equipment pursuant to subsection (B) above shall be as set by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(F)  The city council shall approve or deny the application not more than sixty (60) days after the application is considered to be administratively complete. 
(G)  Special land use approval of wireless communications equipment described in subsection (B) above may be made expressly conditional on the wireless communications equipment's meeting of the requirements of other city ordinances and of federal and state laws before the wireless communications equipment is approved and begins operations. 
(H)  Special land use approval for wireless communications equipment that does not meet the requirements of subsection C.1.A(2)(A)(i) and special land use approval for wireless communications support structures, shall be subject to the provisions of subsections C.1.A(2)(C) through (F) for the special land use approval process, with the exception that the period for approval or denial under subsection (F) above is ninety (90) days. 
(3)  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the planning official, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interests. 
2.  Subject to the standards and conditions set forth below, wireless communication facilities shall be authorized as special land uses within all zoning districts except for single-family residential and television-radio-office-studio districts. 
3.  If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility may not reasonably be established as a permitted use under paragraph 1, above, and is required to be established outside of a district identified in paragraph 2, above, in order to operate a wireless communication service, then, wireless communication facilities may be permitted elsewhere in the city as a special land use, subject to the criteria and standards of subsections D and F, below. 
D.  General regulations. 
1.  Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities. All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions; and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the city council in its discretion: 
a.  Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 
b.  Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas. 
c.  Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions. 
d.  Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. 
e.  Applicants shall demonstrate why a site or sites recommended by the city are not appropriate. 
f.  The following additional standards shall be met: 
(1)  The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities to collocate on the structure). The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district. 
(2)  The minimum setback of the proposed, new, or modified support structure and accessory structures, shall be in accordance with the required setbacks for main or principal buildings as provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the support structure is located. If the support structure is proposed to be located in a zoning district which has no setback requirements and is part of a site containing two (2) or more zoning districts, the setback requirement of the most restrictive district shall apply (see paragraph E.3, below). 
(3)  There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair, and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and, the type of equipment which will need to access the site. 
(4)  The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met. 
(5)  Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building, if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building, it shall conform with all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks. 
(6)  The city council shall, with respect to the color of the support structure and all accessory buildings, review and approve so as to minimize distraction; reduce visibility; maximize aesthetic appearance; and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. 
(7)  The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted. 
(8)  A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard. 
2.  Standards and conditions applicable to special land use facilities. Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be approved as special land uses under subparagraphs 2 or 3 of paragraph C, above, shall be reviewed; and if approved, constructed, and maintained, in accordance with the standards and conditions in subparagraph D.1, and in accordance with the following standards (also see paragraph F for special land uses under subparagraph 3 of paragraph C): 
a.  The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one (1) or more of the following factors: 
(1)  Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare. 
(2)  Areas of population concentration. 
(3)  Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers. 
(4)  Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions. 
(5)  Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate. 
(6)  Other specifically identified reason(s) creating facility need. 
b.  The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation requirements of this section. 
c.  The proposal shall be processed in accordance with section 5.221 of this chapter. 
E.  Application requirements. 
1.  A site plan prepared in accordance with section 5.22 of this chapter shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening, and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping. Site plans shall be approved pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter for the particular zoning district in which the facility is proposed to be located. 
2.  The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed, or where a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings, and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities. 
3.  The application shall include a signed certification by a State of Michigan licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities. 
4.  The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in paragraph H below. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in the form of: (1) case; (2) surety bond; (3) letter of credit; or, (4) an agreement in a form approved by the city attorney and recordable at the office of the register of deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney's fees incurred by the city in securing removal. 
5.  The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within the city, and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the city in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the city, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if released would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant, may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of governmental policy (MCL 15.243(1)(g)). This section shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention of the city. 
6.  The name, address, and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance, and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises. 
7.  Applications, in addition to the applicable non-refundable, administrative application fee, shall be accompanied by an escrow fee in an amount determined by the planning department to pay for the estimated cost of outside consultant(s) who may be retained by the city in connection with the review of the application. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) is less than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the event the cost of the services of the consultant(s) exceeds the amount of the escrow fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the city prior to the issuance of a permit. A denial of an application for a permit shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the deficiency. 
F.  Special requirements for facilities proposed to be situated outside district. For facilities which are not permitted uses under paragraph C.1., above, and proposed to be located outside of a district identified in C.2., above, an application shall be reviewed; and, if approved, facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following additional standards and requirements, along with those in paragraph D. 
1.  At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within the district cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. 
2.  Wireless communications facilities shall be of a design as (without limitation) a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood, and general area, as approved by the city. 
3.  In single-family, residential districts, site locations shall be permitted on the following sites only subject to application of all other standards contained in this section: 
a.  Municipally owned site. 
b.  Other governmentally owned site. 
c.  Religious or other institutional site. 
d.  Public park. 
e.  Public or private school site. 
G.  Collocation. 
1.  Statement of policy: It is the policy of the city to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures within the city, and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless communication facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in paragraph A of this section above. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities reasonable anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the city that all users should collocate on attached wireless communication facilities and wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in paragraph A of this section. If a provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent, and purpose of the city. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the city. 
2.  Feasibility of collocation: Collocation shall be deemed to be feasible for purposes of this section where all of the following are met: 
a.  The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for collocation. 
b.  The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support. 
c.  The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like. 
d.  The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into consideration the several standards contained in parts D and F of this section, above. 
3.  Requirements for collocation: 
a.  A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. 
b.  All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate collocation. 
c.  The policy of the city is for collocation. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to ;b3;alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded, or extended in any respect. 
H.  Removal. 
1.  A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one (1) or more of the following events: 
a.  When the facility has not been used for one hundred eighty (180) days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
b.  Six (6) months after new technology is available at reasonable cost as determined by the municipal legislative body, which permits the operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support structure. 
2.  The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph 1 above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
3.  Upon the occurrence of one (1) or more of the events requiring removal, specified in paragraph 1 above, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the planning official. 
4.  If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the city may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected, and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1419, 5-28-98; Ord. No. 1461, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 1614 , § 1, 9-8-13) 
Sec. 5.59. - Comprehensive master plan procedure. 
    In the event the city desires to adopt a master plan or amend an existing plan (collectively referred to as "plan"), it shall be adopted, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  The plan shall be prepared by the planning department ("department"). The department may develop the plan with the assistance of a professional consultant if approved by the city council ("council"). The process used to obtain and review information for the plan and for its final formulation shall be reviewed by the council. Upon completion, the plan shall be submitted to the planning commission ("commission") for review. 
(2)  The commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plan. The commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing, not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The commission shall thereafter make a recommendation to the council with regard to the plan, but the council may act on the plan without the recommendation if it is not received within ninety (90) days after submission of the plan to the commission. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation or in the absence of a recommendation after the expiration of ninety (90) days from the time the plan was submitted to the commission, the council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plan. The council shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing, not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The council shall thereafter approve, approve with modifications, or reject the plan. 
(4)  At least every five (5) years after adoption of a plan, the council shall review the plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the plan or adopt a new plan, pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1543, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 5.60. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5.60-D. - Reserved for rainwater harvesting systems. 
A.  Identify opportunities where water can be reused for irrigation or used for indoor greywater reuse. From this, calculate the water need for the intended uses. For example, if a two thousand (2,000) square feet landscaped area requires irrigation for four (4) months in the summer at a rate of one (1) inch per week; the designer must determine how much water will be needed to achieve this goal, and how often the storage unit will be refilled via precipitation. The usage requirements and the expected rainfall volume and frequency must be determined. 
B.  Rain barrels and cisterns should be positioned to receive rooftop runoff. 
C.  Provide for the use or release of stored water between storm events in order for the necessary stormwater storage volume to be available. 
D.  If cisterns are used to supplement greywater needs, a parallel conveyance system must be installed to separate reused stormwater or greywater from other potable water piping systems. Do not connect to domestic or commercial potable water systems. 
E.  Household water demands must be considered when sizing a system to supplement residential greywater. 
F.  Pipes or storage units must be clearly marked "Caution: reclaimed water, do not drink". 
G.  Screens must be used to filter debris from storage units. 
H.  Protect storage elements from direct sunlight by positioning and landscaping. Limit light into devices to minimize algae growth. 
I.  The proximity to building foundations must be considered from overflow conditions. Overflow discharge must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from building foundation. 
J.  Climate is an important consideration. Capture/reuse systems must be disconnected and emptied during winter to prevent freezing. 
K.  Cisterns must be watertight (joints sealed with nontoxic waterproof material) with a smooth interior surface, and capable of receiving water from rainwater harvesting system. 
L.  Covers and lids must have a tight fit to keep out surface water, animals, dust and light. 
M.  Positive outlet for overflow must be provided a few inches from the top of the cistern. 
N.  Observation risers must be at least six (6) inches above grade for buried cisterns. 
O.  Reuse may require pressurization. To add pressure, a pump, pressure tank and fine mesh filter can be used which adds to the cost of the system, but creates a more usable system. 
P.  Rain barrels require a release mechanism in order to drain empty between storm events. Connect a soaker hose to slowly release stored water to a landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
ARTICLE 5. - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (R A, R 1, R 2, R 3, R 4, R E) 

Sec. 5.61. - Intent. 
    These residential districts are intended to provide areas in the city for single-family dwellings as permitted uses and residentially related uses subject to special approval. The districts are designed to encourage the continued use of land for single-family dwellings and discourage any land use which would create excessive or unsafe traffic on local streets. 
    The R A District is intended to apply only to those areas where the existing lots are platted at less than the minimum lot size of the R 1 District or where the existing character of development in the immediate vicinity is less than the minimum lot size of the R 1 District and that the legislative body does find that an unreasonable hardship would be created for the property owners to develop in accordance with the existing zoning district regulations. 
    The R E District is intended to apply to those areas where the existing development clearly meets the requirements of this district and that any future reduction of those development standards would have a serious adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood and would reduce the existing character of such residential area to the detriment of the community. 
    There are certain special land uses that may be permitted after a finding by the planning commission and city council subject to the specific standards as enumerated in article 5 of this chapter. 
    The regulations in this article shall apply to all R A, R 1, R 2, R 3, R 4, and RE Districts. 
(Ord. No. 1446, 8-5-99) 
Sec. 5.62. - Uses permitted. 
    In all single-family residence districts, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or used, or land used, in whole or in part, except as otherwise provided in this chapter except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  One family dwellings. 
(2)  Farms and buildings erected, altered or moved onto farms which shall conform to all provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses; one (1) private garage for each residential lot, shall be considered a legal accessory use. Not more than one (1) of each of the following shall be allowed to be stored, placed, or kept on the property: boat, domestic trailer, commercial vehicle or recreational vehicle. A boat, domestic trailer, commercial vehicle or recreational vehicle which does not exceed twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length may be kept, placed or stored in the rear yard of the property or within a private garage; however, if any length thereof exceeds twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) such boat, domestic trailer, commercial vehicle or recreational vehicle must be kept, place or stored fully within a private garage. "Commercial motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle used in commerce or business to transport passengers or property. However, if any commercial vehicle is being used as a daily mode of transportation for an occupant of the residence, and does not exceed twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length, it may be temporarily parked (not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours) in the driveway of the residential structure while not in use. 
(Ord. No. 1446, 8-5-99; Ord. No. 1588 , § 2, 12-25-11; Ord. No. 1648 , § 2, 12-27-15) 
Sec. 5.62A. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(A)  The residential character of the area shall be maintained. 
(B)  The subject property is so located as not to hinder the natural and presumed residential development of the area, nor negatively impact, existing woodlands and wetlands as defined by the city's adopted woodlands and wetlands map and ordinance of article 4, general provisions. 
(C)  The subject property will act as a buffer or transitional area between a residential development and a nonresidential development. 
(D)  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate there from which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(E)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(F)  The proposed use is of such character and the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(G)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor or fumes. 
(H)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Uses. 
(1)  Public and private schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
(2)  Publicly owned buildings and buildings located on publicly owned land. 
(3)  Parks and nature preserves. 
(4)  Community buildings, country clubs, fraternal lodges, or similar civic or social clubs. 
(5)  Recreational areas which are predominately open uses of land with indoor facilities no larger in gross floor area than twenty-five (25) percent of the ground area occupied by the outdoor recreational facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities in this section shall include swimming pools and adjoining decks, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, handball courts, baseball fields, soccer fields, golf courses, driving ranges, picnic grounds and other areas that are designated to be used for specified recreational activities. 
(6)  Indoor recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, hockey, soccer, lacrosse, tennis, racquetball, squash and gymnasiums for basketball and volleyball which may or may not be operated for profit. 
(7)  Churches, synagogues, mosques, cemeteries. 
(A)  Emergency shelters for the homeless and soup kitchens may be considered ancillary uses conditional upon the following: 
i.  Shelter and/or meal service for seven (7) or more recipients is limited to two (2) weeks maximum in any one calendar year. 
ii.  Shelter and/or meal service for seven (7) or more recipients is limited to one (1) week at a time throughout the calendar year. 
iii.  Limitations on duration for six (6) or fewer recipients of shelter and/or meal service at a time do not apply. 
(8)  Group child care homes. 
(Ord. No. 1446, 8-5-99; Ord. No. 1588 , § 2, 12-25-11; Ord. No. 1654 , § 4, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 5.62B. - Required conditions. 
(1)  Animals, including fowl, other than pets shall be housed in accessory buildings. No building or buildings shall be used or built for the housing of animals or fowl, other than pets, on the front half of any lot nor nearer than one hundred seventy-five (175) feet (53.375 meters) to any adjoining dwelling nor nearer than fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) to the dwelling of the owner thereof and, provided further, that no animals which are or shall be in any way noisy, obnoxious, unwholesome, destructive, dangerous, or offensive shall be kept, harbored or housed in any section of the city. 
(2)  The owner shall not permit any animal or fowl owned by him or in his possession or control, to run at large in any street, alley or public place, or upon the premises of another without express permission of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the owner or person in possession or control of any animal or fowl, other than such animals or fowl as are commonly housed in a human dwelling as household pets, to provide, construct and maintain fencing devices reasonably designed or adapted to effectively exclude such animal or fowl from the area within five (5) feet (1.525 meters) of the property line of the owner of the animal or fowl. 
(4)  Indoor recreational facilities, churches, synagogues, mosques, cemeteries, country clubs, fraternal bodies or similar civic or social clubs, shall comply with the following: 
(A)  The depth of the front and of the rear yards and the width of each side yard shall not be less than fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters). 
(B)  At least fifty (50) percent of the above yard setback shall be in landscaping. 
(C)  The subject property must be located on a major thoroughfare, with direct access to the thoroughfare. 
(D)  An unpierced masonry wall shall be provided on all sides adjacent to residential districts. 
(5)  Picnic grounds, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, golf courses, shall comply with the following: 
(A)  The subject property must be located on a major thoroughfare, with direct access to the thoroughfare. 
(6)  Group child care homes shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Only the care provider and his/her immediate family shall reside in the home. 
(b)  For each child, a child care home shall have a minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor activity space for use, exclusive of all of the following: 
  Hallways 
  Bathrooms 
  Storage areas and cloak rooms 
  Kitchens 
  Reception and office areas 
  Non-habitable basement space 
(c)  Adequate outdoor play area (minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet) shall be provided on the subject property or located within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property at a public park or at other outdoor facilities, which are accessible by public walkway. 
(d)  All outdoor play areas, on subject property, shall be located in the rear or side yards only and shall be enclosed with a completely obscuring decorative masonry wall or ornamental fence six (6) feet in height. 
(e)  Children (not related to the care provider) shall not be dropped off or picked up between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(f)  There shall be no signs for the child care home. 
(g)  The appearance and maintenance of the property is consistent with the visible character of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 4-6-87; Ord. No. 1446, 8-5-99; Ord. No. 1588 , § 2, 12-25-11) 
Sec. 5.63. - Front yard. 
    In all residence districts, there shall be a front yard on every lot, the minimum depth shall be as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.64. - Side yard. 
    In all residence districts, there shall be a side yard on each side of every lot, the minimum width of side yards shall be as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22, except that in no instance shall any side yard abutting a street be less than twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) in width. 
Sec. 5.65. - Rear yard. 
    In all residence districts, there shall be a rear yard on every lot, the minimum depth shall be as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22, except that for residential buildings with attached garages, the minimum depth of the rear yard shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters). 
    Where a rear yard on a lot abuts a street (such lot is commonly known as a thru lot), the minimum depth of such rear yard shall be equal to the minimum front yard requirement for the lots fronting on said street within the same frontage block. 
Sec. 5.66. - Area and size of buildings. 
    In all residence districts, the minimum usable floor area and the maximum percent of the area of a lot that one (1) family dwellings, together with accessory buildings, may occupy shall be as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.67. - Height. 
    In all residence districts, the maximum height of buildings shall be regulated by the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.68. - Lot area. 
    In all residence districts, the minimum required lot area shall be as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22, and further: 
(1)  All areas of developed single-family property that are not covered by buildings and hard-surfaced areas such as driveways, patios, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other permitted outdoor activity areas, shall be landscaped as defined in article 2, section 5.7, paragraph (1), and further, not less than sixty-five (65) percent of all front and side yards shall be landscaped. 
(2)  The parking of motor vehicles shall not be permitted on any front or side yard landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 1321, 7-18-91) 
Sec. 5.69. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
    One (1) or more accessory buildings, including one (1) detached garage, shall be permitted in all single-family residence districts provided that: 
(1)  Such buildings comply with the height and setback limitations of the zoning code. 
(2)  The total sum of the gross floor area of all accessory buildings on any assessment tax parcel shall not exceed the smaller of either ten (10) percent of the land area of the assessment tax parcel, or the gross area of the first story or ground floor of the principal building or use to which the accessory building relates. 
(3)  No portion of any accessory building shall be within three (3) feet (.915 meters) of a side or of a rear property line. 
(4)  Where a rear yard abuts a street (such lot being commonly known as a thru lot), accessory buildings shall not occupy any of the minimum required rear yard space. 
(5)  On a corner lot, accessory buildings shall not occupy any of the minimum required side yard area abutting a street nor any of that portion of the rear yard nearer to the street than the width of said yard required on such lot and abutting on such street. 
    Accessory transmitting and/or receiving towers, antenna or satellite dish antennas shall not be located in any front yard or any required side yard as regulated by article 2, definitions, section 5.9 (T-Z). On a corner lot, any such accessory structures shall not occupy any of the side yard abutting upon a street. Guy wires or any other structural supports shall not encroach upon any right-of-way, adjoining property, easements, or yard areas abutting a street. 
    The maximum height of any accessory transmitting and/or receiving tower or antenna shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet (22.875 meters) from grade. 
    Satellite dish antennas shall be approved by the department of building and safety engineering prior to issuance of a building permit and shall not exceed an overall diameter of twelve (12) feet (3.66 meters) or an overall height of fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) above existing grade and shall be permanently ground-mounted. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 4-6-87) 
Sec. 5.70. - Single-family cluster option. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will provide for an alternative means for development of single-family areas. Realizing the increased public importance of protecting woods and parks in their natural state, special attention will be given to the creation of private garden areas, public sitting areas, tot lots, and park areas. Prime locations for the use of this option will be those areas where natural features would be destroyed due to the mass grading resulting from the conventional subdividing of property. To accomplish this, modifications to the single-family residential standards, as outlined in article 22, schedule of regulations, shall be permitted. 
(1)  The city council may, after recommendation from the planning commission, approve the clustering and/or attaching of single-family dwelling units on parcels of land under single ownership and control when, in the opinion of the city council, such development would have advantages over development under the normal subdivision approach. 
In approving an area for cluster development, at least one (1) of the following conditions shall exist as it relates to the subject property: 
(a)  The property is of such a depth and/or width to make normal subdivision platting difficult. 
(b)  The parcel is shaped in such a way that it contains acute angles which would make a normal subdivision difficult to achieve. 
(c)  The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which results in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or other documented evidence must be submitted to the planning commission in order to substantiate the parcel's qualification for cluster development. 
(d)  The parcel contains natural assets which could be preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include the natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features, or other natural assets which should be preserved. 
(e)  The parcel contains natural land forms which are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of ten (10) percent between these elevations. The elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the typical feature of the site rather than the exceptional or infrequent features of the site. The topography is such that achieving road grades of less than that permitted by the city could be impossible unless the site were mass graded. 
(f)  The parcel has at least one (1) lot line which abuts a nonsingle-family residential zoning district or a permanent nonresidential use. 
(g)  The parcel is in an area which has been designated by the city council, after a report and recommendation from the planning commission, as a residential conservation area. For purposes of this chapter, residential conservation areas are defined as areas of sound structures but with some scattered dilapidation and poor maintenance. The majority of the structures can be economically rehabilitated into sound residential structures. 
(h)  The parcel is situated such that the cluster option will allow flexibility in design and placement of open space for increased insulation and protection for the residential units from adjacent freeways or other major thoroughfares. 
(i)  A request for the cluster option shall not be approved when: 
1.  In the opinion of the city council the proposal would be contrary to the health, safety and general welfare of the developed and established residential areas in the immediate vicinity; or 
2.  The request would be contrary to the purpose of the cluster option which is to maintain important natural areas, topography and improving the open space characteristics of a given area; or 
3.  The request is not consistent with the goal of revitalizing residential conservation areas into sound and stable residential areas and improving the health, safety, and welfare of residential areas. 
(2)  In areas meeting the above criteria, the minimum yard setbacks and minimum lot sizes per unit as required by article 22, schedule of regulations, may be waived and the attaching of dwelling units may be permitted subject to the following: 
(a)  The attaching of single-family dwelling units, one to another, may be permitted when said homes are attached by means of one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Through a common party wall which does not have over thirty (30) percent of the plan view overlap of any wall in common with an abutting dwelling wall. 
2.  By means of an architectural wall which does not form interior room space. 
3.  Through a common party wall in only the garage portion of the abutting structure. 
(b)  No other common party wall relationship is permitted and the number of units attached in the above manner shall not exceed four (4). 
(c)  In a cluster development, the maximum density permitted shall be determined by the following regulations: 
Zone District Land Area Per Unit R A 9,000 Sq. Ft. R 1 11,000 Sq. Ft. R 2 11,000 Sq. Ft. R 3 11,000 Sq. Ft. R 4 11,000 Sq. Ft. R E 20,000 Sq. Ft.  
(d)  The minimum floor area per unit shall be determined by the respective zoning district in which the development is located and as listed in article 22, schedule of regulations. 
(e)  Yard requirements shall be provided as follows: 
1.  No building shall be less than fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) from a perimeter lot line; all other yard requirements shall be determined and controlled by the site plan. 
2.  Off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted within a minimum yard abutting a public street. 
(3)  The procedure for preparation and submittal of a plan under this section shall be as follows: 
(a)  Ten (10) copies of a preliminary plan of the cluster development with a written application shall be submitted to the planning department. 
(b)  The preliminary plan should be drawn to scale and show the arrangement of dwelling units, streets, and open space. Dimensions of these elements shall be shown but may be approximated. It is the intent of this section that the preliminary plan be done in sufficient detail to permit planning review and yet not require precisely engineered plans. At this stage, the planning commission shall have the authority to require alterations to be made in the plan if this is found necessary to comply with the intent of this section. 
(c)  The preliminary plan shall include: 
1.  An overall map showing the relationship of the property to its surroundings within one-half (1/2) mile (.8045 kilometers) such as section lines and/or major and secondary streets. 
2.  Property and lot lines and public and private streets of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided property within two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) of the proposed plan. 
3.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or immediately adjacent to the proposed property. 
4.  Topography drawn at two-foot (.61 meters) contour intervals, preliminary landscaping plans, and all computations relative to acreage and density. 
To the extent possible, all the natural features of the property such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property and will promote the health and welfare of the community shall be preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be maintained by the proprietor and the provision of adequate easements, where appropriate, shall be required. 
5.  At least two (2) trees per unit shall be provided within the area, related to the respective units. Said trees shall have at least three-inch (7.62 centimeters) caliper measured one (1) foot (.305 meters) above the ground. 
6.  Sidewalks shall be required on all public rights-of-way and in any area the planning commission or city council deems necessary to insure pedestrian movement and safety. 
The planning commission and/or city council may request typical building elevations and floor plans and any other details which assist in reviewing the proposed plan. 
(d)  Site plans submitted under the option shall be accompanied by written statements regarding the following: 
1.  The proposed manner of holding title to the open land. 
2.  The proposed manner of payment of taxes. 
3.  The proposed method of regulating the use of the open land and the persons or corporations responsible for maintenance. 
4.  The proposed method of financing the maintenance and development of the property. 
(e)  Upon receipt of all the necessary material and plans, the planning commission shall review all details of the proposed plan within the framework of the zoning ordinance, within the various elements of the master plan, and within the intent of this section. 
(f)  After the review of the preliminary plan, the proprietor may be requested to submit detailed plans showing detailed building location, final topography, landscaping, driveways and parking and any other items which the commission deems necessary for their final review. 
(4)  The planning commission shall not act upon the request until notices by registered or certified mail have been sent to the proprietor and to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed plan. Said notices shall include the time and place of the commission meeting and shall be sent not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. In addition, not less than fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. 
(5)  If the planning commission is satisfied that the proposal meets the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance, it shall give tentative approval with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. If the planning commission is not satisfied that the proposal meets the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance or finds that approval of the proposal would be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall record reasons therefor in the minutes of the planning commission meeting. If the proposal has been approved by the planning commission, the city clerk shall place the matter upon the agenda of the city council. If disapproved, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if he requests one (1) in writing within thirty (30) days after action by the planning commission. 
The city council shall not act upon the request until notices by registered or certified mail have been sent to the proprietor and to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed plan. Said notices shall include the time and place of the council meeting and shall be sent not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. In addition, not less than fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. 
(6)  If the city council approves the site plan, they shall instruct the city attorney to review deed restrictions setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based. The restrictions, after approval by the city council, shall be binding upon the property and the prospective purchasers. Said restrictions shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  A severance clause for noncompliance with the approved plan. 
(b)  A specified time period for development. Failure to begin construction within twelve (12) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless the extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
(c)  A provision which will guarantee the completion of the proposed improvements to the open land within a time to be set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 2-27-89) 
ARTICLE 5-A. - MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (RMH) 

Sec. 5.70-1. - Intent. 
    The Mobile Home Park District (RMH) is intended to apply only to large, vacant, unplatted areas and will serve as zones of transition between more intensive land uses such as office or commercial and other residential districts or permanent nonresidential uses. The Mobile Home Park District is further provided to allow an alternate form of housing that provides the flexibility of moving living units from place to place. 
Sec. 5.70-2. - Site plan review. 
    No mobile home shall be placed on a site in a Mobile Home Park District (RMH) unless a site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission within sixty (60) days after it has been requested by the council. In addition to general considerations of health, safety and welfare, the city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  The site plan does show that ingress and egress is provided to a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety except: 
(a)  Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such ingress and egress is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveways and all property abutting such street between the driveways and a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive is zoned for multiple-family use, any nonresidential uses, or is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences. This exception shall only apply if the council finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety. 
Sec. 5.70-3. - Uses permitted. 
(1)  One-family mobile home. 
(2)  Double-wide, one-family mobile home. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(4)  Automobile parking spaces to be provided, as required in sections 5.30 and 5.31, which may be located in carports or garages adjacent to, or in close proximity to, the units they are intended to serve. 
Sec. 5.70-4. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish site design and construction standards for mobile home parks insuring that the arrangement of mobile homes provides adequate light, air, convenience of access, safety, essential utilities and recreational facilities and other open spaces. 
(1)  Minimum site size. The minimum site size for development purposes of a Mobile Home Park District is twenty-five (25) acres (10.125 hectares). 
(2)  Density. The maximum density shall be limited by the requirement of a minimum of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet (697.5 square meters) of land area per mobile home, exclusive of the area of internal minor and collector streets. 
(3)  Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for any mobile home to be utilized for residential purposes shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet (93 square meters). 
(4)  Circulation. The street system shall provide convenient circulation by means of minor streets and properly located collector streets. Closed ends of dead-end streets shall be provided with an adequate vehicular turning circle at least ninety (90) feet (27.45 meters) in diameter. A minor street shall be not less than twenty-seven (27) feet (8.235 meters) wide, measured between curb faces, and a collector street shall be not less than thirty-three (33) feet (10.065 meters), measured between curb faces. 
(5)  Setbacks. All mobile homes and any accessory buildings shall maintain a 50-foot (15.25 meters) setback to any boundary line of the development to adequately protect the residential use of the development. 
(6)  Spacing between mobile homes. Mobile home sites shall be so arranged so as to provide a minimum distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) between any unit or attached appendage to the main unit. The minimum distance between the roadway which provides circulation to the site and the unit shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters). 
(7)  Mobile home stands. Each mobile home must be situated on a series of concrete piers arranged in accordance with the following diagram. The concrete piers shall be not less than sixteen (16) inches (40.64 centimeters) in diameter, not less than forty-two (42) inches (106.68 centimeters) deep, and shall have a maximum footing load of fifteen (15) pounds (6.804 kilograms) per square inch (6.451 square centimeters). 
Each mobile home shall be located on the stands and supported with masonry blocks or jacks, shall have the wheels removed, shall be connected to utilities, and be provided with skirting from the bottom of the walls of the mobile home to the ground which shall consist of face brick or aluminum siding and shall provide an uninterrupted screening device around the mobile home. 
(8)  Anchorage and tie downs . Every space for mobile homes shall be provided with devices for anchoring the unit to prevent overturning or uplift. Anchorage may be by eyelets imbedded in the concrete with adequate anchor plates or hooks, or other suitable means. The anchorage shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift based upon the size and weight of the units and as detailed in the BOCA Code. 
(9)  Open space. Each mobile home shall be provided with an outdoor living and service area. Such area should be improved and landscaped as necessary to assure reasonable privacy and comfort. The minimum area should not be less than three hundred (300) square feet (27.9 square meters) with a least dimension of fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters). 
In addition to the above, there shall be provided at least three hundred (300) square feet (27.9 square meters) of open space and recreation space for each mobile home and shall be developed in clusters located uniformly throughout the site. At least one (1) such area in each mobile home park shall be of such size and shape that a minimum 100-foot square (9.3 meters square) may be laid out within it and be substantially flat, without trees, bushes or other obstructions, and maintained as lawn and is suitable for active forms of recreation. Streets, driveways and parking areas are not to be included in calculating the size of the recreation area. 
(10)  Utilities. All utilities are to be located underground. In addition, an underground master television antenna system must be provided for each mobile home park for the use of each unit; exterior antennas shall not be permitted on individual mobile homes. 
(11)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks, at least five (5) feet (1.525 meters) wide, shall be provided adjacent to all drives and streets that provide vehicular circulation through the mobile home park. Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of the drives and streets. 
(12)  Refuse collection facilities. Refuse containers, having a capacity of one (1) cubic yard (.765 cubic meters) for each four (4) mobile homes, shall be provided in a location where vehicular and pedestrian access is convenient, must be located on Portland cement concrete stands, and shall be surrounded, except on the driveway side, by a brick faced masonry wall at least six (6) feet (1.83 meters) high. 
(13)  Boat and camper storage. The storage of boats, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, trailers and non-motorized campers shall be permitted only in an area designated for such storage and shall not be permitted on any mobile home space. 
(14)  Community building. Each mobile home park development shall contain a community building of sufficient size to accommodate laundry facilities, indoor recreational facilities, and room for community gatherings to service the residents of the mobile home park. 
(15)  Project improvements. Each mobile home park development shall comply with the requirements and regulations of chapter 48, subdivision and project improvements, of the City Code. 
(16)  Fire safety requirements. Each mobile home, regardless of age, shall be equipped with approved smoke detection and alarm systems in addition to an approved portable fire extinguisher suitable for handling incipient fires to the home. 
(17)  Storage sheds. Storage sheds may be permitted as accessory buildings. No outdoor storage shall be permitted by any mobile home park or committed by any occupant, including the storage of anything underneath any mobile home. 
(18)  Walls. A six-foot (1.83 meters) high brick faced, solid masonry wall shall be required wherever parking areas are adjacent to single-family residentially zoned property as determined by the city council at the time of site plan review. 
(19)  Signs. Permitted signs are limited to directional, speed limit, street address and street name signs. 
(Ord. No. 1338, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.70-5. - Fees. 
    Fees charged for the site planning review of requests under the provisions of this section shall be in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per mobile home. This fee is necessary and reasonably related to the expense incurred in processing such requests and shall be paid at the time of presenting the site plan to the planning department. 
(Ord. of 4-1-91) 
ARTICLE 6. - ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-T) 

Sec. 5.71. - Intent. 
    The Attached Single-Family Residential District (R-T) is intended to permit and to relate the type, design, and layout of attached and detached single-family residential development to the particular site in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values in established residential areas. This district is also intended to encourage a more efficient and more desirable use of land. 
    This district is specifically intended to prohibit multiple-family buildings where entry to individual dwelling units is from an interior common area, to require that units be separated from any abutting dwelling unit by a party wall extending up from the ground the full height of the building, and to require each dwelling unit to have direct access from outdoors from at least the front and rear or side of the unit. 
Sec. 5.72. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in an Attached Single-Family Residential District (R-T) unless the site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within sixty (60) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  The site plan does show that ingress and egress is provided to a secondary thoroughfare, major thoroughfare, or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the secondary thoroughfare, major thoroughfare, and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except: 
(a)  Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such ingress and egress is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive is zoned for multiple-family use, any nonresidential uses, or is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences. This exception shall only apply if the council finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety or that the property will be a transitional zone between a single-family zoning district and a nonresidential district. 
(b)  All the development features including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
Sec. 5.73. - Principal uses permitted. 
(1)  One-family attached dwellings (townhouses) with not less than three (3) attached units. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above-permitted uses. 
(3)  The entire area of the site shall be treated to service the residents of the development and any accessory buildings, uses or services shall be developed solely for the use of the residents. Uses considered herein as accessory uses include: swimming pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas, and other similar uses. 
Sec. 5.74. - Other uses. 
    The city council may, after a recommendation from the planning commission, permit one-family detached dwellings and one-family attached dwellings of less than three (3) attached units when they are found to be: 
(1)  Reasonably necessary or convenient for the satisfactory and efficient development of a complete townhouse district, and 
(2)  Necessary for the creation of an effective density development, and 
(3)  Necessary for the extension of a single-family character in a single-family residential area. 
Sec. 5.75. - Density control. 
    Dwelling units per acre shall be determined by the required land area in square feet per number of bedrooms as follows: 
(1)  One-bedroom unit - Three thousand, six hundred thirty (3,630) square feet (twelve (12) dwelling units per acre) 
(2)  Two-bedroom unit - Four thousand, three hundred fifty (4,350) square feet (ten (10) dwelling units per acre) 
(3)  Three-bedroom unit - Five thousand, four hundred, forty-five (5,445) square feet (eight (8) dwelling units per acre) 
(4)  Four-bedroom unit - Seven thousand, two hundred, sixty (7,260) square feet (six (6) dwelling units per acre) 
(Ord. No. 1642 , § 1, 7-19-15) 
Sec. 5.76. - Area and bulk regulations. 
(1)  See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area and provides minimum setback requirements. 
(2)  No building shall be less than thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters) from a perimeter lot line; all other yard requirements shall be determined and controlled by the site plan. 
(3)  No building or structure within one hundred fifty (150) feet (45.75 meters) of a perimeter lot line shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) or two (2) stories in height. All other buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet (10.675 meters) or three (3) stories in height. 
(4)  Automobile parking spaces are to be provided as required in section 5.30. 
(5)  Provide a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet (37.2 square meters) of landscaped open space adjacent to each unit. 
(6)  Attached single-family units shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet (76.25 meters) in total length. 
(7)  Dwelling units may be attached by other than side walls when the attachment does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the plan view overlap of any wall in common with an abutting dwelling unit or attached garage. 
(Ord. No. 1539, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5.77. - Walls. 
    A six-foot (1.83 meters) high solid masonry wall of similar material as the principal buildings may be required wherever parking areas are adjacent to single-family residentially zoned property. 
Sec. 5.78. - Conditions. 
    When approving a site plan for an attached single family residential development, the city council shall prescribe such additional conditions as are, in its opinion, necessary to secure the objectives of an attached single family residential site plan which are as follows: 
(1)  The development is compatible with the future land use plan as recommended by the planning commission. 
(2)  The development is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities of the subject property. 
(3)  The development will harmonize and be compatible with any existing or proposed development in the area surrounding the subject property. 
(4)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
The violation of any conditions so imposed shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 3, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5.79, 5.80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS-LOW RISE (RM) 

Sec. 5.81. - Intent. 
    The Multiple-Family Residential Districts (Low Rise) are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures which will generally serve as zones of transition between commercial districts and the lower density single-family districts. The multiple-family dwelling district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low density, single-family community. 
Sec. 5.82. - Site plan review. 
    In an RM, Multiple-Family Residential District, no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in an RM, Multiple-Family Residential District unless the site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  The site plan does show that ingress and egress is provided only to a secondary thoroughfare, major thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety except: 
(a)  Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted to other than a secondary thoroughfare, major thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such ingress and egress is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveways and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or freeway service drive is zoned for multiple-family use, any nonresidential uses, or is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences. This exception shall only apply if the council finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety or that the property will be a transitional zone between a single-family zoning district and a nonresidential district. 
(2)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas, are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties. 
(3)  The traffic engineer shall submit to the planning commission and city council a report regarding the improvements in the public right-of-way which are necessary for the satisfactory operation of contiguous roadways. 
(4)  To the extent possible, all the natural features of the property such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses, and similar assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property and will promote the health and welfare of the community shall be preserved. 
Such review of the site plan is required to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and, furthermore, to find proper relationships between the following development features as they relate to traffic safety: service roads, driveways, parking areas, accessory buildings and uses, and open spaces. 
Sec. 5.83. - Uses permitted. 
(1)  All principal uses permitted in single-family residence districts with all the requirements equal to at least the requirement of the most restrictive immediately abutting residential district or, if there is none, the requirements of the least restrictive residential district shall apply. Provided that single-family structures shall not require site plan review and approval. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings not in excess of two (2) stories. 
(A)  The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  One-bedroom unit - Two thousand, two hundred ninety (2,290) square feet of land area (nineteen (19) dwelling units per acre) 
2.  Two-bedroom unit - Two thousand, seven hundred twenty (2,720) square feet of land area (sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre) 
3.  Three-bedroom unit - Three thousand, three hundred fifty (3,350) square feet of land area (thirteen (13) dwelling units per acre) 
4.  Four-bedroom unit - Three thousand, nine hundred sixty (3,960) square feet of land area (eleven (11) dwelling units per acre) 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(5)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 5.30. 
(Ord. No. 1642 , § 2, 7-19-15) 
Sec. 5.84. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following use (uses) may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use, or uses, may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the multiple family residential district-low rise. 
(b)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(c)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(d)  Failure to begin construction within twelve (12) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless an extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
(e)  In approving a special use, the city council may attach reasonable conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed use as they may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the intent of this section. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Housing for the elderly upon review and report from the city housing commission concerning the suitability and appropriateness so as to not isolate the development either socially or physically from the balance of the community; in relation to accessibility to convenience services such as shopping, banking, health care, community facilities, and transportation. In addition, the housing commission shall review and report on the design of the project and the amenities of the project such as, but not limited to, recreational, social and other support facilities and further that: 
1.  All dwelling units shall consist of at least a living room, bedroom, kitchen, and private bath and toilet and each unit shall contain not less than five hundred twenty-five (525) square feet (48.825 square meters) for a one-bedroom unit and seven hundred (700) square feet (65.1 square meters) for a two-bedroom unit except that not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the units may be of an efficiency type of not less than four hundred twenty-five (425) square feet (39.525 square meters). The floor area shall be measured from the interior faces of all walls. This requirement of unit sizes for housing for the elderly has been established to reflect economy as well as efficiency recognizing the absence of children, the lack of need for large entertaining areas within units, and the provision of common areas located within the project. 
2.  Parking shall be established per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements assisted living/elderly. The city council may permit the reduction of parking spaces provided in a landscaped parking bank which will allow the conversion of landscaped areas into additional parking at the request of the planning department. Such landscaped parking banks shall not be computed in minimum landscape requirements. All required parking shall be ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) in width, center to center, and twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length with a minimum aisle width of twenty-two (22) feet (6.71 meters). 
3.  The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following schedule: 
Stories Required Land Area Per Unit Density DU/Acre (.405 Hectares) 2 1,500 sq. ft. (139.50 sq. m.) 29.0  
4.  The owner shall file with the Oakland County Register of Deeds a covenant, approved as to form by the city attorney, in which said owner shall covenant on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors, and assigns not to use the property for any other use than housing for the elderly unless the use complies with all requirements of the zoning ordinance. Required compliance includes, but is not limited to, density, unit sizes, parking, and setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 1641 , §2, 5-31-15) 
Sec. 5.85. - Use restrictions. 
    All dwelling units shall have at least one (1) living room and one (1) bedroom, except as provided in section 5.84, paragraph (2), subparagraph (a)1., housing for the elderly. 
    All dwelling units shall contain not less than two (2) rooms of not less than eighty (80) square feet (7.44 square meters) each, not including kitchen or sanitary facilities, except that not more than ninety (90) percent of the units may be of the one (1) bedroom type. 
Sec. 5.86. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22 except that carports or garages may be located within fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) of a side or rear property line where such lot line abuts a multiple-family zoning district or a nonresidential zoning district. 
Sec. 5.87. - Building distance formula. 
    In all Multiple-Residence Districts, the minimum distance between any two (2) buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings. 
    The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings (referred to as building "A" and building "B") is described in section 5.97. 
Sec. 5.88. - Landscaping. 
    Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 4, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5.89-5.90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS-MEDIUM RISE (RMM) AND HIGH RISE (RMU) 

Sec. 5.91. - Intent. 
    The Multiple-Family Residential Districts (Medium Rise) are designed to provide sites for medium-density multiple-dwelling structures adjacent to secondary and major thoroughfares and freeway service drives. This district is designed to provide a zone of transition between secondary and major thoroughfares and/or more intensive uses of land such as high rise office or high rise multiple-family uses and the less intensive uses of land such as low rise multiple-family uses and/or single-family residential. This district is further designed to provide a zone of medium height limitation which may be more desirable than the RMU (High Rise) District which permits unlimited height and could be detrimental to established areas. 
    The Multiple-Family Residential Districts (High Rise) are designed to provide sites for high-density multiple-dwelling structures adjacent to high traffic generators commonly found in the proximity of Regional Shopping Centers and areas abutting major thoroughfares and expressways. This district is further provided to serve the residential needs of persons desiring the apartment-type of accommodation with central services as opposed to the residential patterns found in the one (1) family residential and RM, Multiple-Family Residential Districts. This district is further designed so as to provide a zone of transition between these major thoroughfares and high traffic generators and other residential districts through more open space. 
Sec. 5.92. - Site plan review. 
    In an RMM or RMU Multiple-Family Residential District, no building, structure or land shall be erected or used in an RMM or RMU Multiple-Family Residential District unless the site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  The site plan does show that ingress and egress is provided only to a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive except that the RMM District may have ingress and egress to a secondary thoroughfare, and that a proper relationship exists between the thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except: 
(a)  Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such ingress and egress is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or freeway service drive is zoned for multiple-family use, any nonresidential uses, or is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences. This exception shall only apply if the council finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a transitional zone between a single-family zoning district and a nonresidential district. 
(2)  Such review of the site plan is required to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and furthermore, to find proper relationships between the following development features as they relate to traffic safety, service roads, driveways, parking areas, accessory buildings and uses, and open spaces. 
(3)  The traffic engineer shall submit to the planning commission and city council, a report regarding the improvements in the public rights-of-way which are necessary for the satisfactory operation of contiguous roadways. 
Sec. 5.93. - Uses permitted. 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings in structures between three (3) and six (6) stories within the RMM Medium Rise District, and seven (7) stories to unlimited in height, providing yard requirements are satisfied within the RMU High Rise District. 
(2)  Retail and service uses clearly accessory to the principal use and in accordance with section 5.95, paragraph (3). 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 1-14-99) 
Sec. 5.94. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following use (uses) may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use, or uses, may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the multiple family residential districts - medium rise (RMM) and high rise (RMU). 
(b)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(c)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(d)  Failure to begin construction within twelve (12) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless an extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
(e)  In approving a special use, the city council may attach reasonable conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed use as they may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the intent of this section. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Housing for the elderly upon review and report from the Southfield Housing Commission concerning the suitability and appropriateness so as to not isolate the development either socially or physically from the balance of the community; in relation to accessibility to convenience services such as shopping, banking, health care, community facilities, and transportation. In addition, the housing commission shall review and report on the design of the project and the amenities of the project (such as, but not limited to, recreational, social and other support facilities) and further that: 
1.  All dwelling units shall consist of at least a living room, bedroom, kitchen, and private bath and toilet and each unit shall contain not less than five hundred and twenty-five (525) square feet (48.825 square meters) for a one (1) bedroom unit and seven hundred (700) square feet (65.1 square meters) for a two (2) bedroom unit except that not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the units may be of an efficiency type of not less than four hundred and twenty-five (425) square feet (39.525 square meters). The floor area shall be measured from the interior faces of all walls. This requirement of unit sizes for housing for the elderly has been established to reflect economy as well as efficiency recognizing the absence of children, the lack of need for large entertaining areas within units, and the provisions of common areas located within the project. 
2.  Parking shall be established per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements assisted living/elderly. The city council may permit the reduction of parking spaces installed not to exceed fifty (50) percent which may be provided in a landscaped parking bank which will allow the conversion of landscaped areas into additional parking at the request of the planning department. Such landscaped parking banks shall not be computed in minimum landscape requirements. All required parking shall be ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) in width, center to center, and twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length with a minimum aisle width of twenty-two (22) feet (6.71 meters). 
3.  The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following schedule: 
Stories Required Land Area Per Unit (Square Feet) Density DU/Acre (.405 Hectares) 6 or more 800 (74.4 sq. m.) 54.5 5 900 (83.7 sq. m.) 48.4 4 1,000 (93.0 sq. m.) 43.6 3 1,100 (102.3 sq. m.) 39.6  
4.  The owner shall file with the Oakland County Register of Deeds a covenant, approved as to form by the city attorney, in which said owner shall covenant on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors and assigns not to use the property for any other use than housing for the elderly unless the use complies with all requirements of the zoning ordinance. Required compliance includes, but is not limited to, density, unit sizes, parking, and setbacks. 
(b)  Urban town homes or row style housing is defined as attached, two to three-story residential units designed with the appearance of an individual unit with the main entrance fronting a public right-of-way or private road. To accomplish this effect, modifications are allowed from the area and bulk regulations of the RMM or RMU district, as stated in sections 5.95, 5.96 and 5.97, article 8 and section 5.193, article 22. Approval is subject to the following standards and conditions: 
1.  The proposed development shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare and no further than 1/4 of a mile from established retail uses. 
2.  The building facades visible from all exterior property lines shall be constructed to be compatible with the adjoining land uses. 
3.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) garaged parking space per residential unit which shall be attached to or within the residential unit. 
4.  The required number of parking spaces per unit shall be defined under article 4, general provisions, section 5.30 off-street parking provisions. 
5.  The unit density shall not exceed twenty-two (22) dwelling units per acre. 
6.  Minimum floor area shall be determined by the following schedule: 
1 bedroom 800 sq. ft. (74.4 sq. m.) 2 bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. (93.0 sq. m.) 3 bedroom 1,100 sq. ft. (102.3 sq. m.) 4 bedroom 1,300 sq. ft. (120.9 sq. m.)  
Minimum floor area is the area of the unit measured from the outside faces of exterior walls to the center of interior walls of the unit. Included within the minimum floor area computation may be private balconies or private patios having a minimum dimension of five (5) feet (1.525 meters) and a minimum area of forty (40) square feet (3.72 square meters) with a maximum allowable area for computing minimum floor area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the unit size. 
7.  Not less than fifteen (15) percent of the total gross site shall be developed in landscaping or public open space. As a part of the required landscaped area, a minimum of two and one half (2.5) percent of the site shall be provided in a private park site for the benefit of the residents of the development. The park may be developed with recreational uses, such as swimming pools, cabanas, gazebos, play structures, and other similar uses. 
8.  Internal streets shall be constructed in accordance with city engineering standards and are intended to encourage on-street parking. 
9.  Internal sidewalks five (5) feet wide shall be provided to connect residential units for pedestrian access. 
10.  All buildings shall be set back not less than tewnty (20) feet from all peripheral property lines. Further, no front or side of any building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the edge of pavement of any public or private street. Within the required twenty (20) foot building setback, the entire area, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways and porches, shall be in landscaping. 
11.  There shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaped area along all peripheral property lines. 
12.  Building separation shall be a minimum of sixty two (62) feet face to face and rear to rear with twenty (20) feet face to end, and fifteen (15) feet side to side. 
13.  Building height shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty six (36) feet in height and shall be measured in accordance with the standards under article 2 definitions, section 5.3 definitions (a-b). 
14.  Building length and grouping. No building shall exceed ten (10) units and stacked units shall not exceed twenty (20) units and further no building shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in total length. 
15.  Condominium documents, if any, must be reviewed by the planning department, building department and city attorney's office to determine compliance with City Codes and ordinances. 
16.  On street parking for the residential units is encouraged. 
17.  Storm water management measures shall be designed in accordance with the city storm water management plan, as applicable, and the stormwater management plan for the site. 
18.  No mechanical equipment shall be located in front of the homes. If mechanical equipment is located within a side yard, the equipment must be screened. Air conditioning units shall be incorporated within the design of the building, wherever possible. 
19.  These requirements are applicable only for urban town homes or row style housing under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 1462, 6-17-01; Ord. No. 1641 , § 3, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1678 , § 5, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.95. - Use restrictions. 
(1)  The proposed development area for any RMU use shall have one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare or expressway service drive. The site shall be planned so as to provide ingress and egress only to said thoroughfare or expressway service drive. 
(2)  All units shall have at least one (1) living room and one (1) bedroom except that ten (10) percent of the dwelling units in a multiple-family building may be of an efficiency type. 
(3)  Any business uses on the site shall be developed as retail or service uses clearly accessory to the main use, within the walls of the main structure, and totally obscured from any exterior view. Such business uses shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area at grade level or fifty (50) percent of the floor area of a sub-grade level and shall be prohibited on all floors above the first floor, or grade level. 
(4)  The entire area of the site shall be treated to service the residents of the apartment and any accessory buildings, uses or services shall be developed solely for the use of residents of the main building. Uses considered herein as accessory uses include: swimming pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas, and other similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 1339, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.96. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area and provides minimum yard setback requirements in the RMM and RMU Districts. 
    It is the intent of this schedule to incorporate a sliding scale density provision which will prevent high density developments in low profile and low rise buildings which will provide a good living atmosphere and environment by controlling the open space in relationship to the dwelling units. 
    The distance between buildings on the same lot is regulated by the building distance formula and where, because of the building arrangement, the formula is not applicable, the minimum distance between buildings shall be thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters). 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22 except that: carports or garages may be located within fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) of a side or rear property line where such lot line abuts a multiple-family zoning district or a nonresidential zoning district. 
Sec. 5.97. - Building distance formula. 
    In all Multiple-Residence Districts, the minimum distance between any two (2) buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings. 
    The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings (referred to as building "A" and building "B") is as follows: 
S = LA + LB + 2(HA + HB) / 6 
WHERE 
S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
LA = Total length of building A 
The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
LB = Total length of building B 
The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. 
HA = Height of building A 
The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion of portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
HB = Height of building B 
The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
Sec. 5.98. - Landscaping. 
    Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 5, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5.99, 5.100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - OFFICE-SERVICE DISTRICT (O-S) 

Sec. 5.101. - Intent. 
    The office-service district (O-S) is designed to accommodate various types of office uses performing administrative, professional and personal services. These are typically small office buildings which can serve as a transitional use between the more intensive uses of land such as major thoroughfares and/or commercial districts and the less intensive uses of land such as single-family residential. 
    This district is specifically intended to prohibit commercial establishments of a retail nature or other activities which require constant short-term parking and traffic from the general public except as provided in section 5.104. 
    This district is also intended to provide ancillary facilities and uses which will service the occupants of, and be in harmony with, the appropriate and orderly development of the office-service district. 
Sec. 5.102. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in an office-service district (O-S) unless a site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission, but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas, are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except that: access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive is within a multiple-family district or any nonresidential district, or is developed with permanent uses which are other than single-family residences. This exception shall apply only to property having frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and shall apply only upon a finding that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety. 
The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1046, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.103. - Uses permitted. 
    In an O-S, office-service district, no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Executive, administrative and professional offices. 
(2)  Medical offices, including clinics and medical laboratories. 
(3)  Facilities for human care, such as hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent and nursing homes. 
(4)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(5)  Libraries and government office buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards or post offices. 
(6)  Private social or fraternal clubs or lodges. 
(7)  Churches and related facilities. 
(a)  Emergency shelters for the homeless and soup kitchens may be considered ancillary uses conditional upon the following: 
i.  Shelter and/or meal service for seven (7) or more recipients is limited to two (2) weeks maximum in any one calendar year. 
ii.  Shelter and/or meal service for seven (7) or more recipients is limited to one (1) week at a time throughout the calendar year. 
iii.  Limitations on duration for six (6) or fewer recipients of shelter and/or meal service at a time do not apply. 
(8)  Public or private schools or colleges for general or vocational education. 
(9)  Nursery schools. 
(10)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(11)  Funeral homes. 
(12)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as: beauty parlors and barber shops. 
(13)  Veterinary clinics and hospitals provided all activities are conducted within a totally and permanently enclosed building. 
(14)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 1654 , § 5, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 5.104. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use or uses may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the office-service district. 
(b)  The location, size, and intensity of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(f)  The request for a use requiring special approval shall be accompanied by a site plan indicating the treatment of the subject property, the adjacent uses and properties, and the relationship of the building and site to adjoining thoroughfares. 
(g)  Failure to begin construction within eighteen (18) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless an extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
(h)  In approving a special use, the city council may attach reasonable conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed use as they may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the intent of this section. 
(i)  In the event of a protest to a proposed special use duly signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the combined area of land included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) from any point of the boundary, including one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property directly across any street right-of-way measured from the property lines extended, a two-thirds concurring vote of the city council shall be required. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Pharmacies and prescription centers when located in, or near, medical offices, medical clinics, hospitals, convalescent or nursing homes or similar facilities. 
(b)  Private or public athletic clubs or health spas when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(c)  Office and drafting supplies. 
(d)  Reproduction and duplicating facilities and other complementary office services, but not a print shop. 
(e)  Office warehousing when storage or warehousing of goods or products does not exceed sixty (60) percent of the usable area and further provided that: 
1.  No manufacturing or production of goods or materials is conducted on the premises. 
2.  Loading zones are not on any street frontage and are adequately obscured and screened from any residentially zoned property. Loading and unloading shall be restricted to normal business hours. 
3.  The parking of trucks, truck trailers, vans or cars incidental to the use shall not exceed a period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
4.  The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials is prohibited. 
5.  The retail sales on a "cash and carry" basis of goods is prohibited. 
6.  The minimum site size shall be three (3) acres (1.215 hectares). 
(f)  Buildings in excess of two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters), but not in excess of three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet (10.675 meters), provided that: 
1.  The minimum site size shall be three (3) acres (1.215 hectares). 
2.  The minimum setback from any single-family residentially zoned property shall be not less than seventy-five (75) feet (22.875 meters). 
(g)  Automobile leasing and rental offices provided that: 
1.  The area designated for the leasing or rental of automobiles and vans only shall not exceed fifteen (15) vehicles per site or the number of parking spaces available on the site in excess of parking requirements of article 4, section 5.30, off-street parking requirements, whichever is less. the standard is necessary to insure maintenance of the office character of the site. 
2.  The parking area for the vehicles for lease or rental shall not be located in areas that are required for tenant parking, aisleways, loading, landscaping, sidewalks, or required setbacks. 
3.  The parking of the vehicles for lease or rental shall not interfere with the primary office use of the site. 
4.  The leasing of vehicles exceeding three (3) tons (2.721 metric tons) is expressly prohibited. 
5.  The sale, maintenance, and/or repair of vehicles at the site is prohibited. 
6.  All vehicles shall be licensed, operable, and in good physical condition. 
7.  The storage or parking of tow trucks is expressly prohibited. 
8.  The firm, company, or agent's office for the leasing of said vehicles is located on the premises, and further, said use shall be accessory to the permitted uses within this district and not be the only use located within a freestanding building. 
(h)  Residential structures converted to, or used for, nonresidential purposes as permitted in section 5.103, uses permitted, and section 5.104, uses permitted subject to special approval, of article 9, Office-Service District (O-S), and further provided that: 
1.  The minimum floor area of the existing structure is two thousand (2,000) square feet (186 square meters). 
2.  The proposed use meets all requirements within this chapter. 
3.  All residential structures that were converted to nonresidential purposes with the approval of the city prior to the effective date of this chapter (May 22, 1989), which contain less than two thousand (2,000) square feet (186 square meters) shall not be deemed in noncompliance with this subsection 5.104.(2)(h), merely because of floor area. 
(i)  Uses that are related and reasonably necessary or convenient for the satisfactory and efficient operation of a complete and integrated Office-Service District. 
(j)  Self-storage facilities may be permitted under special use upon the following conditions and restrictions and shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection 5.105, required conditions of this article. 
1.  The site property line shall abut on at least one (1) side, property zoned I-1, Industrial, which allows for outside storage of materials or TVR, Television-Radio-Office Studio Districts, which allows independent equipment to be placed outside of buildings. 
2.  The height of the building shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
3.  The building shall be constructed on the exterior in such a manor as to resemble an office building. 
4.  All storage rental areas shall be accessed from the interior only with only one (1) primary ingress door and one egress door for vehicles allowed. 
5.  Any manager's apartment or caretaker facilities shall not exceed one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet (130.2 square meters) and located within the building. 
6.  The area and bulk regulations shall be determined by article 22, schedule of regulations, except a side yard is not required on interior side lot lines when abutting the I-1, Industrial, and TV-R, Television-Radio-Studio Districts and which is developed with a permanent permitted use. 
(3)  Restaurants. Any restaurant approved by the city council under this section prior to the effective date of this amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be deemed to be a permitted use within the O-S District and such use shall remain subject to all of the provisions of this section as it existed immediately prior to the adoption of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1044-A, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 1237, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 1277, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1463, 6-17-01) 
Sec. 5.105. - Required conditions. 
(1)  No interior display shall be visible from any property line. 
(2)  The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials in quantity greater than normally incidental to the above permitted uses shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Not more than fifty (50) percent of any front or side yard abutting a street shall be used for vehicular parking or driveways. This parking restriction is necessary to maintain the transitional character of the area that this district is intended to preserve. 
(5)  In addition to required landscaping, landscaping may be provided in lieu of ten (10) percent of the total number of parking spaces required, provided the landscaping is arranged such that parking may be installed at a later date if such a demand arises, and further provided, that the owner agrees to provide such parking at the city's request. 
(6)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1242, 2-25-88; Ord. No. 1678 , § 6, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.106. - Signs and lighting. 
(1)  Necessary directional or regulatory traffic signs of not more than two (2) square feet (.186 square meters) each shall be permitted. 
(2)  No moving or flashing parts or lights or devices shall be permitted. All incandescent light sources shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No lighting fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(Ord. No. 1340, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.107. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area, and provides minimum yard setback requirements. 
Sec. 5.108. - Provision for a one-year grace period for approved site plans. 
    This provision shall not apply to any land or building for which a site plan has been submitted to, and received by, the city or approved by the city, in accordance with the provisions of the former section 5.102, site plan review, of article 9, Office-Service District (O-S), of chapter 45, as amended on or before the effective date of this amendment. The above exceptions shall be permitted provided that a building permit is issued for construction in accordance with the approved site plan, or any approved revision thereof, within one (1) year of the effective date of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1046, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 10. - EDUCATION-RESEARCH-OFFICE-LIMITED (ERO-M) AND EDUCATION-RESEARCH-OFFICE (ERO) DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5.110. - Intent. 
    The Education-Research-Office Districts (ERO-M, ERO) are designed to accommodate various types of office uses performing administrative, professional and technical services. These are typically large office buildings which can serve as a transitional use between major thoroughfares, more intensive uses of land and/or commercial districts and less intensive uses of land such as multiple-family or single-family residential. 
    These districts are specifically intended to prohibit commercial establishments of a retail nature or other activities which require constant short-term parking and traffic from the general public but are intended to permit those businesses which are required to serve the normal daily needs of the occupants of the permitted primary uses. 
    The Education-Research-Office-Limited (ERO-M) District is designed to provide a site for medium density office structures adjacent to major thoroughfares by providing a medium height limitation which may be more desirable than the unlimited height (ERO) to preserve the character and quality in adjoining areas. 
Sec. 5.111. - Site plan review. 
    In an ERO-M (Education-Research-Office-Limited) or ERO (Education-Research-Office) District no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in an ERO-M (Education-Research-Office-Limited) or ERO (Education-Research-Office) District unless the site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  The site plan does show that ingress and egress is provided only to a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except: 
(a)  Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such ingress and egress is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or freeway service drive is zoned for multiple-family use, any nonresidential uses, or is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences. This exception shall only apply if the council finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety or that the property will be a transitional zone between a single-family zoning district and a nonresidential district. 
(2)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon the adjacent properties. 
(3)  The traffic engineer shall submit to the planning commission and city council a report regarding the improvements in the public rights-of-way which are necessary for the satisfactory operation of contiguous roadways. 
(4)  To the extent possible, all the natural features of the property such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses, and similar assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property and will promote the health and welfare of the community shall be preserved. 
Such review of the site plan is required to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and, furthermore, to find proper relationships between the following development features as they relate to traffic safety: service roads, driveways, parking areas, accessory buildings and uses, and open spaces. 
Failure to begin construction within twelve (12) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless an extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
Sec. 5.112. - Uses permitted. 
    In the Education-Research-Office-Limited (ERO-M) and the Education-Research-Office (ERO) Districts, no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special approval in article 9, O-S District, and meeting the requirements as set forth in said district with the exception of funeral homes and veterinary clinics which shall be expressly prohibited from this district. 
(2)  Any uses which are charged with the principal function of education, research, design and technical training and experimental product development when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Facilities for human care such as convalescent and nursing homes. 
(4)  Dormitories for students enrolled in, and quarters for instructors employed by, educational institutions when incidental to any permitted principal use. 
(5)  Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
(6)  Studios for professional work or teaching of interior decorating, photography, music, drama or dancing. 
(7)  Hospitals, when the following conditions are met, provided, however, hospitals for criminals and those primarily for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill are not permitted: 
(a)  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least five (5) acres (2.025 hectares) in area. 
(b)  The property shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare (a thoroughfare of at least one hundred twenty (120) feet (36.6 meters) of right-of-way, existing or proposed). 
(c)  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets that are adjacent to property zoned residential shall be at least one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) unless footnote (v) [of section 5.195] requires a greater setback. 
(d)  Ambulance and delivery areas shall be screened from all residential view with a brick faced masonry wall not less than six (6) feet (1.83 meters) in height. Ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(e)  All ingress and egress to the off-street parking areas, for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other users of the facility, shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(8)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above-permitted uses such as services for employees and other persons normally associated with the permitted uses such as: coffee shop, pharmacy, barber shop, tobacco shop, post office and parking structures. 
(9)  Any housing for the elderly project approved by the city council pursuant to sections 5.111 and 5.112 of the zoning ordinance prior to the effective date of this amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be permitted provided that a building permit is issued for construction in accordance with the approved site plan or any approved revision thereof within one (1) year from the effective date of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 927, 2-28-77) 
Sec. 5.113. - Required conditions. 
(1)  No display shall be permitted in an exterior show window or be visible from any property line. The total area devoted to display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the usable floor area of the establishment using the display of an actual product for sale as a sales procedure. (This condition shall not apply to accessory uses permitted in section 5.112, paragraph 9). 
(2)  The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials in quantity greater than normally incidental to the above permitted uses shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Not more than fifty (50) percent of any required yard abutting a street shall be used for vehicular parking or driveways. Adjacent to any lot line abutting a street, there shall be a continuous landscaped area not less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) wide except at points of approved vehicular access to the street. This parking and landscaping restriction is necessary to maintain the transitional character of the area that this district is intended to serve and to assure pedestrian and vehicular safety by separating the off-street parking area from the vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the public right-of-way. 
(5)  In addition to the landscaping required above, not less than five (5) percent of the site, exclusive of buildings and the required yards abutting a street, shall be landscaped. No landscaped area having a width of less than five (5) feet (1.525 meters) shall be considered in the five (5) percent minimum landscaping requirement. This requirement is necessary to provide for the safety and welfare of pedestrians in large parking areas and to provide for effective traffic control regulations. 
(6)  In addition to required landscaping, landscaping may be provided in lieu of ten (10) percent of the total number of parking spaces required, provided the landscaping is arranged such that parking may be installed at a later date if such a demand arises, and further provided, that the owner agrees to provide such parking at the city's request. 
(7)  Where the parking is provided in parking structures to satisfy the parking requirements of section 5.30, they shall be designed so all architectural and vehicular lighting is shielded or screened from view from adjacent properties. No lighting shall be so located or visible as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(8)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1126, 8-22-83; Ord. No. 1678 , § 7, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.114. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, "schedule of regulations," which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area, and provides for minimum yard setback requirements in the ERO-M and ERO districts. 
    The ERO-M district permits a height of four (4) stories or fifty-five (55) feet (16.775 meters) with provisions that the city council may, after a recommendation from the planning commission, permit a development in the ERO-M district not to exceed six (6) stories in height or seventy-five (75) feet (22.875 meters) subject to the following conditions and standards: 
(1)  The proposed use and height must be of such character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the education-research-office-limited district (ERO-M) and other development in the immediate area. 
(2)  The location, size, and intensity of any such proposed development must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(3)  The proposed development must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(4)  The proposed development is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(5)  The proposed development is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(6)  In approving an increase in height, the city council may attach reasonable conditions regarding the location, character, density, and other features of the proposed development as they may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the intent of this section. 
The ERO District permits unlimited height provided all setback, parking, and landscaping requirements are satisfied and may be used in those areas adjacent to high intensity uses. 
Parking structure locations shall be governed by: (a) the setbacks established in article 22, "schedule of regulations," and (b) proper traffic engineering as reviewed and approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1044-B, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 1678 , § 7, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.115. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the Education-Research-Office-Limited (ERO-M) and the Education-Research-Office (ERO) Districts. 
(b)  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character and the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Hotels. 
(Ord. No. 1222, 2-16-87) 
Secs. 5.116, 5.117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 11. - TECHNICAL-EDUCATION-RESEARCH DISTRICTS (TR) 

Sec. 5.118. - Uses permitted. 
    In all Technical-Education-Research Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  Any uses which are charged with the principal function of education, research, or technical training and accessory uses and which further meet the following performance standards set forth in section 5.119 relevant to smoke, dirt, and dust; noise, glare and heat; wastes, odors, noxious gases, fire hazards and electromagnetic radiation. 
(2)  Dormitories for students enrolled in, and quarters for instructors employed by, institutions offering technical education, when incidental to any permitted principal use. 
Sec. 5.119. - Performance standards. 
    No use, otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any Technical-Education-Research District (TR District) which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within the said area. 
(1)  Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as No. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart; provided, that the following exceptions shall be permitted: Smoke, the shade of appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than, No. 2 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods, aggregating four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes. 
Method of measurement: For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the Umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with Ringlemann's Chart. 
(2)  Dust, dirt and fly ash. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating, while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gas or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gas or airborne solids shall not exceed two-tenths (0.20) grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Method of Measurement: For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed fifty (50) percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code for dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust and dirt shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The director of the department of building and safety engineering may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust and dirt have been made. 
(3)  Noise. The intensity level of the sounds being emitted from any operation within the TR District shall not exceed the following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of use districts: 
Sound Levels in Decibels Adjacent Use Where Measured 50 All Residential Districts Common Property Line 55 Neighborhood Business District Common Property Line 60 General Business District Common Property Line 65 Light Industrial District Common Property Line 75 Heavy Industrial District Common Property Line 75 Major Street At Street Line 60 Secondary Residential Street (Residential Opposite) At Street Line  
Objectionable noises, due to intermittence, heat frequency or shrillness shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
Method of Measurement: The sound level, in decibels, measured at the points adjacent to the various use districts shall meet the established levels ninety (90) percent of the time, and shall at no time exceed the established sound levels by more than ten (10) percent; the sound levels shall be measured with an approved standard sound-level meter incorporating a 40-db. frequency-weighing network, or by any method subsequently approved by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. 
(4)  Glare and heat. Such operations producing an intensity of light and heat (e.g. welding operations and acetylene torch cutting) which would prove detrimental to any person or to the public, or to endanger the health, comfort or safety of any such person or to the public, shall be performed within a completely enclosed building or behind a fence so as to completely obscure said operation from view from any point beyond the property line, except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied. 
(5)  Sewage wastes. Privately developed and installed sewage treatment systems shall meet the requirements of, and be given approval by, the county board of health. The city shall not issue a building permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure until the plans for said sewage treatment have been given final approval by the county board of health. 
Wherever public sewer systems are involved, any person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process which will meet the following requirements: 
(a)  No wastes shall be discharged into the public sewer system which are dangerous to the public health and safety or create obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest. 
(b)  Acidity and alkalinity shall be neutralized to a pH of 7.5 as a daily average in a volumetric basis, with a maximum temporary variation of pH 5.0 to 10.0. The term pH refers to the degrees of alkalinity or acidity of wastes. 
(c)  Wastes shall contain not more than ten (10.0) p.p.m. (parts per million) of the following gases: Hydrogen, Sulfide, Sulphur Dioxide, Oxides of Nitrogen, and any of the Halogens. Wastes shall contain no cyanides. 
(d)  Wastes shall not contain any grease or oil or any oily substance in excess of one hundred (100) p.p.m. (parts per million), or exceed a daily average of twenty-five (25) p.p.m.; or that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(e)  Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substances in excess of ten thousand (10,000) p.p.m. (parts per million) or exceed a daily average of five hundred (500) p.p.m. (parts per million) or fail to pass a No. 8 (U.S. Bureau of Standards) sieve, or have a dimension greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters). 
(f)  Wastes shall not have a chlorine demand greater than fifteen (15) p.p.m. (parts per million). 
(g)  Wastes shall not contain phenols in excess of .005 p.p.m. (parts per million). 
(h)  Wastes shall not contain insoluble substances having specific gravity greater than 2.65. 
(i)  Wastes shall not have any chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with materials of construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures. 
Method of measurement. All the preceding standards and requirements of this subsection are to apply at the point where wastes are discharged into a public sewer or drainage way. Furthermore, all chemical and/or mechanical corrective treatment must be accomplished to practical completion before this point is reached. 
(6)  Odor. The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall be unlawful. 
Method of measurement. For the purpose of defining an odor, as such, it is hereby established that at such point where the measurement of the threshold of smell can be achieved, it shall be considered a noxious concentration and shall not be exceeded. These measurements will show the minimum concentration at which the first sensation of odor is had and shall be made in ounces of the substance per thousand cubic feet of air (e.g. Max. for ethyl selano mercaptan shall be eighteen-millionths of an ounce per one thousand (1,000) cu. ft. of air). 
(7)  Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive in character shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(8)  Electromagnetic radiation The following standards shall apply with respect to all Technical-Education-Research Districts: 
(a)  General. It shall be unlawful within any TR District for any person, firm or corporation to operate or cause to be operated any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission's regulations if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors or quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious reradiation conducted energy in power or telephone systems or harmonic content. 
The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Radio Manufacturers Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall apply: (1) American Institute of Electrical Engineers; (2) Institute of Radio Engineers; and (3) Radio Manufacturers Association. Recognizing the special nature of many of the operations which will be conducted because of the research and education activities, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or cause to be operated, to maintain or cause to be maintained, any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic energy the radiated power from which exceeds one thousand (1,000) watts, without the express approval of the city zoning and planning commission. 
(b)  Electromagnetic interference. For the purpose of these regulations, electromagnetic interference shall be defined as electromagnetic disturbances which are generated by the use of electrical equipment other than planned and intentional sources of electromagnetic energy which interfere with the proper operation of electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design. 
It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly operate or to knowingly cause to be operated any source of electromagnetic interference, the radiation or transmission from which exceeds the minimum values tabulated below: 
RADIATED Section of Electromagnetic Spectrum (from-to) Primary Intended Service Maximum Field Strength at Edge of Property Containing Interference Source 10 Kc.-100 Kc. Communications Services 500 Microvolts/Meter 100 Kc.-535 Kc. Navigational Aids 300 Microvolts/Meter 535 Kc.-1605 Kc. AM Broadcasting 200 Microvolts/Meter 1605 Kc.-44 Mc. Various 200 Microvolts/Meter COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 44 Mc.-88 Mc. VHF Television 150 Microvolts/Meter 88 Mc.-174 Mc. FM Broadcasting 200 Microvolts/Meter 174 Mc.-216 Mc. VHF Television 150 Microvolts/Meter 216 Mc.-580 Mc. Navigational Aids 250 Microvolts/Meter 580 Mc.-920 Mc. UHF Television 300 Microvolts/Meter 920 Mc.-30,000 Mc. Various 2,000 Microvolts/Meter  
  
BY TRANSMISSION OR CONDUCTION Section of Electromagnetic Spectrum (from-to) Primary Intended Service Maximum Voltage measured line to line or line to ground where power or telephone lines cross edge of property Containing Interference Source 10 Kc.-100 Kc. Communications Services 2.5 Millivolts 100 Kc.-535 Kc. Navigational Aids 1.5 Millivolts 535 Kc.-1605 Kc. AM Broadcasting 1.0 Millivolts 1605 Kc.-44 Mc. Various 0.5 Millivolts COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 44 Mc.-88 Mc. VHF Television 0.25 Millivolts 88 Mc.-174 Mc. FM Broadcasting 
Airport Control 1.5 Millivolts 174 Mc.-216 Mc. VHF Television 0.5 Millivolts 216 Mc.-580 Mc. Navigational Aids 
Citizens Radio 20.0 Millivolts 580 Mc.-920 Mc. UHF Television 50.0 Millivolts 920 Mc.-30,000 Mc. Various 60,000 Millivolts  
Method of measurement: For purposes of determining the level of radiated electromagnetic interference, standard field strength measuring techniques shall be employed. The maximum value of the tabulation shall be considered as having been exceeded if at any frequency in the section of the spectrum being measured and measured field strength exceeds the maximum value tabulated for this spectrum section. 
For purposes of determining the level of electromagnetic interference transmitted or conducted by power, or telephone lines, a suitable, tunable, peak reading, radio frequency voltmeter shall be used. This instrument shall, by means of appropriate isolation coupling, be alternately connected from line to line and from line to ground during the measurement. The maximum value of the tabulation shall be considered as having been exceeded if at any frequency in the section of the spectrum being measured and the measured peak voltage exceeds the maximum value tabulated for this spectrum section. 
Sec. 5.120. - Violations of performance standards. 
    In every TR District, any use of any facility or equipment, which results in a violation of the aforestated performance standards, shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a violation of this chapter and a nuisance and the same may be prosecuted under the penal provisions hereof, or abated by any proper legal means upon application of the city or any affected private person; provided, however, that in the event of any violation of the performance standards above set forth with respect to electromagnetic radiation or interference, no legal action shall be taken by the city to penalize the offender or to abate the nuisance unless the owner or operator of the offending facilities shall fail to correct the faulty conditions and conform to the stated performance standards within fifteen (15) days after the service of notice of such improper radiation or interference upon the owner or operator of such facilities. 
    For the purpose of determining the existence of a violation of the performance standards with respect to electromagnetic radiation or interference, the measurement of the intensity thereof may be made either at the borders of the premises upon which the offending facility is located or at any point outside the borders of such premises. 
Sec. 5.121. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    In every Technical-Education-Research District, the following accessory uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection with the principal use. 
(2)  Other accessory uses and structures not otherwise prohibited, customarily incidental to any principal use. 
Sec. 5.122. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 12. - TELEVISION-RADIO-OFFICE-STUDIO DISTRICTS (TV-R) 

Sec. 5.124. - Uses permitted. 
    In all Television-Radio-Office-Studio Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Radio and television transmitter towers. 
(2)  Transmitters. 
(3)  Office buildings and broadcasting studios of radio and television stations not to exceed two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet (9.15 meters) in height. 
(4)  Uses directly related to or in conjunction with any of the above permitted uses. 
(5)  Off-street parking serving such facilities. 
The above uses shall be permitted upon review and approval of the city council based upon a finding that all the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces and any service roads, driveways and parking areas, are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 1149, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 1267, 3-2-89; Ord. No. 1360, 7-6-93) 
ARTICLE 13. - NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT (NS) 

Sec. 5.125. - Intent. 
    The Neighborhood Shopping District (NS) is designed to service the needs of the local residential community as well as provide shopping opportunities for convenience or comparison shoppers. The district is generally characterized by a concentration of uses sharing common parking. The district will generally be located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.126. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in a Neighborhood Shopping (NS) District unless a site plan therefore has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission, but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways, and parking areas are so located as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare and that a proper relationship exists between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(3)  The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.127. - Uses permitted. 
    In all Neighborhood Shopping Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises such as, but not limited to, groceries, baked goods or other food, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions and hardware. 
(2)  Medical offices and clinics. 
(3)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(4)  Government office buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards. 
(5)  Administrative and professional offices. 
(6)  Restaurants and carryout restaurants when attached to, and located within, a shopping center building complex. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center will consist of not less than three (3) attached uses sharing a common parking area. 
(7)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(8)  Veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals provided all activities are conducted within a permanently enclosed building. 
(9)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as beauty parlors, barber shops, nail salons, tanning salons, repair shops (including watches, radio, television, shoe, and etc., but prohibiting major repair shops such as automotive, heavy equipment, large appliances, furniture and etc.), tailor shops, dry cleaning and laundry establishments provided cleaning equipment is used to service only the premises at which it is located. 
(10)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, but excluding drive-in and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.128. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following use (uses) may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use, or uses, may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
1.  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the Neighborhood Shopping District (NS). 
2.  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
3.  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
4.  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect or be detrimental to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
5.  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
6.  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
7.  The proposed use, or change in use, must be designed and operated so as to provide security and safety to the employees and the general public. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Freestanding restaurants and carry-out restaurants. 
(b)  Additional commercial uses, related to and reasonably necessary or convenient for, the satisfactory and efficient operation of a complete and integrated neighborhood shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.129. - Required conditions. 
(1)  The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(2)  Whenever a project is developed under the NS, Neighborhood Shopping District, a landscape plan by a registered landscape architect shall be submitted to and reviewed and approved by the city planner or his designated representative. The landscape plan shall be developed in accordance with the city general landscape standards and shall contribute significantly to the overall appeal of the site. The integration of the landscaping plan with stormwater management for the site, and use of vegetated stormwater control measures, are encouraged. Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(3)  Storm water management for the site shall be designed in accordance with the city storm water management requirements, as applicable, and the stormwater management plan for the site. 
(4)  An underground sprinkler system shall be required for all landscape areas, including rights-of-way. 
(5)  The owner/developer shall execute a perpetual maintenance agreement for landscaping and parking areas for the entire site. 
(6)  The owner/developer shall implement the recommendations of the city police department's crime prevention bureau. 
(7)  The owner/developer shall participate in a special assessment district (SAD) for street lighting along any public right-of-way abutting the development. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 2-16-03; Ord. No. 1678 , § 8, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.130. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
ARTICLE 14. - REGIONAL SHOPPING DISTRICT (RS) 

Sec. 5.131. - Intent. 
    The Regional Shopping District (RS) is designed to provide for a large concentration of comparison shopping, office, and service needs for persons residing in a densely settled suburban area. This district will allow for an intense use of land to service regional needs and will be located adjacent to high volume major thoroughfares. 
Sec. 5.132. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in a Regional Shopping (RS) Center District unless a site plan therefore has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission, but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways, and parking areas, are so located as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare and that a proper relationship exists between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(3)  The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.133. - Uses permitted. 
    In regional shopping districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to, groceries, baked goods or other food, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions and hardware. 
(2)  Medical offices and clinics. 
(3)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(4)  Government office buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards. 
(5)  Administrative and professional offices. 
(6)  Day care center, nursery school, with a permanently secured outside play area. 
(7)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(8)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as: beauty parlors, barber shops, nail salons, tanning salons, repair shops (including watches, radios, television, shoe, etc.), health and fitness clubs, tailor shops, cleaners, dry cleaning and laundry establishments provided cleaning equipment is used to service only the premises at which it is located. 
(9)  Assembly halls, concert halls, banquet halls or similar places of assembly, when conducted within enclosed buildings. 
(10)  Open-air retail sales of plant materials and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies provided that: 
(a)  The open-air sales area is enclosed with a fence. 
(b)  That such sales area is in conjunction with indoor sales of the same general type. 
(c)  That the square footage of the open sales area is no greater than the indoor sales area. 
(11)  Hotels. 
(12)  Restaurants, including bar/lounge, fast food and carry out restaurants, when attached to and located within a shopping center building complex. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center will consist of not less than three (3) attached uses sharing a common parking area. 
(13)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, but excluding drive-in restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 2-16-03) 
Sec. 5.134. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the regional shopping district. 
(b)  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character, and the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect on, or be detrimental to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, must be designed and operated so as to provide security and safety to the employees and the general public. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Recreation centers, similar to bowling alleys, skating rinks, archery ranges, dance studios, amusement areas, arcades with a minimum of one hundred (100) gross square feet (9.3 square meters) of floor area per machine and if located within a building or structure containing other uses, the amusement arcade shall be separated and segregated from such other uses, by the means of approved walls, rails, fences or similar approved means as to specifically delineate the area in which said machines are to be located, the minimum square footage of floor area per machine being measured thereby, and similar forms of commercial recreation or amusement when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(b)  Automobile and truck agency sales and showrooms subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The automobile and truck sales agency must be located on a site having a frontage of not less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet (45.75 meters) on a major thoroughfare and an area of not less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares). 
2.  Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the intersection formed by the existing or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
3.  Major repair and major refinishing shops will be permitted as accessory when located not less than two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) from residentially zoned property and conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
4.  No outside display of discarded or salvaged materials, junk vehicles or junk parts shall be permitted on the premises. 
5.  The outside display of new and used automobiles and trucks shall be permitted, but the outside storage of vehicles shall be limited to new vehicles, and such storage area shall occupy no more than thirty-five (35) percent of a lot, which is used for new vehicle sales. 
6.  A fifteen (15) foot (4.575 meters) landscaped setback shall be provided between any existing or proposed right-of-way line, whichever is greater, and any outdoor display of new or used automobiles. 
7.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and the use of open or base bulbs shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Automobile repair and service facilities subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Minor repair and service of automobiles are permitted with prohibited activities including, but not limited to, automobile, truck and trailer renting and leasing, motor vehicle body repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, engine and transmission rebuilding, motor vehicle dismantling, upholstery work, and other such activities whose adverse external physical effects would extend beyond the property line. 
2.  All activities shall be conducted in an enclosed building. 
3.  All buildings shall be set back not less than forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) from all existing or proposed street right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
4.  No storage nor display of any kind shall be allowed within the street right-of-way. All display shall be so located as not to obstruct view of vehicles. 
5.  There shall be no outside storage or display of any kind except for the display of new merchandise related to the primary use of the facility and for retail sale during the hours of operation of the facility. 
6.  There shall be no parking of damaged motor vehicles except on a temporary basis not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. Junk parts and junk vehicles shall not be kept on the outside of the building. 
7.  Parking shall be provided per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
8.  The parking of tow trucks shall be permitted only in designated areas and shall not be permitted in the corner clearance areas. 
(d)  Freestanding restaurants, including bar/lounge and carry out restaurants. 
(e)  Drive-in and free standing fast food restaurants, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A setback of at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
2.  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the intersection of any two (2) streets and shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
3.  There shall be provided a landscaped area (which may include fencing or walls) of not less than twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in width (except for points of ingress and egress) on all sides of the premises. The landscaped area shall be designed in such a manner that the combination of plant materials, fencing or walls, and site topography will provide an effective visual buffer from the impacts of lighting and traffic at the site. 
4.  Parking requirements: per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
5.  When a building or portion of building is used for said purposes, it must be located not less than five hundred (500) feet (152.5 meters) from residentially zoned property. 
(f)  Full-time or continuing retail sales operations specializing in primarily handcrafted, used merchandise and antiques which are displayed on portable tables in undivided open areas or in booth or stall-like enclosures using arcade as a common entrance and being separated from each other by portable partitions. Said retail sales operations shall include, but shall not be limited to, so-called farmers' markets, flea markets, trading posts and the like. 
(g)  Multiple family residential when located within a building containing other uses allowed within the regional shopping district and further, provided that: 
1.  All dwelling units shall consist of at least a living room, bedroom, kitchen and private bath and toilet, and each unit shall contain not less than seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet (69.75 square meters) for a one (1) bedroom unit and eleven hundred and twenty-five (1,125) square feet (104.625 square meters) for a two (2) bedroom unit. 
2.  Off-street parking requirements provided per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
(h)  Motels. 
(i)  Theaters. 
(j)  Additional commercial uses, related to and reasonably necessary or convenient for, the satisfactory and efficient operation of a complete and integrated regional shopping center. 
(k)  Smoking lounges, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Must be approved by the State of Michigan Department of Community Health as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar and possess a valid exemption of the State of Michigan smoking prohibition of section 12603, Public Act 368 of 1978. Smoking lounges not possessing a valid state exemption as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar are not permitted. 
2.  Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
3.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet (1/2 mile) to any other smoking lounges. 
4.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
5.  Outdoor patios used for smoking cannot be any closer than twenty (20) feet from any other business entrance or outside dining area. 
6.  Smoking lounges shall provide adequate ventilation for the smoke in accordance with all requirements imposed by the building and fire departments. At a minimum, the ventilation system shall also assure that smoke from the smoking lounge is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building hosting the smoking lounge or into any other building or premises in the vicinity of the smoking lounge. 
7.  The interior of the smoking lounge shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernible to persons with normal visual acuity. 
8.  No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the smoking lounge from outside the premises during operating hours. Any proposed window tint shall be approved in advance by the police department. 
9.  The maximum occupancy level for a smoking lounge shall be established by the fire department. 
(l)  Shelters for the homeless, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The facility must be operated by a recognized human service agency (or religious institution), incorporated by the state and which is not for profit. 
2.  Resident manager and support services shall be provided. 
3.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand (2,000) feet to any other emergency shelter for the homeless or soup kitchen. 
4.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any school, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
5.  Must be located on a major thoroughfare. 
6.  Maximum occupancy is limited to thirty (30) persons. 
7.  Facilities jointly operated as an emergency shelter for the homeless and soup kitchen must also meet the requirements for soup kitchens. 
(m)  Soup kitchens, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The facility must be operated by a recognized human service agency (or religious institution), incorporated by the state and which is not for profit. 
2.  Must provide proof of license or approval by the county health department. 
3.  Seating shall be provided at one hundred (100) percent of meal service capacity. 
4.  Waiting area(s) shall be on the premise where the meal service is being provided. The owner/operator must ensure that persons receiving service do not block public access to sidewalks, rights-of-way and private property, and that emergency access points are clearly identified and maintained. Adequate space must be available to accommodate the expected number of persons who will be served meals. 
5.  All meals served shall be limited to a consecutive three-hour period within a 24-hour day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The hours should be posted and clearly visible to the public. This limitation does not apply to meals served to the residents and staff of a facility that is jointly operated as an emergency shelter for the homeless and a soup kitchen. 
6.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand (2,000) feet to any other soup kitchen or emergency shelter for the homeless. 
7.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any school, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
8.  Must be located on a major thoroughfare. 
9.  Maximum occupancy is limited to fifty (50) persons. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 2-16-03; Ord. No. 1619 , § 3, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1641 , § 4, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1654 , § 6, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1678 , § 9, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.135. - Uses prohibited. 
    No activity shall be carried on in a regional shopping district so as to be obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, waste or vibration. 
Sec. 5.136. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.137. - Parking requirements for regional shopping centers. 
    For those uses permitted within a regional shopping center, parking shall be provided per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1641 , § 4, 5-31-15) 
Sec. 5.138. - Required conditions. 
1.  Whenever a project is developed under the RS, Regional Shopping District, a landscape plan by a registered landscape architect shall be submitted to and reviewed and approved by the city planner or his designated representative. The landscape plan shall be developed in accordance with the city general landscape standards and shall contribute significantly to the overall appeal of the site. Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
2.  Storm water detention shall be designed in accordance with the city storm water management requirements and stormwater management plan for the site. 
3.  An underground sprinkler system shall be required for all landscape areas, including rights-of-way. 
4.  The owner/developer shall execute a perpetual maintenance agreement for landscaping and parking areas for the entire site. 
5.  The owner/developer shall implement the recommendations of the city police department's crime prevention bureau. 
6.  The owner/developer shall participate in a special assessment district (SAD) for street lighting along any public right-of-way abutting the development. 
(Ord. No. 1484, 2-16-03; Ord. No. 1678 , § 9, 7-6-17) 
ARTICLE 15. - REGIONAL CENTER DISTRICT (RC) 

Sec. 5.138-A. - Intent. 
    The Regional Center District is intended to provide for the combining of high rise office, high rise multiple-family, and hotels and motels in a planned development and to provide for the combining of secondary retail and service uses with high rise office and/or residential development. The district is also established in order that the public health, safety and general welfare will be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization and of growing demand for office and multiple-family residential facilities of all types and design. This district is also provided to encourage innovations and variety in type, design and arrangement of such uses. Because of the intensity of development permitted in the Regional Center Districts, they shall generally be used only abutting one (1) or more major thoroughfares. 
    Secondary retail business or service establishments as set forth below shall be permitted subject to the restrictions set forth in section 5.141, paragraph (4). Secondary uses are permitted to reduce the dependence of office and multiple-family occupants of the Regional Center District upon goods and services outside of the Regional Center District and to reduce traffic congestion in such areas of intensive development. 
    Because the arrangement of such diversified land uses in a Regional Center District may not be predetermined in detail, site plan approval of each development is an absolute necessity to assure a compatible arrangement of the varied land uses which are permitted to be mixed and their relationship to surrounding areas. Great emphasis will be placed upon the review of pedestrian and vehicular circulation facilities such as sidewalks, parking, interior streets, pavement widths and rights-of-way because of the anticipated high volumes of pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be generated. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 678 as amended through November 13, 2005, enacted provisions to be designated as § 5.137. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 5.137, and in order to maintain the numeric style of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5.138-A. 
Sec. 5.138-B. - Site plan review. 
    In an RC, Regional Center, District no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. No building, structure, or land shall be erected or used in an RC, Regional Center District unless the site plan therefor has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not act on the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within ninety (90) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including principal buildings and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas, are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety except that: access driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or freeway service drive is within a multiple-family district or any nonresidential district, or is developed with permanent uses which are other than single-family residences. 
The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
In order that the public health, safety, morals and general welfare be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization and of growing demand for housing; to provide for necessary office space; and to allow for commercial facilities located conveniently to the population of the housing and office space; to encourage innovations in residential, office and commercial development so that the growing demands of the population may be met by great variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings; in order to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services; to lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways; to provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of residential, office and commercial development to the particular site, it is necessary to review site plans on a master plan concept for the property indicating the staging of development and defining the location and acreages to be devoted to specific uses. 
The traffic engineer shall submit to the planning commission and city council a report regarding the improvements in the public rights-of-way which are necessary for the satisfactory operation of contiguous roadways based upon the submitted master plan. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 678 as amended through November 13, 2005, enacted provisions to be designated as § 5.138. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 5.138, and in order to maintain the numeric style of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5.138-B. 
Sec. 5.139. - Uses permitted. 
    In an RC, regional center district, no building, structure, or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Primary uses. 
(a)  Office uses. 
1.  Executive, administrative and professional offices. 
2.  Medical offices, including clinics and laboratories. 
3.  Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent and nursing homes. 
4.  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
5.  Libraries and government office buildings, public utility offices, and post offices. 
6.  Private clubs or lodges. 
7.  Public or private schools or colleges for general or vocational education. 
8.  Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
9.  Any uses which are charged with the principal function of education, research, design, and technical training and experimental product development when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(b)  Hotels. 
(c)  Multiple-family uses. 
1.  See article 22 - Schedule of regulations for density requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1105, 10-11-82; Ord. No. 1223, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 1284, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1322, 7-25-91; Ord. No. 1642 , § 3, 7-19-15) 
Sec. 5.140. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following use (uses) may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use, or uses, may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the regional center district (RC). 
(b)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(c)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(d)  Failure to begin construction within twelve (12) months of approval of the city council shall make the approval null and void unless an extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and the request is granted by the city council. 
(e)  In approving a special use, the city council may attach reasonable conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed use as they may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the intent of this section. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Housing for the elderly upon review and report from the Southfield Housing Commission concerning the suitability and appropriateness so as to not isolate the development either socially or physically from the balance of the community; in relation to accessibility to convenience services such as shopping, banking, health care, community facilities, and transportation. In addition, the housing commission shall review and report on the design of the project and the amenities of the project (such as, but not limited to, recreational, social and other support facilities) and further that: 
1.  All dwelling units shall consist of at least a living room, bedroom, kitchen, and private bath and toilet and each unit shall contain not less than five hundred twenty-five (525) square feet (48.825 square meters) for a one-bedroom unit and seven hundred (700) square feet (65.1 square meters) for a two-bedroom unit except that not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the units may be of an efficiency type of not less than four hundred twenty-five (425) square feet (39.525 square meters). The floor area shall be measured from the interior faces of all walls. This requirement of unit sizes for housing for the elderly has been established to reflect economy as well as efficiency recognizing the absence of children, the lack of need for large entertaining areas within units, and the provision of common areas located within the project. 
2.  Parking shall be established per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements assisted living/elderly. 
3.  The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following schedule: 
Stories Required Land Area Per Unit (Square Feet) Density DU/Acre (.4045 Hectares) 6 or more 800 (74.4 Sq. M.) 54.5 5 900 (83.7 Sq. M.) 48.4 4 1,000 (93.0 Sq. M.) 43.6 3 1,100 (102.3 Sq. M.) 39.6  
4.  The owner shall file with the Oakland County Register of Deeds a covenant, approved as to form by the city attorney, in which said owner shall covenant on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors and assigns not to use the property for any other use than housing for the elderly unless the use complies with all requirements of the zoning ordinance. Required compliance includes, but is not limited to, density, unit sizes, parking and setbacks. 
(b)  Theaters. 
(c)  Restaurants, excluding drive-in and fast food restaurants, when not located within a building which contains a primary use. 
(d)  Motels. 
(e)  Smoking lounges, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Must be approved by the State of Michigan Department of Community Health as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar and possess a valid exemption of the State of Michigan Smoking Prohibition of section 12603, Public Act 368 of 1978. Smoking lounges not possessing a valid state exemption as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar are not permitted. 
2.  Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
3.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet (1/2 mile) to any other smoking lounges. 
4.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
5.  Outdoor patios used for smoking cannot be any closer than twenty (20) feet from any other business entrance or outside dining area. 
6.  Smoking lounges shall provide adequate ventilation for the smoke in accordance with all requirements imposed by the building and fire departments. At a minimum, the ventilation system shall also assure that smoke from the smoking lounge is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building or premises in the vicinity of the smoking lounge. 
7.  The interior of the smoking lounge shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernable to persons with normal visual acuity. 
8.  No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the smoking lounge from outside the premises during operating hours. Any proposed window tint shall be approved in advance by the police department. 
9.  The maximum occupancy level for a smoking lounge shall be established by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1284, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1322, 7-25-91; Ord. No. 1435, 9-24-98; Ord. No. 1619 , § 4, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1641 , § 5, 5-31-15) 
Sec. 5.141. - Required conditions. 
(1)  An RC, Regional Center, project shall be developed with two (2) or more land uses with a minimum mixture per project as follows: 
(a)  Minimum percentage of usable area in a second primary use shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the total usable area, or 
(b)  Minimum percentage of usable area in a secondary use shall be not less than two and one-half (2-1/2) percent of the total usable area. 
(c)  A primary-primary mixture shall consist of primary uses of section 5.139, uses permitted, (1-a, 1-b, 1-c) and a second primary use of section 5.139, uses permitted, (1-a, 1-b, 1-c). 
(d)  A primary-secondary mixture shall consist of at least one (1) primary use of section 5.139, uses permitted, (1-a, 1-b, 1-c) and secondary uses of section 5.139, uses permitted, paragraph (2). 
(e)  This land use mixture requirement shall not be compulsory to parcels of land less than ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) in size and zoned regional center prior to the enactment of this chapter. This exception recognizes the limited capabilities of small sites as they relate to the intent of the regional center districts. 
(f)  The city council may, after receipt of a report and recommendation from the planning commission, permit variations from, or deletions of, any of the requirements of this paragraph upon a finding by the city council that: 
1.  The property immediately surrounding the development contains a mixture of uses which satisfy the intent of the district as set forth in section 5.137, or 
2.  The master plan of the development, as a whole, satisfies the intent of the district as set forth in section 5.137. 
(2)  Secondary retail business or service establishments as permitted in subsection (2), section 5.139, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of any building or structure and must be attached or connected to the principal building it is intended to serve, except when physically designed and oriented to serve more than one (1) building in a complex of buildings, the secondary uses may be permitted in a separate building. 
(3)  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the area of any required yard abutting a street shall be used for vehicular parking and driveways. Adjacent to any lot line abutting a street there shall be a continuous landscaped area not less than twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) wide except at points of approved vehicular access to the street. This parking and landscaping restriction is necessary to assure pedestrian and vehicular safety by separating the off-street parking area from the vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  In addition to the landscaping required above, not less than ten (10) percent of the site, exclusive of buildings and the required yards abutting a street, shall be landscaped. No landscaped area having a width of less than five (5) feet (1.525 meters) shall be considered in the ten (10) percent minimum landscaping requirement. This requirement is necessary to provide for the safety and welfare of pedestrians in large areas and to provide for effective traffic control regulations by the development of curbed and landscaped islands at the end of parking bays and divider islands between parking bays. Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(5)  Parking requirements: 
(a)  The off-street parking requirements for a building where the greatest percentage of usable floor area is devoted to an office use shall be determined by applying a parking requirement of one (1) parking space per one hundred and twenty-five (125) square feet (11.625 square meters) for ten (10) percent of the total usable floor area of the office use in the building and by adding to this figure the parking requirements of section 5.30 for the remaining primary uses in the building. 
(b)  The off-street parking requirements for buildings where the greatest percentage of usable floor area is devoted to multiple family use or hotels/motels shall be determined by applying a parking requirement of four (4) parking spaces per dwelling unit or hotel/motel unit for ten (10) percent of said units in the building and by adding this figure to the parking requirements of section 5.30 for the remaining primary uses in the building. 
(c)  In addition to required landscaping, landscaping may be provided in lieu of ten (10) percent of the total number of parking spaces required, provided the landscaping is arranged such that parking may be installed at a later date if such a demand arises, and further provided, that the owner agrees to provide such parking at the city's request. 
(6)  Parking structures shall be designed so all architectural and vehicular lighting is shielded or screened from view from adjacent properties. No lighting shall be so located or visible as to be a hazard to traffic safety. Parking structure locations shall be governed by: 
(a)  The setbacks established in article 22, "schedule of regulations;" and 
(b)  Proper traffic engineering as reviewed and approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(7)  The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(8)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material in quantity greater than normally incidental to the above permitted uses shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 10, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.142. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the minimum development area and provides minimum yard setback requirements. 
Secs. 5.143-5.146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 16. - NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-1) 

Sec. 5.147. - Intent. 
    The Neighborhood Business District (B-1) is designed to provide for the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. The district will generally be used as a transitional district between more intensive uses of land such as major thoroughfares and other business districts and less intensive uses of land such as office and residential. It will normally be located only on property which fronts on a major or secondary thoroughfare. 
Sec. 5.148. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure, or land shall be erected or used in a B-1, Neighborhood Business District unless a site plan therefore has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways, and parking areas are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except that: access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive is within a multiple-family district or any nonresidential district, or is developed with permanent uses which are other than single-family residences. This exception shall apply only to property having frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and shall apply only upon a finding that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety. 
The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1047, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.149. - Uses permitted. 
    In a Neighborhood Business District (B-1) no building, structure, or land shall be erected or used except for the following uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Medical offices and clinics. 
(2)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(3)  Libraries and government office buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards. 
(4)  Private clubs or lodges. 
(5)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(6)  Veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals provided all activities are conducted within a permanently enclosed building. 
(7)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as; beauty parlors, barber shops, repair shops (including watches, radio, television, shoe, and etc., but prohibiting major repair shops such as automotive, heavy equipment, large appliances, furniture and etc.), tailor shops, self-service laundries and cleaners, dry cleaning and laundry establishments provided cleaning equipment is used to service only the premises at which it is located. 
(8)  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions and hardware. 
(9)  Restaurants and carry out restaurants when attached to, and located within, a shopping center building complex. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center will consist of not less than four (4) attached uses sharing a common parking area. 
(10)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, but excluding drive-in and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1280, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1425, 9-24-98) 
Sec. 5.150. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the Neighborhood Business District. 
(b)  The location, size, intensity, and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Freestanding restaurants and carry out restaurants, excluding drive-in type and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1058, 6-8-81; Ord. No. 1280, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1425, 9-24-98) 
Sec. 5.151. - Required conditions. 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  The outdoor storage, display, or servicing of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material in quantity greater than normally incidental to the above permitted uses shall be prohibited. 
(4)  At least fifty (50) percent of any required front yard shall be landscaped. Along any side or rear lot line abutting a street, there shall be a continuous landscaped area with a minimum width equal to one-half (1/2) the width of the required yard. The landscaped strip need not be provided at points of approved vehicular access and may incorporate vegetated stormwater management measures. This landscaping requirement is necessary to maintain the transitional character of the area that this district is intended to preserve. 
(5)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 11, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.152. - Signs and lighting. 
(1)  Necessary directional or regulatory traffic signs which conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be permitted. 
(2)  No moving or flashing parts or lights or devices shall be permitted. All light sources shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No lighting fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(Ord. No. 1343, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.153. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area and provides minimum yard setback requirements. 
Sec. 5.154. - Provision for a one-year grace period for approved site plans. 
    This provision shall not apply to any land or building for which a site plan has been submitted to, and received by, the city or approved by the city, in accordance with the provisions of the former article 16, of chapter 45, as amended, on or before the effective date of this amendment. The above exceptions shall be permitted provided that a building permit is issued for construction in accordance with the approved site plan, or any approved revision thereof, within one (1) year of the effective date of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1047, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 17. - PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2) 

Sec. 5.156. - Intent. 
    The Planned Business District (B-2) is designed to service the needs of the convenience or comparison shopper. The district is generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. For this reason, this district will generally be located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares. 
Sec. 5.157. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure, or land shall be erected or used in a B-2, Planned Business District unless a site plan therefore has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within ninety (90) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways, and parking areas are so located as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exists between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except that: access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive is within a multiple-family district or any nonresidential district, or is developed with permanent uses which are other than single-family residences. This exception shall apply only to property having frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and shall apply only upon a finding that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety. 
The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
Sec. 5.158. - Uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 District, no building, land or premises shall be used and no building or structure erected except for one (1) or more of the following uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Medical offices and clinics. 
(2)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(3)  Libraries and government office buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards. 
(4)  Post offices. 
(5)  Private clubs or lodges. 
(6)  Nursery schools and day care centers. 
(7)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(8)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as: beauty parlors, barber shops, repair shops (including watches, radios, television, shoe, and etc., but prohibiting major repair shops such as: automotive, heavy equipment, large appliances, furniture, and etc.), tailor shops, self-service laundries and cleaners, dry cleaning and laundry establishments provided cleaning equipment is used to service only the premises at which it is located. 
(9)  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions, and hardware. 
(10)  Restaurants and carry out restaurants when attached to, and located within, a shopping center building complex. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center will consist of not less than four (4) attached uses sharing a common parking area. 
(11)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, but excluding restaurants, carry outs, drive-in, and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1281, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1426, 9-24-98) 
Sec. 5.159. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed: 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the Planned Business District. 
(b)  The location, size, intensity, and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
(b)  Open-air retail sales of plant material and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment, and garden supplies provided that: 
1.  The open-air sales area is enclosed with a fence. 
2.  That such sales area is in conjunction with indoor sales of the same general type. 
3.  That the square footage of the open sales area is no greater than the indoor sales area. 
(c)  Arcades with a minimum of one hundred (100) gross square feet (9.3 square meters) of floor area per machine and if located within a building or structure containing other uses, the amusement arcade shall be separated and segregated from such other uses by the means of approved walls, rails, fences, or similar approved means as to specifically delineate the area in which said machines are to be located, the minimum square footage of floor area per machine being measured thereby, bowling alley, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, indoor skating rink, and similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when the building or portion of building used for said purposes is located at least two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) from any residentially zoned property. 
(d)  Hotels and motels. 
(e)  Freestanding restaurants and carry out restaurants, but excluding drive-in and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1059, 8-8-81; Ord. No. 1103, 10-11-82; Ord. No. 1281, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1426, 9-24-98) 
Sec. 5.160. - Other uses. 
    The city council may permit additional uses after a recommendation from the planning commission when they are found to be: 
(1)  Related to, and reasonably necessary or convenient for, the satisfactory and efficient operation of a complete and integrated planned shopping center. 
(2)  Similar in character to one (1) or more of the above uses. 
Sec. 5.161. - Required conditions. 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  The outdoor storage, display, or servicing of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale, except as specifically provided above. 
(3)  Not less than five (5) percent of this site, exclusive of buildings, shall be landscaped. This requirement is necessary to provide for the safety and welfare of pedestrians in large parking areas and to provide for effective traffic control regulations. 
(4)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 12, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.162. - Signs and lighting. 
(1)  Necessary directional or regulatory traffic signs which conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be permitted. 
(2)  No moving or flashing parts or lights or devices shall be permitted. All light sources shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No lighting fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(Ord. No. 1344, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.163. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area, and provides minimum setback requirements. 
Sec. 5.164. - Provision for a one-year grace period for approved site plans. 
    This provision shall not apply to any land or building for which a site plan has been submitted to, and received by, the city or approved by the city, in accordance with the provisions of the former article 17 of chapter 45, as amended, on or before the effective date of this amendment. The above exceptions shall be permitted provided that a building permit is issued for construction in accordance with the approved site plan, or any approved revision thereof, within one (1) year of the effective date of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 999, 7-16-79) 
Sec. 5.165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 18. - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-3) 

Sec. 5.166. - Intent. 
    The General Business District (B-3) is designed to provide sites for diversified business types and is often located so as to serve passerby traffic. These uses are generally characterized by generating large volumes of vehicular traffic. This district is intended to prohibit establishments which require outdoor storage of goods and materials. The district will generally be used adjacent to high volume major thoroughfares. 
Sec. 5.167. - Site plan review. 
    No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in a B-3, General Business District unless a site plan therefore has been approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve the site plan until it receives a recommendation in connection with the site plan from the planning commission, but the council may act on the site plan if a recommendation is not received from the planning commission within thirty (30) days after it has been requested by the council. The city council shall not approve the site plan unless it shall find as follows: 
(1)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways, and parking areas are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  The site plan does show that access is provided only to a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and that a proper relationship exits between the major or secondary thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, except that: access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive is within a multiple-family district or any nonresidential district, or is developed with permanent uses which are other than single-family residences. This exception shall apply only to property having frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare or freeway service drive and shall apply only upon a finding that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety. 
The site plan shall not be approved unless all interior and abutting streets have sufficiently improved rights-of-way to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses permitted in the district or unless adequate provision is made at the time of the approval of the site plan for such sufficiently improved rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1048, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.168. - Uses permitted. 
    In a General Business District (B-3), no building, structure or land shall be erected or used except for the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Medical offices, including clinics, and medical laboratories. 
(2)  Banks and similar financial institutions. 
(3)  Post offices. 
(4)  Private clubs or lodges. 
(5)  Nursery schools. 
(6)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios. 
(7)  Photographic reproduction, blueprinting and print shop. 
(8)  Funeral homes. 
(9)  Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as: beauty parlors, barber shops, repair shops (including watches, radios, television, shoe, etc., but prohibiting major repair shops such as automotive, heavy equipment, etc.), tailor shops, self-service laundries and cleaners, dry cleaning and laundry establishments provided cleaning equipment is used to service only the premises at which it is located. 
(10)  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions and hardware. 
(11)  Veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals provided all activities are conducted within a permanently enclosed building. 
(12)  Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, including electric transformer stations, and substations and gas regulator stations excluding storage yards, water and sewer pumping stations. 
(13)  Establishments of electricians, plumbers, heating contractors, bakers, painters, or similar trades in conjunction with a retail sales operation. 
(14)  Assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly, but excluding theaters and when conducted within enclosed buildings. 
(15)  Open-air retail sales of plant materials and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies provided that: 
(a)  The open-air sales area is enclosed with a fence. 
(b)  That such sales area is in conjunction with indoor sales of the same general type. 
(c)  That the square footage of the open sales area is no greater than the indoor sales area. 
(16)  Hotels. 
(17)  Restaurants, including bar/lounge and carry out restaurants, when attached to, and located within, a shopping center building complex. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center will consist of not less than four (4) attached uses sharing a common parking area. 
(18)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the above-permitted uses which are of the character of a personal or administrative service or a retail facility for a product on a "cash and carry" basis, but excluding restaurants, carry out restaurants, drive-in, and fast food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 1224, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 1279, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1282, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1426, 9-24-98) 
Sec. 5.169. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the general business district. 
(b)  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use may be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character and the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(g)  The proposed use, or change in use, must be designed and operated so as to provide security and safety to the employees and the general public. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  Recreation centers, similar to bowling alleys, skating rinks, archery ranges, dance studios, amusement areas, arcades with a minimum of one hundred (100) gross square feet (9.3 square meters) of floor area per machine and if located within a building or structure containing other uses, the amusement arcade shall be separated and segregated from such other uses by the means of approved walls, rails, fences or similar approved means as to specifically delineate the area in which said machines are to be located, the minimum square footage of floor area per machine being measured thereby, and similar forms of commercial recreation or amusement when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(b)  Motor vehicle washing, conveyor or non-conveyor type, when completely enclosed in a building excepting points of ingress and egress and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All cleaning operations shall be completely enclosed within a building. 
(2)  A hard-surfaced driveway of one (1) or more lanes shall be constructed on the parcel in such a manner as to provide for a continuous movement of cars into the wash rack. 
(3)  The driveway as provided shall be not less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) wide for a single lane and not less than ten (10) additional feet (3.05 meters) in width for each additional lane. 
(4)  Where only a single lane is provided, it shall be used for no other purpose than to provide access to the wash rack. All lanes provided shall be suitable protected from interference by other traffic. 
(5)  The total length of the required lane or lanes so provided for a conveyor type wash rack shall be determined by the overall length of the building, including areas having side walls but not roof. In any building where the washing operation moves in other than a straight line, the length of the building, for the purposes of this section, shall be the distance measured along the centerline of the conveyor or wash line from the point of entry to the point of exit from the building. The overall length of the required lane or lanes, as measured along the centerline, shall be determined in accordance with the following formula: 
Where the building is eighty (80) feet (24.4 meters) or less in overall length, the total required lanes shall be not less than four hundred (400) feet (122 meters) in length. Where the building exceeds eighty (80) feet (24.4 meters) in length, the length of the required lane or lanes shall be increased fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) for each ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) or fraction thereof by which the building exceeds eighty (80) feet (24.4 meters) in overall length. 
(6)  For a non-conveyor type auto wash, five (5) waiting spaces for each twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) in length, shall be provided for each washing stall on the entrance side of the stall and two (2) spaces per stall shall be provided on the exit side for a drying area. 
(7)  The site shall be designed in such a manner that no operations are conducted off the parcel. 
(8)  A building setback of at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) must be maintained from the proposed or existing street right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(9)  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the intersection formed by the existing or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater, and shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(10)  The site shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property. 
(11)  Gasoline sales shall be permitted on the property provided there is compliance with section 5.169, paragraph 2 (b-4) and 2 (c) of this chapter. 
(c)  Gasoline stations. Prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, the following: trailer renting and leasing, motor vehicle body repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, motor vehicle dismantling, upholstery work, and other such activities whose adverse external physical effects would extend beyond the property line. 
City council review and approval shall be for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the community. The city council shall approve the use only after finding that the use is so arranged that the gasoline station will not adversely affect the normal development or use of adjacent property and further, that the gasoline station will be constructed in accordance with the following development standards. 
(1)  One hundred and twenty (120) feet (36.6 meters) of street frontage on the lot proposed for the gasoline station shall be provided on the principal street serving the station. 
(2)  The lot shall contain not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet (1,116 square meters) in area. 
(3)  All buildings shall be set back not less than forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) from all existing or proposed street right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Gasoline pumps, air and water hose stands and other appurtenances shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) from all street right-of-way lines. 
(5)  Driveway widths entering the gasoline station shall have a maximum width of thirty-five (35) feet (10.675 meters). Curb openings for such driveways shall be in accordance with the city standard deceleration lane. 
(6)  Any driveway approach shall enter the property not less than twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) from the intersection formed by the existing or proposed right-of-way lines as set forth in the official thoroughfare plan, and not less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) from any adjoining property line. 
(7)  Curbs in accordance with standard city specifications shall be constructed on all streets adjacent to the gasoline station site. 
(8)  Lighting shall be shielded from residential property. 
(9)  No storage nor display of any kind shall be allowed within the street right-of-way. All display shall be so located as not to obstruct view of vehicles 
(10)  There shall be no outside storage or display of any kind except for the display of new merchandise related to the primary use of a gasoline station for retail sale during the hours of operation of the gasoline station. 
(11)  There shall be no parking of damaged motor vehicles except on a temporary basis for seventy-two (72) hours or less. Junk parts and junk vehicles shall not be kept on the outside of the building. 
(12)  Automobile leasing may be permitted in connection with a gasoline service or gasoline filling station upon the special approval of the city council and subject to the provisions that the number of automobiles on the site that are available for lease shall not exceed one (1) automobile for each one thousand (1,000) square feet (93 square meters) of lot area and shall not be located in areas that are required for parking, aisle ways, service bays, loading, landscaping or sidewalks. 
(13)  The landscape requirement for a gasoline station shall be not less than twelve and one-half (12.5) feet (3.81 meters) along a street frontage. The landscape strip need not be provided at points of approved vehicular access and may incorporate vegetated stormwater control measures. 
(14)  Parking shall be determined by applying the appropriate parking standards based on the category of gasoline station (either gasoline filling station or gasoline service station) according to section 5.30, off-street parking requirements, except for in the case of gasoline filling/service station with ancillary retail sales area, in which case, in addition to said requirement, additional parking shall be provided per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
(d)  Automobile repair and service facilities subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Minor repair and service of automobiles are permitted with prohibited activities including, but not limited to, truck and trailer renting and leasing, motor vehicle body repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, engine and transmission rebuilding, motor vehicle dismantling, upholstery work, and other such activities whose adverse external physical effects would extend beyond the property line. 
(2)  All activities shall be conducted in an enclosed building. 
(3)  All buildings shall be set back not less than forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) from all existing or proposed street right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
(4)  No storage nor display of any kind shall be allowed within the street right-of-way. All display shall be so located as not to obstruct view of vehicles. 
(5)  There shall be no outside storage or display of any kind except for the display of new merchandise to the primary use of the facility and for retail sale during the hours of operation of the facility. 
(6)  There shall be no parking of damaged motor vehicles except on a temporary basis not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. Junk parts and junk vehicles shall not be kept on the outside of the building. 
(7)  Parking shall be provided on the site at a ratio of one (1) parking space for each three thousand (3,000) square feet (279 square meters) of site area. 
(8)  Automobile leasing may be permitted subject to the provisions that the number of automobiles on the site that are available for lease shall not exceed one (1) automobile for each one thousand (1,000) square feet (93 square meters) of lot area and shall not be located in areas that are required for parking, aisle ways, service bays, loading, landscaping or sidewalks. 
(9)  The parking of tow trucks shall be permitted only in designated areas and shall not be permitted in the corner clearance areas. 
(e)  Automobile and truck agency sales and showrooms subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The automobile and truck sales agency must be located on a site having a frontage on a major thoroughfare of not less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet (45.75 meters) and an area of not less than two (2) acres (.81 hectares). 
2.  Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the intersection formed by the existing or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
3.  Major repair and major refinishing shops will be permitted as accessory when located not less than two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) from residentially zoned property and conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
4.  No outside storage of discarded or salvaged materials, junk vehicles or junk parts shall be permitted on the premises. 
5.  The outside display of new and used automobiles and trucks shall be permitted but the outside storage of vehicles shall be limited to new vehicles and such storage area shall occupy no more than thirty-five (35) percent of a lot which is used for new vehicle sales. 
6.  A fifteen (15) foot (4.575 meters) landscaped setback shall be provided between any existing or proposed right-of-way line, whichever is greater, and any outdoor display of new or used automobiles. 
7.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and the use of open or base bulbs shall be prohibited. 
8.  No outside loud speaker or outside public address system shall be used. 
(f)  Freestanding restaurants, including bar/lounge and carry out restaurants. 
(g)  Drive-in and fast food restaurants, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A setback of at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
2.  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the intersection of any two (2) streets and shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
3.  There shall be provided an unpierced face brick wall six (6) feet (1.83 meters) in height on all sides of the premises so used except as provided below; provided said wall or fence, if required, shall be protected by means of precast concrete wheel stops or their equivalent, not less than three (3) feet (.915 meters) from said wall. 
a.  On the side of the property adjacent to the major thoroughfare, the above described wall shall be reduced to a height of three (3) feet six (6) inches (1.0675 meters). 
b.  A cyclone fence may be used in lieu of a brick wall on those lot lines not adjacent to a street or alley but contiguous to property zoned in an I-L or I-1, Industrial classification 
c.  No wall shall be required on that portion of a lot line where there is a building or structure serving the purpose of a wall. Any such building or structure located on adjacent property shall be protected from damage by means of precast concrete wheel stops as specified in (3) above. 
4.  Parking requirements. Parking shall be provided per section 5.30, off-street parking requirements. 
5.  When a building or portion of building is used for said purposes, it must be located not less than five hundred (500) feet (152.5 meters) from residentially zoned property. 
(h)  Open-air display and sale of motor homes, camping trailers, vehicles other than trucks and automobiles, home owners gardening equipment and etc., provided there is no outside storage and further provided, that there shall be no display in areas that are required for parking, aisle ways, loading or sidewalks. 
(i)  Retail sales operations specializing in primarily handcrafted, used merchandise and antiques which are displayed on portable tables in undivided open areas or in booth or stall-like enclosures using an arcade as a common entrance and being separated from each other by portable partitions. Said retail sales operations shall include, but shall not be limited to, so-called farmers' markets, flea markets, trading posts and the like. 
(j)  Executive, administrative and professional offices. 
(k)  Motels. 
(l)  Theaters. 
(m)  Alternative financial services (AFS), subject to the following conditions pawn shops, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Cannot be located any nearer than one hundred five hundred (1,500) feet to any other alternative financial services establishment or pawn shops. 
2.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential zoning district, schools, religious institutions, parks, or childcare facilities. 
3.  Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
4.  Drive-thru transaction stations are prohibited. 
5.  The petitioner is to implement the recommendations made by the city police department's crime prevention bureau regarding site security. 
6.  Note: Other retail establishments where less than ten (10) percent of usable floor space is dedicated for AFS services are not subject to items 1-5 above. 
(n)  Pawn shops, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Cannot be located any nearer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any other pawn shops or alternative financial services establishment. 
2.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential zoning district, schools, religious institutions, parks, childcare facilities, firearm dealers or businesses selling alcohol. 
3.  Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
4.  Requires unobstructed view of the business from a public street, a security plan (window bars, chains, etc. are prohibited), and other approved operating and development standards. 
5.  At least thirty (30) percent of a first floor façade that faces a public street shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly tinted glass that allow views into the building at eye level. The business window shall not be obscured in any way, including by temporary or painted window signs. Neon signs are prohibited. The petitioner is to implement the recommendations made by the city police department's crime prevention bureau regarding site security. 
6.  All receipt, sorting or processing of goods shall occur within a completely enclosed building. 
7.  The building shall have lighting to provide illumination for security and safety of parking and access areas. 
(o)  Smoking lounges, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Must be approved by the State of Michigan Department of Community Health as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar and possess a valid exemption of the State of Michigan smoking prohibition of Section 12603, Public Act 368 of 1978. Smoking lounges not possessing a valid state exemption as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar are not permitted. 
2.  Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
3.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet (1/2 mile) to any other smoking lounges. 
4.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
5.  Outdoor patios used for smoking cannot be any closer than twenty (20) feet from any other business entrance or outside dining area. 
6.  Smoking lounges shall provide adequate ventilation for the smoke in accordance with all requirements imposed by the building and fire departments. At a minimum, the ventilation system shall also assure that smoke from the smoking lounge is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building hosting the smoking lounge or into any other building or premises in the vicinity of the smoking lounge. 
7.  The interior of the smoking lounge shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernible to persons with normal visual acuity. 
8.  No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the smoking lounge from outside the premises during operating hours. Any proposed window tint shall be approved in advance by the police department. 
9.  The maximum occupancy level for a smoking lounge shall be established by the fire department. 
(p)  Shelters for the homeless, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The facility must be operated by a recognized human service agency (or religious institution), incorporated by the state and which is not for profit. 
2.  Resident manager and support services shall be provided. 
3.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand (2,000) feet to any other emergency shelter for the homeless or soup kitchen. 
4.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any school, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
5.  Must be located on a major thoroughfare. 
6.  Maximum occupancy is limited to thirty (30) persons. 
7.  Facilities jointly operated as an emergency shelter for the homeless and soup kitchen must also meet the requirements for soup kitchens. 
(q)  Soup kitchens, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The facility must be operated by a recognized human service agency (or religious institution), incorporated by the state and which is not for profit. 
2.  Must provide proof of license or approval by the Oakland County Health Department. 
3.  Seating shall be provided at one hundred (100) percent of meal service capacity. 
4.  Waiting area(s) shall be on the premise where the meal service is being provided. The owner/operator must ensure that persons receiving service do not block public access to sidewalks, rights-of-way and private property, and that emergency access points are clearly identified and maintained. Adequate space must be available to accommodate the expected number of persons who will be served meals. 
5.  All meals served shall be limited to a consecutive three-hour period within a 24-hour day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The hours should be posted and clearly visible to the public. This limitation does not apply to meals served to the residents and staff of a facility that is jointly operated as an emergency shelter for the homeless and a soup kitchen. 
6.  Cannot be located any nearer than two thousand (2,000) feet to any other soup kitchen or emergency shelter for the homeless. 
7.  Cannot be located any nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any school, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
8.  Must be located on a major thoroughfare. 
9.  Maximum occupancy is limited to fifty (50) persons. 
(Ord. No. 1060, 6-8-81; Ord. No. 1104, 10-11-82; Ord. No. 1224, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 1279, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1282, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1345, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 1427, 9-24-98; Ord. No. 1501, 5-30-04; Ord. No. 1597 , § 1, 11-11-12; Ord. No. 1619 , § 5, 3-9-14; Ord. No. 1641 , § 6, 5-31-15; Ord. No. 1654 , § 7, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1678 , § 13, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.170. - Required conditions. 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale, except as specifically permitted by other provisions of this district. 
(4)  Parking of passenger vehicles not exceeding a net weight of three (3) tons (2.721 metric tons) and all parking shall be for periods of less than forty-eight (48) hours and in accordance with the provisions of article 4. This restriction shall not prohibit the display and storage of vehicles where permitted by other provisions of this district. 
(5)  At least fifty (50) percent of any required front yard shall be landscaped. The landscape strip need not be provided at points of approved vehicular access and may incorporate vegetated stormwater control measures. This landscaping requirement is necessary to maintain the transitional character of the area that this district is intended to preserve. 
(6)  Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1275, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1678 , § 13, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5.171. - Signs and lighting. 
(1)  Necessary directional or regulatory traffic signs which conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be permitted. 
(2)  All light sources shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No lighting fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(Ord. No. 1345, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.172. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    See article 22, schedule of regulations, which limits the height and bulk of buildings, determines the permitted development area, and provides minimum yard setback requirements. 
Sec. 5.173. - Provision for a one-year grace period for approved site plans. 
    This provision shall not apply to any land or building for which a site plan has been submitted to, and received by, the city or approved by the city, in accordance with the provisions of the former article 18 of chapter 45, as amended, on or before the effective date of this amendment. The above exceptions shall be permitted provided that a building permit is issued for construction in accordance with the approved site plan, or any approved revision thereof, within one (1) year of the effective date of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1048, 1-5-81) 
Sec. 5.174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 19. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (I-L) 

Sec. 5.175. - Intent. 
    The I-L, Light Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect, in a detrimental way, any of the surrounding districts. It is also the intent of this article to encourage the development of planned industrial parks characterized by structural uses located on landscaped sites, served by adequate off-street parking and loading areas, without unsightly outdoor storage. 
Sec. 5.176. - Uses permitted. 
    In all I-L, Light Industrial Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. The growing of any vegetation requisite to the conducting of basic research shall be excluded from the requirement of enclosure. 
(2)  Research and office uses related to permitted industrial operations. 
(3)  Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building: 
(a)  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
(b)  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as: cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and household supplies. 
(c)  The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile fenders or bodies), ferrous and nonferrous metals (excluding large castings and fabrications), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, (excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns. 
(d)  The manufacture of pottery and figures or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(e)  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps or other small molded rubber products (not including pneumatic tires). 
(f)  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
(g)  Laboratories - experimental, film or testing. 
(4)  Warehouse, storage and transfer uses and electric and gas service buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, provided that outside storage is not permitted for any of these uses. 
(5)  The parking of trucks and truck trailers incidental to any of the above permitted uses, not to exceed seven (7) continuous days. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, not including outdoor storage. 
(7)  Recreation centers, similar to bowling alleys, skating rinks, archery ranges, dance studios, amusement areas, inflatable play places, gymnasiums, court sports facilities and similar forms of commercial recreation or amusement when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 1549, § 1, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 1587 , § 2, 11-6-11) 
Sec. 5.176-A. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1549, adopted June 25, 2007, deleted § 5.176-A, which pertained to uses permitted subject to special approval and derived from Ord. No. 1524, adopted November 13, 2005. 
Sec. 5.177. - Uses prohibited. 
    Manufacturing development which creates unusual danger from fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards and which cause noxious, offensive, unhealthful and harmful odors, fumes, dust, smoke, light, waste, noise or vibration is prohibited. The processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial or commercial operation at another location, is prohibited. 
Sec. 5.178. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.179. - Uses permitted subject to special approval and licensing. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council after a recommendation from the planning commission. The use or uses shall only be approved when the following conditions have been satisfied and all licensing provisions in chapter 86 have been met. This section promotes and protects the public health, safety and welfare and mitigates potential deleterious impacts to surrounding properties and persons and conforms with the policies and requirements of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, P.A. 2008, Initiated Law 1 (MMMA), MCL 333.26421, et seq. (hereinafter "MMMA"), as amended. A use which purports to have engaged in the medical use of marihuana either prior to enactment of said act, or after enactment of said act but without being legally registered by the department, shall be deemed to not be a legally established use, and therefore not entitled to legal non-conforming status under the provisions of city ordinance and/or state law. The fundamental intent of this section is to facilitate a private and confidential qualified patient and primary caregiver relationship whereby the cultivation, distribution and use of marihuana is strictly for medical purposes. Accordingly, this section permits authorization for activity in compliance with the MMMA. Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing a person or persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow use, cultivation, growth, possession or control of marihuana not in strict accordance with the express authorizations of the MMMA and this section; and, nothing in this section shall be construed to undermine or provide immunity from federal law as it may be enforced by the federal or state government relative to the cultivation, distribution, or use of marihuana. 
(1)  Uses. 
(a)  A medical marihuana facility shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Any parcel within five hundred (500) feet of a residentially zoned district or "drug-free school zone"; any parcel within five hundred (500) feet of a parcel that contains a house, adult regulated use, school, church, child care facility or park; and any parcel within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any pawn shops or alternative financial services establishment, shall not qualify for a medical marihuana facility. 
2.  A State of Michigan Registry Identification Card and a valid license issued pursuant to chapter 86 of the Southfield City Code is required for all medical marihuana facilities operated by a primary caregiver. If the primary caregiver is not the owner of the premises, then consent must be obtained in writing from the property owner to ensure the owner's knowledge of the use. 
3.  Licenses issued pursuant to chapter 86, in addition to any state issued license, permit or certification shall be conspicuously posted on the premises. 
4.  Usable marihuana on site, when not actively distributed, shall be kept or stored within an indoor enclosed locked facility accessible only to caregivers and/or qualifying patients, as permitted under article II, definitions. 
5.  Marihuana, if cultivated on site, shall be kept within an indoor enclosed locked facility as defined in article II, definitions, of this chapter. 
6.  Consumption of marihuana on the premises is prohibited. 
7.  There shall be no outdoor, open use or display of marihuana upon the licensed premises. 
8.  A medical marihuana facility shall distribute marihuana for medical use only as authorized and in the manner permitted by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act P.A. 2008, as amended. 
9.  No more than five (5) qualified patients per primary caregiver. The amount of usable marihuana stored at the medical marihuana facility for each patient shall be limited to: two and one-half (2.5) ounces of usable marihuana (excludes seeds, stalks, and roots) and twelve (12) marihuana plants kept in an indoor enclosed locked facility as defined under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act P.A. 2008, as amended, and as noted by the licensing requirements of chapter 86. 
10.  The medical marihuana facility shall be subject to periodic and unannounced inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, state law and city ordinances. 
11.  Hours of operations permitted: Monday-Friday: 9:00 a.m.-9:00 p.m.; Saturday: 9:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m.; Sunday: 10:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. 
12.  Minimum distance from one (1) medical marihuana facility to another shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
13.  Drive-thru facilities shall be prohibited. 
14.  Security and lighting: A security and lighting plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the city planning and building departments. 
15.  A conspicuous sign(s) shall be posted stating that "No loitering is permitted" on such property. 
16.  Entry into the premises by persons under the age of eighteen (18) is prohibited unless they are a qualifying patient and accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
17.  The location from which a primary caregiver manufacturers, stores and distributes medical marihuana to a qualifying patient shall not be used by another primary caregiver for any purpose whatsoever. 
18.  Electrical, plumbing and all other inspections required by city ordinance, must be obtained and all necessary permits must be obtained confirming that all lights, plumbing, equipment and all other means proposed to be used to facilitate the growth or cultivation of marihuana plants is in conformance with all applicable codes; prior to the commencement of operation as a medical marihuana facility. 
19.  Caregiver activity shall not be advertised as, or permitted to operate as a "medical marihuana provisioning center", "safety compliance facility", "dispensary," "compassion club", "clinic" or "hospital." A qualified caregiver and any other person authorized under the MMMA to assist patients, if any, shall distribute medical marihuana only on a confidential, one-to-one basis, with no other caregivers being present at the approved facility, provided, however, that a qualified patient's immediate family members or guardian may be present. 
20.  Nothing is this section shall permit or be construed or interpreted to permit a medical marihuana dispensary, provisioning center, safety compliance facility, or compassion club, and those or similar activities or uses are expressly prohibited hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1637 , § 2, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 5.180. - Landscaping. 
    Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 14, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5.181, 5.182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 20. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (I-1) 

Sec. 5.183. - Uses permitted. 
(1)  Uses related to manufacturing. 
(2)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building, including medical research and alternative energy facilities. 
(3)  Film industry studios, recreation centers similar to bowling alleys, skating rinks, archery ranges, dance studios, amusement areas, inflatable play places, gymnasiums, court sports facilities and similar forms of commercial recreation or amusement when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building 
(4)  Information technology centers and general office related to an industrial or manufacturing operation. 
(5)  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as: cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and household supplies. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(7)  Restaurants without drive-thrus. 
(Ord. No. 1075, 12-7-81; Ord. No. 1664 , § 2, 9-8-16) 
Sec. 5.184. - Uses prohibited. 
    Any use not expressly permitted or permitted with special use approval is strictly prohibited within the (I-1) district, including medical marihuana facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1664 , § 2, 9-8-16) 
Sec. 5.185. - Uses permitted as a special land use. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the industrial (I-1) zone as a special land use after recommendation by the planning commission and after a public hearing by the city council which may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, the request for a special land use based upon the standards and requirements following. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the industrial districts (I-1). 
(b)  The location, size, intensity and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which must be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(c)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principals of sound planning. 
(d)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect, or be detrimental, to the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor or fumes. 
(f)  The proposed use, or change in use, will not be adverse to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  The following special land uses only shall be allowed on properties with frontage on Telegraph Road: 
1.  Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on the premises such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions and hardware. 
2.  Wholesale establishments. 
3.  Restaurants with drive-thrus. 
4.  General or professional office not related to an industrial or manufacturing operation. 
5.  Self-storage or warehousing use not related to an industrial or manufacturing operation. 
6.  New and used vehicle dealers (Class A: New vehicle dealer and Class B: Used vehicle dealer): 
a.  Banners, balloons, balloon structures, portable signs, streamers, flags, other than United States or State of Michigan designations, vehicles or persons displaying advertising signage as a means of advertising vehicles for sale on the property is strictly prohibited. 
7.  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments including plants. 
8.  Transportation service providers (emergency vehicle dispatch, taxi, limousine, private or charter buses). 
(b)  The following special land uses only shall be allowed on properties with at least 100-foot wide frontage on W. Eight Mile Road: 
1.  Contractor offices with or without ancillary showroom and storage use including landscape contractor's offices and yards. 
2.  Self-storage or warehousing use not related to an industrial or manufacturing operation. 
3.  Automotive repair, salvage facility, junk yard or junk storage 
4.  Any use which requires the following dealer license(s) from the State of Michigan: 
(a)  Class C: Used vehicle parts dealer. 
(b)  Class F: Vehicle scrap metal processor. 
(c)  Class G: Vehicle salvage pool. 
(d)  Class E: Distressed vehicle transporter. 
(e)  Class W: Wholesaler. 
5.  Crematorium. 
(a)  Crematorium buildings shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to any residential district measured from the closest point of the building to the nearest residential district boundary line. 
(b)  Bodies to be cremated shall not be stored or kept on the premises for a period exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(c)  Any building used as a crematorium shall provide an auxiliary means of electrical service in the event of a power failure. 
(d)  Any crematorium shall, at all times, be operated in full compliance with any and all applicable laws and regulations. 
6.  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments including plants. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Transportation service providers (emergency vehicle dispatch, taxi, limousine, private or charter buses). 
(a)  No motor vehicles shall run idle on the property between the hours of 10:30pm and 6:00am each day. 
9.  Motor freight depots, trucking terminals, or trucking dispatch centers. 
(a)  Access shall only be via a major thoroughfare as defined in article 2 definitions. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit credible evidence of the provisions to be made to minimize harmful or unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration and smoke). 
(c)  A minimum lot area of three (3) acres shall be provided. 
(d)  All buildings and parking facilities shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines. 
(e)  Outside storage shall be permitted in accordance with ordinance requirements. 
(f)  Any and all service work shall be performed within a completely enclosed building. 
(g)  Parking, screening and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(h)  The ground surface of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be paved with asphalt or concrete to protect the surrounding uses from inappropriate dust and other disturbances. 
(i)  No motor vehicles shall run idle on the property between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day. 
(j)  No trucks shall operate between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district boundary or residential property line. 
10.  Recycling centers and refuse haulers. 
(c)  The following special land uses shall be allowed on properties with frontage on either Telegraph Road or W. Eight Mile Road: 
1.  Oil and gas wells/oil and gas development. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The city council finds that Southfield is a community with significant environmentally sensitive areas that is largely residential, developed and suburban and is home to more than one thousand one hundred (1,100) acres of wetlands, twenty-nine (29) acres of ponds, seven (7) acres of lakes and sixteen thousand eight hundred eighteen (16,818) acres of watershed areas between the Rouge River Watershed and Clinton River Watershed; and contains unique natural features such as over two thousand three hundred eighty-five (2,385) acres of protected woodland, wildlife habitats, walking trails, paths, and other environmentally sensitive areas. 
(2)  The city has a longstanding tradition of protecting environmentally sensitive areas as exemplified by its wetland and watercourse protective ordinance enacted on January 31, 1991, and its woodland and tree preservation ordinance enacted on August 26, 1991, and the establishment and development of the Carpenter Lake Nature Preserve and the Valley Woods Wetland Restoration Project. Additionally, the city employs a well-trained staff charged with protecting and enhancing the natural environment by implementing active programs in woodland and wetland protection, environmental education and planning, soil erosion and sediment control, solid waste management, nuisance and blight abatement and eradication. 
(3)  Preservation of environmentally sensitive areas shall be and is necessary to maintain hydrologic, economic, recreational and aesthetic assets for existing and future residents of the city. 
(4)  The development of innovative methods of gas and oil exploration and extraction, has resulted in oil and gas development activities appearing in areas that traditionally have not been areas subject to oil and gas activities, such as densely populated, largely residential suburban cities in Michigan. 
(5)  Residents in cities across the nation and in Michigan have experienced the adverse secondary impacts of oil and gas activities where oil and gas development activities have occurred near or adjacent to residential uses. 
(6)  The adverse secondary impacts of gas and oil exploration and extraction experienced by residents living nearby or adjacent to oil and gas development activities include obnoxious odors and lights; excessive noise; air, soil and water contamination; contaminated drinking wells; excessive dust, traffic and debris; off pad soil erosion; local road deterioration; and wildlife habitat impacts; all adversely affecting the residential quality of life and natural resources of the city. 
(7)  Based on recent experiences in Michigan cities, it is recognized that state statutes and regulations do not adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of city residents, local natural resources and the community from the adverse impacts of oil and gas activities, thereby necessitating local regulation under the city's zoning authority and general police powers of oil and gas development activities and all secondary impacts. 
(8)  The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act authorizes and empowers a local unit of government to provide by zoning ordinance for the regulation of land development and the establishment of one (1) or more districts within its zoning jurisdiction which regulate the use of land and structures to meet the needs of the state's citizens for food, fiber, energy, and other natural resources, places of residences, recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land, to ensure that the use of land is situated in appropriate locations and relationships, and to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(9)  The Michigan Constitution and statutes authorize the city to adopt resolutions and ordinances relating to municipal concerns to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents; to regulate activities that cause nuisances; to regulate activities or industries that impede upon others' quality of life, property values, and health, safety and public welfare; and to protect and preserve natural resources of the community. 
(10)  Federal, state, and local laws impose a substantive duty on the city pursuant to its police powers and authority to prevent or minimize likely degradation of the air, water, and local natural resources held in the public trust. 
(11)  Convincing evidence of the adverse secondary impacts of oil and gas development activities have been presented to the city in public meetings, hearings, in articles, from experiences of neighboring communities, and studies, reports and court cases made available to the city. 
(12)  It is an established legal principal that a municipality may rely on studies, reports, and experiences and evidence generated by other communities of the adverse secondary impacts of certain establishments, so long as whatever evidence that the municipality relies upon is reasonably believed to be relevant to the problem that the municipality addresses. (Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41). 
(13)  The courts have recognized that an ordinance furthers a substantial government interest by regulating adverse secondary impacts of certain establishments. (City of L.A. v. Alameda Books, Inc.), 535 U.S. 425. 
(14)  Courts have further recognized that proper exercise of police power is to relegate industrial establishments to locations separated from residential sections. (Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Amber Realty Co.,) 272 U.S. 365 (1926). 
(15)  The reports, studies and evidence presented to the city support the finding that oil and gas exploration, extraction and development is an industrial activity that is associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary impacts including but not limited to the following: industrial operations that run twenty-four (24) hours a day; obnoxious night-time light emitted off site; obnoxious hydrocarbon odors and/or hydrogen sulfide bearing gases emitted off site; obnoxious industrial noise emitted off site; excessive vibrations emitted off site; dust emitted off site; scattered debris on site that does not meet site maintenance standards of the community; truck traffic impeding flow of traffic and endangering pedestrian and non-motorized travel within the community; excessive truck traffic resulting in accelerated damage to roads within the community; activities that disrupt wildlife and wildlife habitats; activities near public parks that impact the natural ecosystem and quiet enjoyment of nature paths, trails, and wildlife habitats; withdrawal of groundwater resulting in reducing the volume or amount of well water serving residential properties; withdrawal of groundwater resulting in impacts to the interconnected lakes, streams, ponds and wetlands within the community; contamination of groundwater, surface water and drinking water supplies; contamination of environmentally sensitive areas; off-site soil erosion that causes nutrient degradation, pollution, and wildlife habitat impacts; activities that impact the natural course and flow of storm water runoff; environmental consequences from the storage and disposal of wastewater on site; environmental consequences from the loading, unloading and off-site transport of waste and products; environmental consequences of wells and pipelines within, or in close proximity to protected wetlands, woodlands and environmentally sensitive areas within the city; and violations of provisions of the city's legally required master plan by forcing industrial conditions in residentially zoned areas. 
(b)  Purposes. As a result of the findings set forth herein and otherwise considered, the city council has determined that it is necessary to provide for the reasonable establishment of land for oil and gas development while providing adequate and appropriate health, safety, and welfare protection of Southfield residents. Accordingly, it is necessary and appropriate to adopt reasonable requirements for oil and gas development and the appropriate zoning district(s) within which oil and gas wells and oil and gas development activities are permitted so that these resources can be obtained in a manner than protects the environment, protects residential properties and residential property values, and mitigates associated negative impacts. This chpater is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to municipalities as set forth in article 7, section 7 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan, and the powers given to municipalities to protect the public health, safety and welfare through the Home Rule City Act, MCL 117.4; and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110, effective July 1, 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor the effect of prohibiting or controlling the drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes or to regulate the issuance of permits for the drilling, completion, operation or abandonment of oil or gas wells; and acknowledges the jurisdiction and authority of the supervisor of wells over the administration and enforcement of the Natural Resources Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, MCL 324.101 et seq, and matters relating to the prevention of waste and the conservation of oil and gas in this state. However, while the supervisor of wells has jurisdiction and control over persons and things necessary to enforce the NREPA and the prevention of waste and conservation of oil and gas, such grant of authority does not abrogate the power and authority of the city under the Michigan Constitution, the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and statutory authority to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to continue to regulate issues of local concern. 
(c)  Necessity. The city council declares that this section is essential to the health, safety, economic and general welfare of the people of the city, and to the furtherance of the policy set forth in article 7, section 7 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan, and through the powers given to municipalities to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Southfield through the Home Rule City Act, MCL 117.4i and Michigan's Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(d)  Definitions of terms. Terms not specifically defined in this section shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the meaning respectively given as follows: 
APPLICANT: An individual, firm, company, corporation or government authority created by statute that seeks special use approval for oil and gas development activities regulated by this chapter. 
CONTAMINATED LIQUID: Includes but is not limited to any water, waste water, liquid industrial waste, crude, oil/brine, chemical mixture with water or any other fluid or liquid which is deemed contaminated under applicable federal and/or state law. 
DERRICK: Any portable framework, tower mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil or gas. 
DRILLING PAD: The area of surface operations surrounding the surface location of a well or wells. Such area shall not include an access road to the drilling pad. 
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING OR FRACKING: A well completion operation that involves injecting water, customized fluids, sand, steam, or gas into a gas well under pressure to create or propagate artificial fractures for the purpose of improving the deliverability and production of hydrocarbons. 
HORIZONTAL DRILLING: The drilling of an oil or natural gas well at an angle so that the well runs parallel to the formation containing the oil or gas. 
IMMEDIATELY: Within one (1) hour of receipt of knowledge of a release or suspected release. 
OIL AND GAS: Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other products or similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil or gas well. 
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT OR OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES: The well site preparation, construction, drilling, redrilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used for such activities; and the installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and structures whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and activities associated with the exploration for, production and transportation of oil and gas. This definition does not include natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities performing the equivalent functions. 
OIL AND NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT: A facility designed and constructed to process crude oil and/or to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets but not including facilities or equipment that are designed and constructed primarily to remove water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from the natural gas. 
OIL OR GAS WELL: A pierced or bored hole drilled or being drilled in the ground for the purpose of, or to be used for, producing, extracting or injecting gas, oil, petroleum or another liquid related to oil or gas production or storage, including brine disposal. 
OIL OR GAS WELL SITE OR WELL SITE: The location of facilities, structures, materials and equipment (whether temporary or permanent), that are necessary for or incidental to the preparation, construction, drilling, production or operation of an oil or gas well, including required containment area. This definition also includes exploratory wells. 
OPERATOR: An individual, firm, company, corporation or government authority created by statute that conducts oil or gas development activities on a well site pursuant to special use approval by the city council. 
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION: A facility designed and constructed to compress natural gas that originates from a gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery of gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing plant or underground storage field, including one (1) or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment. 
STORAGE WELL: A well-used for and in connection with the underground storage of natural gas, including injection into or withdrawal from an underground storage reservoir for monitoring or observation of reservoir pressure. 
(e)  Required conditions for special use approval. In addition to the general standards set forth in section 5.185(1)(a) through (f) herein, special use approval for oil and gas wells and oil and gas development shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Spacing and setbacks. An oil or gas well and/or an oil and gas well site shall not be located closer than six hundred (600) feet of a residential dwelling or place of worship, school, hospital, child care center, or public park. This paragraph shall not be construed to restrict or prohibit underground horizontal drilling directional or horizontal drilling where lawfully permitted by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(2)  Height. The completed wellhead structure shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. The temporary drilling derrick/rig shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height. 
(3)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be based upon meeting required spacing and setbacks. 
(4)  Fencing, landscaping, lighting, access roads. 
(a)  An oil or gas well site shall be completely enclosed within a six (6) foot high black vinyl-coated chain link fence, equipped with at least two (2) gates with a knox box to allow for entry by City of Southfield emergency personnel, if needed. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or its employees are not on the oil or gas well site. 
(b)  Staggered ten (10) foot tall evergreen trees shall be placed adjacent to any residentially zoned property or public right-of-way to screen the oil or gas well site and drilling wellhead and pad, and the buffer shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth. This landscape buffer shall be in place within sixty (60) days of the removal of the temporary drilling derrick/rig. The landscape buffer and trees shall be regularly irrigated and maintained. 
(c)  Obnoxious night-time light emitted off the well site interferes with the comfortable, quiet use and enjoyment of surrounding residential properties. Oil or gas well site lighting shall be shielded, directed downward and directed internally on the site so as to avoid glare on public roads, and adjacent property, dwellings, and buildings. The level of light (foot-candles) at common adjacent lot lines shall be zero (0). Exterior lights shall be turned off except when personnel are working on site or motion sensors are activated. 
(d)  Access roads to an oil or gas well site shall be designed and constructed to minimize nuisances to surrounding properties, obtain and comply with all required state, county, or city standards and permits, and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any adjoining property line. 
(5)  Compliance with City Code. Oil and gas development activities or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(6)  Dust, noise, vibration, and odors. All oil and gas development activities shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices defined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effects will be minimized by the oil and gas development activities carried on at any well site or from anything incidental thereto, and to minimize the annoyance of persons living or working in the vicinity. Additionally, the well site or structures thereon shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. The city may impose additional reasonable restrictions upon oil and gas development activities to reduce adverse impacts upon adjacent properties. 
(7)  Hydraulic fracturing or fracking. Hydraulic fracturing or fracking is expressly prohibited within the city. 
(8)  Compliance with laws and permit issuance. Oil and gas development activities for the purpose of oil or gas extraction shall be undertaken in conformity with all state and federal laws, statutes, rules, and regulations pertaining thereto, and particularly with the State of Michigan, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the regulations of its supervisor of wells. This shall include obtaining the required permit(s) from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and/or the supervisor of wells, which permit(s) shall be provided to the city before the city will consider an application for a special use approval under this section. This requirement also applies to, but is not limited to, the plugging of wells, the exploration for, the production, marketing, and transportation of petroleum products, and the disposition and removal of any byproducts utilized and associated with such activities. 
(9)  Associated permits and approvals. Special use approval for oil and gas development activities of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes is in addition to and is not in lieu of any permit or plan which may be required by any other provision(s) of the city zoning ordinance, building and fire codes, wetlands and watercourse protective ordinance, woodland and tree preservation ordinance, or other city ordinance or by any other governmental agency unless expressly provided otherwise herein. 
(10)  Operations. 
(a)  Well site preparation and construction of well sites are limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Construction activities associated with establishment of the well site may be eligible for an exception permit issued by the city department of building and safety engineering pursuant to section 9.11(2) of the City Code. 
(b)  The movement of drilling rigs, tanker trucks, or heavy equipment used in connection with oil and gas development activities over public roads and streets, shall be consistent with the city's traffic engineer's approval, which shall be obtained in advance. The city's traffic engineer shall identify the streets and roadways which may be used, and identify any conditions that may apply. 
(c)  All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemicals, fluids or waste, produced or used in connection with oil and gas development activities, shall be safely, lawfully, and properly disposed of to prevent infiltration of or damage to any fresh water, well, groundwater, watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. 
(d)  The oil or gas well site shall be kept in a clean and orderly condition, free of trash and debris, with weeds cut in accordance with the section 9.41 of the City Code. Machinery and equipment not being currently used in the oil and gas development activities at the well site shall not be stored or kept at the well site. 
(e)  An oil or gas well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the city engineer to prevent migration, run-off, or discharge of any hazardous materials, including but not limited to, any chemicals, oil or gas produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas, to adjoining property or to the city sanitary sewer system, storm water system, or any natural or artificial watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except to an approved drainage system in accordance with the city's engineering requirements and applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(f)  Oil and gas development activities shall not result in impacting residential water supplies by: 
i.  The withdrawal of groundwater resulting in reducing the volume or amount of well water serving residential properties. 
ii.  Contamination of soil, groundwater and/or drinking water supplies. 
(g)  Oil and gas development activities shall not cause environmental consequences to protected wetlands, woodlands, and/or environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Unreasonable disruption or harm to wildlife and unreasonable fragmentation or disruption of wildlife habitats; 
ii.  Unreasonable disruption to public parks; 
iii.  Withdrawal of groundwater resulting in an impact to the interconnected lakes, streams, ponds and wetlands within the city; 
iv.  Contamination of soil, groundwater, surface water or environmentally sensitive areas identified by the city; 
v.  Impacts to the natural course and flow of storm water runoff. 
(h)  Oil and gas development activities shall comply with all permit(s) issued, all required plans as approved, and any and all conditions attached to the special use approval by the city council. 
(11)  Inspection. The building official, the fire marshal, and any other designee of the city administrator shall have the right and option at any time during the construction phase and any drilling operation to enter upon the premises covered by the special use approval for the purpose of making inspections to determine if the requirements of this section are complied, including the requirements of any other law, regulation, code or ordinance. 
(12)  Pipelines. The operator shall not excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, oil, gas, or petroleum liquids, on, under, or through the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or other properties owned by the city without an easement from the city. 
(13)  Submittal requirements. In addition to submittal requirements for a site plan as set forth in section 5.22 of article 4 general requirements of chapter 45, zoning and planning, of the City Code, and special use as set forth herein, the following information and documentation shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the special use application, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city in connection with the special use application: 
(a)  Environmental impact statement. the environmental impact statement filed with the supervisor of wells in connection with a well permit under part 615 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 524.61501 et. seq. and the administrative rules promulgated under Part 615, as may be amended, and any other federal or state permits required to undertake the intended oil and gas development activities at the well site. Additionally, copies of any studies and/or reports undertaken in conjunction with required federal or state permits shall be submitted. 
(b)  Permits. A copy of all of the following city issued permits: 
i.  If required, a copy of wetland permit; 
ii.  If required, a copy of woodland permit; 
iii.  If required, a copy of soil erosion and sediment control permit; 
iv.  If required, a copy of any building permit. 
(c)  Schedule. A timeline and activity schedule for the proposed oil or gas activities. 
(d)  Plans. A copy of the following plans, if applicable: 
i.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
ii.  Grading plan. 
iii.  A hydrogeological study and monitoring plan. 
iv.  Water withdrawal plan. 
v.  Water management plan. 
vi.  Truck route plan. 
vii.  Noise management plan. 
viii.  On-site chemical storage plan. 
ix.  Waste management and disposal plan. 
x.  Pollution prevention plan. 
xi.  Emergency response plan. 
xii.  Site identification plan. 
xiii.  Site restoration plan. 
(e)  Required plans shall comply with the following and shall be subject to the approval of the city: 
i.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 49, soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
ii.  Grading plan. The grading plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of article ii, of chapter 19 of the City Code. 
iii.  Hydrogeological study and monitoring plan. A hydrogeological study and monitoring plan is required for the protection of groundwater. Such study shall consist of a minimum of three (3) on-site groundwater monitoring wells at the perimeter of the drilling pad set at a depth encountering the first water bearing zone. Groundwater depth, gradient, and flow direction shall be determined within these three (3) wells, and a down gradient groundwater monitoring well shall be installed to monitor groundwater conditions. The initial results of the study must be included in the application submittal for the application to be considered administratively complete. 
iv.  Water withdrawal plan. A water withdrawal plan shall be provided, which is designed to protect the level of water in lakes, ponds, wetlands, watersheds, groundwater and residential drinking wells located within the city. 
v.  Water management plan. A water management plan shall be provided, which is designed to determine potential impacts from planned water withdrawals. The results of a valid hydrogeological investigation shall also be submitted, including, results of a valid aquifer pump test, and computer modeling to determine aquifer characteristics and the lateral radius of the cone of depression to be created at the proposed aquifer pump rate at the location of the proposed point of groundwater withdrawal. 
vi.  Truck route plan. Excessive truck traffic impedes the flow of traffic within a community and results in significant damage to the roads within the community. Therefore, a proposed truck route plan shall be provided. The plan shall be developed to minimize the impact on local traffic flow and on the condition of local roads utilizing an engineered pavement management system (PMS) methodology to determine existing hard surface road conditions. The plan shall include the proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized at the site, the estimated weight of those trucks, the hours trucks will be traveling to and from the well site, and the estimated number of trucks entering and exiting the site on a daily basis. The plan shall also provide for restoration of damaged roads consistent with best engineering practices utilized for bituminous or concrete paving systems. The proposed truck route plan shall be subject to the approval of the city traffic engineer. 
vii.  Noise management plan. Industrial operations in and adjacent to residential districts oftentimes generate noise that is emitted off site. Therefore, a noise management plan shall be provided detailing how the oil and gas development activities complies with section 9.10, excessive noise declared nuisance, and section 9.11, specific offenses, of the City Code. The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the installation of the noise generating equipment. The noise management plan shall: 
1.  Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction; 
2.  Identify the oil and gas development activities on site that have the potential to cause noise impacts; 
3.  Specify how the impacts will be mitigated considering the following characteristics: 
a.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development; 
b.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
c.  Extent of vegetative screening on or adjacent to the site; 
d.  Topography. 
viii.  On-site chemical storage plan. A chemical storage plan containing a list and the location of all chemicals on site and the safety data sheets (SDS) shall be provided and subject to the approval of the city fire department. 
ix.  Waste disposal plan. A waste disposal plan shall be provided, detailing a complete description of all projected waste, and shall include a list of all chemical constituents and total volumes intended for disposal and the manner by which waste shall be disposed. 
x.  Pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP). A pollution incident prevention plan which comports with part 31, water resources protection, under NREPA, as amended, and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder, shall be provided which is designed to protect the lakes, ponds, wetlands, watersheds, soil/groundwater, ambient air, woodlands, wildlife habitats, walking trails, nature paths, and other environmentally sensitive areas of the city from contamination or pollution that may result from the proposed oil and gas development activities. 
xi.  Emergency response plan. An emergency response plan, shall be submitted to the city's police department, fire department, planning, department of homeland security and emergency management, building and engineering departments. Also, the applicant/operator shall, at its sole cost and expense, provide appropriate site orientation and adequate information for on-going training to address any potential dangerous conditions that may result from the oil and gas development activities. Pursuant to state and federal law, the operator shall provide any information necessary to assist the city with establishing written procedures to minimize dangerous conditions that may result from the proposed oil and gas development activities. The emergency response plan shall include the operator's emergency contact information. 
xii.  Site identification plan. A site identification plan shall be submitted delineating the location, wording and size of required site signage. 
xiii.  Site restoration plan. A site restoration plan shall be submitted showing the nature, extent and timelines for site restoration once exploration, extraction and all oil and gas development activities have ceased. 
xiv.  Compliance with section 5.55 wetland and watercourse ordinance, and section 5.56 woodland and tree preservation ordinance. All proposals for oil and gas wells and oil and gas development are subject to review for woodlands and wetlands and any permits that may be required. 
(f)  Site maintenance agreement. A copy of the executed standard city site maintenance agreement shall be submitted. 
(g)  Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance in coverages and amounts as established by resolution of the city council including a required pollution incident liability rider shall be submitted. 
(h)  Statement. A statement as to whether the applicant/operator has operated a site where a release occurred, where there was a violation of any provision of the NREPA, or where there was a finding that a nuisance existed; and, if so, the statement shall further describe each release, violation, or nuisance, and specify the date, place, jurisdiction and any emergency and/or remediation action taken. 
(i)  General operations. A general operations plan shall be submitted which includes, at a minimum, a description of the nature of the proposed activities, hours of operation, the number of employees, and projected duration of the oil and gas development activities. 
(j)  Fees, expense reimbursement, performance guarantee. The applicant/operator shall pay the application fee and shall establish an escrow to reimburse the city for all expenses of inspection, administrative review, technical review, and for professional and consultant fees incurred including, but not limited to: engineering, planning, building, environmental, and legal fees. A performance guarantee is required in the form of cash or an automatically renewable irrevocable letter of credit, the form of which is approved by the city attorney, in an amount sufficient to ensure compliant closure and restoration of the oil and gas well and the well site, and which may also be used by the city to respond to and remedy an emergency or exigent situation posing a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, involving the well site and/or oil and gas development activities of the operator, or damage to roads or other city property. The application fee, escrow, and performance guarantee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall be on file and made available at the office of the city clerk. 
(k)  Signatures required. The application shall be signed by both the applicant/operator and property owner, and shall be maintained by the city planning department. 
(14)  Monitoring and reporting. 
a)  The operator shall notify the city immediately of a "release" as defined in part 201, of NREPA. 
b)  In order to conduct the monitoring required by this section the operator, at its own cost, shall sample on-site groundwater monitoring wells quarterly for purgeable aromatic hydrocarbons (BTEX) and chloride, and shall report the sample results to the city planning department within ten (10) days of receipt of sample laboratory test results. The city reserves the right to expand the list of chemicals of concern that the operator shall be required to monitor upon confirmation of a release. 
(15)  Copy of data. 
a)  The operator shall copy the city on all data required to be delivered to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for the oil and gas development activities on site; 
b)  The operator shall provide and test results to the city upon request. 
(16)  Waste disposal. Operator shall inform the city in writing of any modification of the waste stream and/or any new waste not included in the application. applicant/operator shall provide a semi-annual report to the city which includes an analysis of the waste stream for all chemical constituents and total volumes. The operator shall also allow the city to conduct random samples of the waste stream upon a forty-eight (48) hour notice to the operator. This sampling and testing shall be at operator's expense. All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemical, fluids or waste produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas shall, under the supervision of the MDEQ, be safely, lawfully and properly disposed of to prevent infiltration of or damage to any fresh water well, groundwater, watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. 
(17)  Well conversion. 
a)  Oil and/or gas wells. Prior to converting an oil or gas well to a Class II brine injection well, an operator shall file the following updated documents and plans with the city planning department, for review and approval: 
i.  Hydrogeological study and monitoring plan; 
ii.  Truck route plan; 
iii.  Noise management plan; 
iv.  On-site chemical storage plan; 
v.  Waste management and disposal plan; 
vi.  Pollution prevention plan; 
vii.  Emergency response plan; 
viii.  Proof of insurance. 
b)  Class II liquid industrial waste well. Prior to installing a new Class II liquid industrial waste well or to converting any existing well to a Class II liquid industrial waste well, an operator shall be required to file a separate special land use request permit application that conforms to all application requirements set forth in section 5.185(2)(c)(5)(M) hereof. 
(18)  Notices required; application. Oil and gas development activities have the potential of adverse secondary impacts and very serious consequences. Further, there is oftentimes a lack of information readily available to the city and the public regarding local exploration, extraction and development of oil and gas operations. Therefore, the following notice to the city and surrounding properties is required to enable the city to ensure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its residents, of environmentally sensitive features, residential water wells and the residential quality of life: 
a)  Within five (5) days of filing an application for a permit with the State of Michigan to conduct any oil or gas development activity within the city, the applicant shall file a copy of the permit application with the city planning department. 
b)  Within seven (7) days of filing an application for a permit with the State of Michigan, the applicant shall, by regular United States mail, notify the owner(s) of record and/or occupant(s) of all properties within 700 feet of the property on which the proposed well is to be located and shall include the following information: 
1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
2)  A statement that the applicant has applied for a permit to drill and operate an oil and gas well. 
3)  A statement that a person may submit comments on the application by mail to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and provide the applicable address, telephone number and contact person, if available. 
4)  Include a copy of the first page of the permit application. 
5)  The applicant shall provide proof of mailing of the notices to the city planning department. 
(19)  Civil proceedings; injunction. Any activity conducted in violation of this section 5.185(2)(c) is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city may commence civil proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction necessary for the enforcement of this section to restrain or correct violations and for the recovery of costs and expenses incurred by the city as authorized by law. Such proceedings, including injunctive relief, shall be brought in the name of the city; however, the institution of civil proceedings shall not preclude enforcement of any other proceeding authorized by ordinance, state or federal law. Further, the city may also issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of any certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this section, including any conditions imposed by the city council as part of the special use approval, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(20)  The standards and requirements of subsection (1) are consistent with and promote the intent and purposes of chapter 45 of the City Code and insure that the land use or activity authorized shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and are consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(21)  In approving a special land use, the council may impose reasonable conditions, including conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(22)  Conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the city council and the landowner. 
(23)  The decision of the city council on a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the special land use and shall specify the basis for the decision and for any conditions imposed. 
(24)  A request for approval of a special land use or activity made under the provisions of this section which is in compliance with the standards and requirements stated above and with the conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (5) above, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes, shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 1075, 12-7-81; Ord. No. 1106, 10-11-82; Ord. No. 1244, 3-31-88; Ord. No. 1662 , § 1, 5-1-16; Ord. No. 1664 , § 2, 9-8-16) 
Sec. 5.186. - Area and bulk regulations. 
    The area and bulk regulations shall be regulated as set forth in the "schedule of regulations" in article 22. 
Sec. 5.187. - Building line. 
    In all Industrial (I-1) Districts, no building or structure shall be erected, altered or moved so that any part or portion thereof is nearer than sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) from the existing right-of-way line. The area between the minimum required building line and the front lot line shall not be used for vehicular parking or open storage. 
Sec. 5.188. - Landscaping. 
    Landscape plans and green infrastructure/low impact development methods required per article 4 section 5.31(21)(b). 
(Ord. No. 1678 , § 15, 7-6-17) 
ARTICLE 21. - VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS (P) 

Sec. 5.189. - Uses permitted. 
    In all Vehicular Parking Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for the following use: 
(1)  A parking lot for passenger vehicles not exceeding a net weight of three (3) tons (2.7210 metric tons) and all parking shall be for periods of less than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(2)  No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the premises. One (1) said shelter shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet (4.65 square meters) of shelter building area for the first acre or less plus an additional fifty (50) square feet (4.65 square meters) of shelter building area for each additional acre of land area. The location of such building shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council to ensure that it will not conflict with the movement of vehicular traffic or obstruct the viewing of vehicles and pedestrians, and so to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1270, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1346, 6-8-92) 
Sec. 5.190. - Development regulations. 
    The development and use of any parking area shall be in accordance with all the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.191. - Uses permitted subject to special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the review and approval of the city council only after a recommendation by the planning commission. The use or uses may only be approved when the following general standards have been satisfied and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed. 
(1)  Standards. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The proposed use or uses must be of such size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district. 
(c)  The location, size, and intensity of any such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be adverse to occupants of any other nearby permitted uses. 
(d)  The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not be inconsistent with, or contrary to, the objectives sought to be accomplished by this chapter and principles of sound planning. 
(e)  The proposed use is of such character that the vehicular traffic generated will not have an adverse effect upon, or be detrimental to, the surrounding land uses or the adjacent thoroughfares. 
(f)  The proposed use is of such character and intensity and arranged on the site so as to eliminate any adverse effects resulting from noise, dust, dirt, glare, odor, or fumes. 
(g)  The request for a use requiring special approval shall be accompanied by a site plan indicating the treatment of the subject property, the adjacent uses and properties, and the relationship of the site to adjoining thoroughfares. 
(2)  Uses. 
(a)  The storage of new cars only, and when the storage of these new vehicles are in excess of any permitted land use and parking requirements on the same lot, or side-well parcel. And further, the site provides for site security and soil stabilized or hard surfacing of the storage area. 
(Ord. No. 1507, 9-26-04) 
Sec. 5.192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 22. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.193. - Residential zoning districts. 
ENGLISH SYSTEM 
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIRED LOT AREA AREA REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES 
Acres MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Feet MAXIMUM HEIGHT (w) MINIMUM YARD SETBACK IN FEET MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
Sq. Ft. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Percent Sq. ft./Dwelling Unit Sq. ft./room of 80 sq. ft. or more Feet Stories Front Least Side Total Sides Rear R A 7,500 65 25 2 30 (r) 
8 (r) 
20 35 1,000 25 R 1 9,000 70 25 2 40 8 20 35 1,000 25 R 2 9,000 70 25 2 40 8 20 35 1,000 25 R 3 9,000 70 25 2 40 8 20 35 1,200 25 R 4 9,000 70 25 2 40 10 25 35 1,400 25 R E 20,000 90 25 2 40 10 25 35 1,400 25 R-T 2,000 25 2 30 (a) 
30 30 (t) RM 
Multiple 1,500 2 acres 30 2 (a) 
50 (a) 
50 (a) 
50 (t) RMM (u) 3 acres 70 6 (v) 
75 (v) 
50 (v) 
50 (t) RMU (u) 5 acres (b) (b) (v) 
75 (v) 
50 (v) 
50 (t)  
METRIC SYSTEM 
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIRED LOT AREA AREA REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES 
Hectares MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Meters MAXIMUM HEIGHT MINIMUM YARD SETBACK IN METERS MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
Sq. M MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Percent Sq. m./Dwelling Unit Sq. m./room of 7.44 sq. m. or more Meters Stories Front Least Side Total Sides Rear R A 697.5 19.825 7.625 2 9.15 (r) 
2.44 (r) 
6.1 10.675 93 25 R 1 837 21.35 7.625 2 12.2 2.44 6.1 10.675 93 25 R 2 837 21.35 7.625 2 12.2 2.44 6.1 10.675 93 25 R 3 837 21.35 7.625 2 12.2 2.44 6.1 10.675 111.6 25 R 4 837 21.35 7.625 2 12.2 3.05 7.625 10.675 130.2 25 R E 1860 27.45 7.625 2 12.2 3.05 7.625 10.675 130.2 25 R-T 186 7.625 2 9.15 (a) 
9.15 9.15 (t) RM 
Multiple 139.5 .81 
Hectares 9.15 2 (a) 
15.25 (a) 
15.25 (a) 
15.25 (t) RMM (u) 1.215 
Hectares 21.35 6 (v) 
22.875 (v) 
15.25 (v) 
15.25 (t) RMU (u) 2.025 
Hectares (b) (b) (v) 
22.875 (v) 
50 (v) 
15.25 (t)  
(Ord. No. 1613 , § 2, 8-18-13) 
Sec. 5.194. - Nonresidential zoning districts. 
ENGLISH SYSTEM 
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIRED LOT AREA AREA REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES 
Acres MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Feet MAXIMUM HEIGHT (w) MINIMUM YARD SETBACK IN FEET MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
Sq. Ft. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Percent Sq. ft./Dwelling Unit Sq. ft./room of 80 sq. ft. or more Feet Stories Front Least Side Total Sides Rear O-S 25 (s) 
15 (c) 
15 (c) 
15 ERO-M 55 4 (v) 
75 (v) 
30 (v) 
75 30 ERO (b) (v) 
75 (v) 
30 (v) 
75 40 TR (h) 30 150 (i) (i) NS * 60 60 60 1,000 RS 25 acres (g) 75 75 75 750 RC (u) 10 acres (b) (v) 
75 (v) 
50 (v) 
75 (t) B-1 25 (s) 
15 (c) 
15 (c) 
15 B-2 * (b) (c) 
50 (c) 
50 (c) 
50 B-3 (b) (e) 
25 (j) (e) 
15 750 I-L (n) 
30 (o) 
60 (p) (q) 
50 I-1 60 60 (l) 750 P (m) (m) (m)  
METRIC SYSTEM 
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIRED LOT AREA AREA REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES 
Hectares MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Meters MAXIMUM HEIGHT (w) MINIMUM YARD SETBACK IN METERS MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
Sq. M MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Percent Sq. m./Dwelling Unit Sq. m./room of 7.44 sq. m. or more Meters Stories Front Least Side Total Sides Rear O-S 7.625 (s) 
4.575 (c) 
4.575 (c) 
4.575 ERO-M 16.775 4 (v) 
22.875 (v) 
9.15 (v) 
22.875 30 ERO (b) (v) 
22.875 (v) 
9.15 (v) 
22.875 40 TR (h) 9.15 45.75 (i) (i) NS 18.3 18.3 18.3 93 RS 10.125 
Hectares (g) 22.875 22.875 22.875 69.75 RC (u) 4.05 
Hectares (b) (v) 
22.875 (v) 
15.25 (v) 
22.875 (t) B-1 7.625 (s) 
4.575 (c) 
4.575 (c) 
4.575 B-2 (b) (c) 
15.25 (c) 
15.25 (c) 
15.25 B-3 (b) (e) 
7.625 (j) (e) 
4.575 69.75 I-L (n) 
9.15 (o) 
18.3 (p) (q) 
15.25 I-1 18.3 18.3 (l) 69.75 P (m) (m) (m)  
(Ord. No. 1044-C, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 1440, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 1613 , § 2, 8-18-13) 
Sec. 5.195. - Schedule of regulations' notes. 
(a)  Side yards need not refer to spacing between buildings for a planned development for two (2) or more buildings on the same parcel; in such instance, the distance between buildings is regulated by the building distance formula as found in section 5.96 and where, because of building arrangement, the formula is not applicable, the minimum distance shall be twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters). 
(b)  Unlimited, provided yard requirements are satisfied. 
(c)  Yard(s) shall be not less than the height of the building, except that where a lot line abuts a street, one-half (1/2) the width of the right-of-way of said street may be considered as yard setback; but in no instance, above included, shall any yard setback be less than the figure indicated. 
(d)  No building shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet (22.875 meters) to a major thoroughfare and not closer than forty (40) feet (12.2 meters) from any other street right-of-way. 
(e)  For buildings over twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) in height, footnote (v) shall apply; however, in no instance shall the yard be less than the figure indicated. 
(f)  See article 9, section 5.102, site plan review, but in no instance shall any front or side yard be less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) nor any rear yard be less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters). 
(g)  Buildings shall not exceed a height of sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters) except when not nearer than two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) from any adjoining residential district. 
(h)  The site plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council. 
Said finding shall determine that: 
(1)  The site plan does show that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)  All the development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties. 
(i)  There shall be a minimum side yard and rear yard of one hundred fifty (150) feet (45.75 meters) where such use abuts upon the side yard or rear yard of a residential district. In all other instances, there shall be a minimum side yard and rear yard equal to five (5) times the height of the tallest point of the building and not less than eighty (80) feet (24.4 meters). 
(j)  Side yards are not required along the interior side lot lines when the building does not exceed twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters) in height. When the height exceeds twenty-five (25) feet (7.625 meters), the minimum yard shall be determined by footnote (v). Where a side lot line abuts a street, a landscaped side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) shall be provided. 
(k)  There shall be on each lot a rear yard of not less than ten (10) square feet (.93 square meters) for each front foot to provide space for loading and unloading and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. 
(l)  Side yards are not required along the interior side lot lines; where a side lot line abuts a street, a landscaped side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) shall be provided. 
(m)  Where the parking lot lies across the street and opposite a residentially zoned district wherein the lots front or side on such street, the required setback in feet shall be twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters). 
Where the parking lot lies across the street and opposite or contiguous to and in the same block with residentially zoned property which has only side lot lines on the street, there shall be established a setback line ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) from the front lot line. 
Wherever a screen planting is not practical or reasonable, a continuous unpierced masonry wall of specified height and materials may be substituted for buffer strip, if approved by the board of appeals. 
(n)  Except that any structure not less than two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) from a residential zoning district may be increased in height by one (1) foot (.305 meters) for each two (2) feet (.61 meters) of additional front, side and rear yard provided in addition to the minimum yard requirements. 
(o)  Which shall not be used for parking. 
(p)  Not less than the height of the building which may be used for parking and where a side yard abuts a street, a landscaped side yard of not less than ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) shall be provided. 
(q)  Which may be used for parking. 
(r)  A minimum side yard on the garage side shall be five (5) feet (1.525 meters) and minimum total sides fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) where an attached garage having no habitable living area above the garage is located at the side of a dwelling unit and any portion of the house behind the garage is only one (1) story in height. 
(s)  Sixty (60) feet (18.3 meters); except where the lot is less than four hundred (400) feet (122 meters) deep, the setback may be reduced to equal fifteen (15 percent) percent of the depth of the lot; but in no case shall the setback be less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters). 
(t)  Minimum floor area shall be determined by the following schedule: 
1 bedroom: Eight hundred (800) square feet (74.4 square meters) 
2 bedroom: One thousand (1,000) square feet (93.0 square meters) 
3 bedroom: One thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet (102.3 square meters) 
4 bedroom: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet (120.9 square meters) 
Minimum floor area is the area of the unit measured from the outside faces of exterior walls to the center of interior walls of the unit. Included within the minimum floor area computation may be private balconies or private patios having a minimum dimension of five (5) feet (1.525 meters) and a minimum area of forty (40) square feet (3.72 square meters) with a maximum allowable area for computing minimum floor area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the unit size. 
(u)  Required land area per unit for multiple family developments shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Height of 
building 
in stories Required land area in square feet per number of bedrooms 1 2 3 4 10+ 871 
(50du/a) 1,090 
(40du/a) 1,245 
(35du/a) 1,452 
(30du/a) 7-9 968 
(45du/a) 1,210 
(36du/a) 1,452 
(30du/a) 1,742 
(25du/a) 3-6 1,090 
(40du/a) 1,360 
(32du/a) 1,742 
(25du/a) 2,180 
(20du/a) 1-2 1,210 
(36du/a) 1,555 
(28du/a) 2,178 
(20du/a) 2,900 
(15du/a)  
(v)  Along those property lines which abut a single-family residential district or which are seventy-five (75) feet (22.875 meters) or less from property zoned in a single-family residential district classification, as measured along a line which is drawn at right angles to any point along the property line, the minimum required yard shall be determined by the following formula: 
Y = L + 2H   3  
Along those property lines which do not have the above described relationship to property zoned in a single-family residential district classification, the minimum required yard shall be determined by the following formula: 
Y = L + 2H   6  
The symbols used above shall be defined as follows: 
Y = required yard. 
L = the total length of that portion of a lot line from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular from the lot line will intersect any part of the building other than permitted yard encroachments. 
H = height of building as defined in article 2, section 5.3(11). 
In all zoning districts which are regulated by this footnote, not more than fifty (50) percent of any required yard abutting a street shall be used for vehicular parking or driveways. Adjacent to any lot line abutting a street, there shall be a continuous landscaped area not less than fifteen (15) feet (4.575 meters) wide except at points of approved vehicular access to the street. 
(w)  Exceptions to height standards. 
Exceptions. The height limitation of this section shall not apply to chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, stage towers, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, pumping towers, monuments, steeples, cupolas, and mechanical appurtenance accessory to and necessary for the permitted use in the district in which they are located. 
Height of public and semi-public buildings. The height of public and semi public buildings such as churches, cathedrals, temples, hospitals, sanitariums, or schools shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet, provided that if any such building exceeds the height limitation for the district in which is located, then, in addition to the required setback, the building shall be set back an additional one (1) foot for each foot by which the building exceeds the height standard. 
Height of parapet walls. Parapet walls may extend up to five (5) feet above the permitted height in the district in which the building is located. 
(Ord. No. 1271, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1276, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1613 , § 2, 8-18-13; Ord. No. 1642 , § 4, 7-19-15) 
Secs. 5.196, 5.197. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 23. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 5.198. - Powers. 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zone district classification of any property; allow a use of property not otherwise permitted in a zone district except as provided in subparagraph (2); nor make any change in the terms of this chapter, but does have the power to act on those matters where this chapter provides for administrative review or interpretation, and to authorize a variance as defined in this section. Said powers include: 
(a)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the director of the department of building and safety engineering with the exception of a decision made pursuant to section 5.57 of this chapter or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Zoning map. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this chapter requests for interpretation of the zoning map. 
(c)  Variances. To authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the strict applications of the provisions of this chapter where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of the original enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board of appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board of appeals shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals, in addition to the general duties and powers conferred upon it by law, may, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, interpret and determine the application of the regulations herein established in harmony with their general purpose and intent as follows: 
(a)  Permit the erection of additional buildings or the enlargement of existing buildings or uses on the same parcel of land, or one contiguous thereto, or directly across an alley therefrom, each in the same single ownership of record at the time of passage of this chapter, for a legal nonconforming business or activity located in a district restricted against such use, where the enlargement or expansion of such business or activity will not be detrimental to or tend to alter the character of the neighborhood or district. 
(b)  Where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in a single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, permit the extension of a use permitted on the less restricted portion of such lot to the entire lot but not for a distance of more than fifty (50) feet (15.25 meters) beyond the district boundary line. 
(c)  Permit variations in the requirements for outer courts in dwellings. 
(d)  Permit variations in the provisions in the chapter for the erection and use of buildings on farms for normal farm purposes, requiring however, that such buildings shall conform to all the provisions of this chapter insofar as is practicable. 
(e)  Temporary use permit: Permit conditional and temporary buildings and uses subject to appropriate conditions and restrictions for an initial period of not more than one (1) year which may be extended by the board for additional periods not to exceed one (1) year each provided: 
1.  In granting this temporary use, the board of appeals shall determine that the following conditions will be met: 
a.  Such temporary use shall not adversely affect the character of the area and shall not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
b.  Such use shall not be dependent upon major building improvements. 
c.  Site improvements shall be of such character that adequate protection shall be provided to abutting uses. 
2.  Any action by which a temporary use permit is granted shall be taken by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the membership of the board after a public hearing. The reasons for granting such temporary use permit and the restrictions and limitations thereon and the nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit shall be stated in the resolution. 
3.  Such permit may be revoked by the board at any time upon a proper showing that the operation of such conditional and temporary building or use has become detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
4.  The board may refer the application for such temporary use permit to any office, department, or commission of the city for study, recommendation, and report to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1409, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 1529, 1-30-06) 
Sec. 5.199. - Fees. 
    The city council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. 
Secs. 5.200, 5.201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 24. - BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 5.202. - Permit and certificate required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to build or use or permit the building or use of any structure or land or part thereof hereafter created, erected, altered or moved or to change or enlarge the use of any building or land or part thereof until a building permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city properly endorsed as to occupancy in a manner herein provided shall have been issued by the director of the department of building and safety engineering hereinafter authorized. 
(2)  A charge to be set by the city council shall be made for the issuance of such permits. An application for a building permit shall be made to the director of the department of building and safety engineering prior to the time when a new or enlarged use of a structure or land or part thereof is intended to begin. No structure shall be started and no building or structure shall be moved onto any parcel of land in this city prior to the issuance of a permit. Such application shall be accompanied by a plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale of not less than one (1) inch (2.54 centimeters) = one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters), showing the exact dimensions of the land and structure to which the permit is to apply, existing and proposed grades indicating proper drainage, the lines of all the lots or parcels under separate ownership contained therein, the width of and alignment of all abutting streets, alleys, easements of access and public open spaces, the area, size, position and height of all buildings or structures erected or to be erected or altered thereon, plans in duplicate drawn to scale of the proposed structure or alteration and such other information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement. In the case of an application for other than a residence, the applicant shall also furnish a sworn statement stating all uses to which he proposes to put property or proposed buildings on the property. Accessory buildings, when erected at the same time as the principal building on a lot and shown on the application thereof, shall not require a separate building permit. A record of all such applications shall be kept on file by the director of the department of building and safety engineering. Whenever the buildings, land and uses thereof as set forth on the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code, it shall be the duty of the director of the department of building and safety engineering to issue a building permit within ten (10) days after the receipt of such application. All building permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the premises. In all cases when the director of the department of building and safety engineering shall refuse to issue a building permit, he shall state such refusal in writing with the cause and reasons for said refusal. 
(3)  Within ten (10) days after notification that the building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy, the director of the department of building and safety engineering shall cause a final inspection to be made thereof and, if it is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all other provisions of the City Code of the city, shall endorse such fact by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  The director of the department of building and safety engineering may, upon the request of a holder of a permit, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or structure or part thereof before the entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building or structure without endangering life or public welfare. The director shall specify the period of time during which the remaining work shall be completed and failure on the part of the permit holder to complete the work within the specified period of time shall be a violation of the building code and this chapter and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of all architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors, builders or other persons having charge of the establishment of any use of land or the erecting, changing or remodeling of any building, land or structure within the city to insure that all proper and necessary permits have been obtained, including, but not limited to, building permits, certificate of occupancy and all other permits required by either this chapter, the building code, or any other provisions of this Code. It shall also be the duty of such party or parties to see that such work or use does not conflict with and is not in violation of the terms of this chapter. Any such person changing, altering, erecting or remodeling a building or land without such a permit or permits having been issued, or in violation of or in conflict with the terms hereof, or allowing any building, land or structure to be occupied without a certificate of occupancy having first been issued, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the person or persons for whom such building or land was used, altered, erected, changed or remodeled, or the use of land established or a building occupied in violation hereof and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for such violation. 
Secs. 5.203, 5.204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 25. - ENFORCEMENT OF THE ZONING CHAPTER 

Sec. 5.205. - Enforcing officer. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of the department of building and safety engineering, who shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the city. 
ARTICLE 26. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 5.206. - Penalty, violation or nuisance. 
    Any firm, corporation or person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense, or may be both fined and imprisoned as provided herein. Any building which is erected, altered, converted or moved or any use of land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared a nuisance per se, and the city through its qualified officers, as provided for by statute for maintaining suits, may institute proceedings in the circuit court for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The director of the department of building and safety engineering, the legislative body of the city, the board of appeals or any court having jurisdiction, shall order such nuisance abated and the owner or agent in charge of such building or land shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies provided by law. 
ARTICLE 27. - AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER 

Sec. 5.207. - Procedure. 
    Amendments or supplements to this zoning chapter may be made from time to time in the same manner provided in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan for 1921; provided, however, every petition for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied with a fee, the amount of which shall be established by council resolution and may be changed from time to time, always to hold a reasonable relationship with the necessary costs and expenses, direct or indirect, which may be incurred by reason of publication and the holding of hearings incident to such petitions for zoning amendment. 
    The fee accompanying the petition, regardless of the ultimate decision, is not refundable. 
ARTICLE 28. - INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER 

Sec. 5.208. - Applicability. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. Unless specifically provided for, it is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with the existing and unrepealed provision of law or ordinance or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building or land, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or structures or land or upon the height, area or size of buildings or requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
Sec. 5.209. - Validity. 
    Should any article, section, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
CHAPTER 46. - SOIL REMOVAL AND LANDFILLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Surface and ground drainage, § 2.131 et seq.; soil erosion and sediment control, § 5.501 et seq. 

Sec. 5.251. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the "City of Southfield Dumping and Soil Removal Ordinance," and the word "soil" as used in this chapter shall be topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, rock, stone and heavy aggregate, earth or any other material proposed to be removed from or dumped on land. 
Sec. 5.252. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and preserve the natural resources and to prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to the public welfare, health, safety, morals and well-being and general welfare. 
Sec. 5.253. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, remove or strip any soil or other material without a permit from the city council. No permit will be required where the moving, grading or leveling of the aforesaid materials is carried on for the immediate use or development of the land upon which these substances are found or pursuant to a building permit issued by the department of building and safety engineering or when in the opinion of the director of public services an amount not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) cubic yards is necessary to abate a nuisance; provided, however, that where soil or other substances are removed from the site or development where found to another site or development that a permit as above mentioned will be required. 
Sec. 5.254. - Procedure on application for permit. 
    The application for any permit referred to in section 5.253 shall be filed with the city clerk in quadruplicate, the original of which shall be sworn to before some person lawfully authorized to administer oaths, and shall set forth the following information and shall be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)  A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly interested in the permit if granted; 
(2)  The residence and business address of the applicant, including all members of any firm or partnership or all officers and directors of any corporation applying; 
(3)  A complete description and location of the property on which the work is proposed to be done by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor; 
(4)  The exact nature of the proposed excavation and soil to be removed or dumped and an estimate of the approximate number of cubic yards to be removed or dumped. This computation to be made by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor; 
(5)  A statement of the manner in which it is proposed to dump or excavate and remove the soil or other materials, including the slope of the sides and the level of the floor, and the kind of equipment proposed to be employed in making such excavation and removing such material; 
(6)  The proposed route which applicant proposes to use over the public streets and over private property in transporting such materials; 
(7)  The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the permit appertains and the name, address and past experience in such matter of the person to be in charge of the proposed operations; 
(8)  The location of the place and the name and address of all persons and firms to whom the bulk of soil and any materials from the excavation are to be sold or delivered, or similar information as to the soil or materials to be dumped; 
(9)  Whether or not any permit of applicant has been revoked and if so, the circumstances of such revocation; 
(10)  The time within which such excavation or dumping is to be commenced after the granting of the permit and the time when it is to be completed; 
(11)  Such further information as the city administrator, city engineer or city council may require. 
Sec. 5.255. - Filing map and payment of filing fee. 
    At the time of the filing of the application provided for in section 5.254, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a topographic map of the property on which the proposed work is to be done covering an area having a radius of three hundred (300) feet, so far as may be possible, from the exterior boundary of the proposed site. At the time of filing the map and application for permit, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Such sum is to be used to defray the cost of engineering services, investigation, publication charges and other miscellaneous administrative expenses occasioned by processing such application. 
Sec. 5.256. - Investigation and hearing. 
    Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit as provided in section 5.255, one (1) copy thereof shall be delivered to the city administrator, and one (1) copy to the city engineer. The city engineer shall make an investigation of the facts set forth in the application and shall make a written report of his investigation, together with his recommendations, to the city administrator, who shall proceed to act upon the application after a hearing set by the city council for a day certain not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of filing the application. Such hearing may be continued from time to time as the circumstances may require. 
Sec. 5.257. - Notice of hearing on application. 
    Notice of hearing on an application shall be given by the city clerk by publishing a notice thereof in the two local papers designated for that purpose at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing and by mailing a copy thereof addressed to the applicant and to the owners of the property, as appear on the last assessment rolls of the county, within a five-hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed site, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain a statement of the time and place of the hearing of the application, the name of the applicant, a general description of the premises where the applicant proposed to do the work, and a general statement of the size and nature of the proposed excavation or dumping area. 
Sec. 5.258. - Payment of permit fee on issuance of permit. 
    At the time of the issuance of the permit if the application for the excavation is granted, the applicant shall pay a permit fee, to cover the expenses of inspection and examination of the continued operation of the site, of one cent ($0.01) for each cubic yard estimated in the application to be removed or dumped. At any time that the number of cubic yards removed or dumped amount to the number of cubic yards set forth in the estimate filed with the original application, the permit granted shall terminate and no further materials may be removed or dumped from the site until a new application has been filed and a permit granted in the same manner as the original application and permit. The fees and/or costs mentioned in this chapter shall not exempt the applicant from payment of any fees and/or costs required by the city under any other provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 5.259. - Deposit of bond and certificate of insurance. 
    The city council shall require, as a condition to the granting of any permit applied for pursuant to section 5.255, that the applicant deposit a surety bond, in an amount to be fixed by the city council inuring to the benefit of the city and the general public guaranteeing that the applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements under which the permit is issued. The city council shall also require, as a condition to the granting of any such permit, that the applicant deposit a certificate of a responsible indemnity company, in an amount reasonably relevant to the proposed work to be done, insuring the city and the public against any loss or damage to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the operations of the applicant, or any person acting on his behalf, in carrying on any work connected directly or indirectly with the issuance of the permit. 
Sec. 5.260. - Consideration by city council. 
(1)  The city council in granting or denying any application for a permit provided for in section 5.255 shall take into consideration the zoning of the proposed site, character of the applicant as respects morality, honesty and integrity, financial responsibility, and all pertinent things concerning the proposed application which may concern the health, safety, morals and well-being and general welfare of the public, the preservation of natural resources and the preventing of nuisances and hazards, and shall exercise a reasonable and sound discretion in the premises. 
(2)  Any permit for which application is made provided for in section 5.255 shall be denied if it appears from the investigation thereof that the project would remove the lateral and subjacent support of the adjacent land and result in a dangerous nuisance dangerous to public safety, or that it otherwise would in any manner endanger the public health, morals and prevent the preservation of natural resources, or be detrimental to the general public welfare. 
Sec. 5.261. - Other requirements-Excavations. 
    Any person to whom any permit is issued to make an excavation referred to in section 5.254 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All vehicles transporting soil or other materials from such excavation over the public streets of the city shall travel only directly over such route as may be directed by the city engineer to be least dangerous to public safety, cause the least interference with general traffic and cause the least damage to the public streets. 
(2)  The floor of any such excavation shall not be made lower than the level thereof as set forth in the application provided for in section 5.254. 
(3)  If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any such excavation will present a dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be enclosed by a chain link or wire mesh fence completely surrounding the portion of the site where the excavation extends, such fence to be not less than five (5) feet in height complete with gates, which gates shall be kept locked when operations are not being carried on. Barbed wire shall not be permitted to be used. 
(4)  Any soil or other material that may be deposited on any public street or place from any vehicle transporting such materials from any such excavation shall be immediately removed in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer at the expense of the person to whom the permit to excavate was issued. 
(5)  Any roads used for the purpose of ingress and egress to the excavation site which are located within three hundred (300) feet of occupied residences shall be kept free of dust by hard-topping with concrete, bituminous substance or chemical treatment. 
(6)  The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in no event exceed a minimum of five (5) feet to one (1) foot (five (5) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical) and where ponded water results from the operation, this slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of three (3) feet. 
(7)  Where excavation operations result in a body of water, the owner or operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out-Danger" signs around the premises not more than one hundred (100) feet apart. 
(8)  No cut or excavation shall be made closer than fifty (50) feet from the nearest street or highway right-of-way nor nearer than forty (40) feet to the nearest property line; provided, however, that the city council may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give sublateral support to surrounding property where soil or geographic conditions warrant it. 
(9)  No person shall open more than fifteen (15) acres of land for purposes of excavation for, or operation of, a gravel or sand mining pit at one time, and such excavation shall not be allowed to remain open for any period in excess of one (1) year except by special permission of the council. 
(10)  During the period in which the excavation is being made or a pit is being operated, no person, firm or corporation shall allow pools or puddles of water to form and become stagnant, and any person operating a pit shall at least once each month spray any pools or ponds which may exist in conjunction with such operations to keep such from becoming breeding places for mosquitoes or otherwise creating an unhealthy condition. 
(11)  In all cases wherein a lake, pool or pond is constructed in connection with the operation of a pit and the same is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence, chainlink fences shall be placed around such body of water adequate to prevent children from entering such premises. 
    The city council shall require such other performance standards where because of peculiar conditions they deem it necessary for the protection of health, safety, morals, preservation of natural resources and well-being of the citizens of the city. 
Cross reference- Unguarded excavations declared a nuisance, § 9.3. 
Sec. 5.262. - Same-Stripping operations. 
    Any person to whom any permit is issued for soil stripping operations under section 5.254 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No soil or other material shall be removed below a point six (6) inches above the mean elevation of the center line of the nearest existing proposed street or road established or proved by the city, county or state road commission, except as required for the installation of utilities and pavement. 
(2)  No soil or other materials shall be removed in such manner as to cause water to collect or to result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health. The premises shall at all times be graded so that surface water drainage is not interfered with. 
(3)  That sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site so that the entire site, when stripping operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil and the replacement of such topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of the stripping operations. If, however, such stripping operations continue over a period of time greater than thirty (30) days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the stripped areas as he progresses. 
(4)  The city council shall require such other and further requirements as is deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals, preservation of natural resources and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
Cross reference- Stagnant water ponds declared a nuisance, § 9.3. 
Sec. 5.263. - Same-Dumping operations. 
    Any person to whom any permit is issued for dumping operations under section 5.254 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Within six (6) months following dumping, a parcel of land must be graded in such manner as to prevent the collection of water, to provide proper drainage and to leave the ground surface fit for the growing of turf and other land uses permitted in the district. 
(2)  No soil or other material shall be dumped on the spillways or floodplains of any natural or artificial streams or watercourses, or any area between the upper and lower banks of such streams or watercourses, except on the approval of the city council; after a public hearing and on a satisfactory showing that such dumping will not result in damage to other property within the limits of the city and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, preservation of natural resources or welfare. 
(3)  Waste and rubbish dumping shall meet the requirements of this section and all other requirements of this Code. 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish, § 2.1 et seq.; stagnant water ponds declared a nuisance, § 9.3. 
Sec. 5.264. - Excavation of holes. 
(1)  The existence within the limits of the city of any unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells, or of any excavations, which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety, morals and preservation of natural resources are hereby prohibited and declared a public nuisance; provided, however, that this chapter shall not prevent the construction of excavations under a permit of the city, where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs and lights located in such manner as may be approved by the city council, and provided further that this section shall not apply to drains created or existing by authority of the state, the county, the city or other governmental agency. 
(2)  Where the city administrator shall determine a nuisance to exist as defined in this section, he shall notify the owner as shown on the latest tax rolls in writing of such finding and require the owner to abate such nuisance within a reasonable time, in no event less than thirty (30) days. 
(3)  If no appeal is made within ten (10) days' time, the city administrator may abate or cause to be abated such nuisance, and the cost or reasonable value of such work shall be placed as an assessment against such property on the next assessment roll. 
Sec. 5.265. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to sections 5.254 through 5.259, inclusive, may be revoked or suspended for failure to comply with any of the provisions of such sections. Revocation of such permit shall be made only upon a hearing granted to the holder of the permit held before the city council after five (5) days' notice to such permit holder stating the grounds of complaint against permittee, and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. If, in the opinion of the city administrator, the public health, safety or welfare requires it, the city administrator may suspend any permit granted under this chapter pending the hearing for the revoking of such permit by the city council. Such revocation or suspension of any permit shall be in addition to the penalties provided in chapter 1 of this Code. 
Sec. 5.266. - Expiration of permit. 
    If any work for which a permit has been granted, as provided for in section 5.258, is not commenced within three (3) months from the date of granting of the permit or if work is started on excavations pursuant thereto and the work is abandoned for a period of three (3) months, the permit shall automatically expire by limitation and cease to be valid for any purpose. 
CHAPTER 47. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Sidewalks required in certain subdivisions, § 4.70. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 5.301. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the "City of Southfield Subdivision Regulations Ordinance." 
Sec. 5.302. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city in order to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city; to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city, consistent with the master plan and chapter 45, zoning; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems so as to lessen congestion on the streets and highways; to ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary sewer facilities, and other health requirements; to achieve the maximum utility and livability on individual lots; to facilitate the further subdivision of large tracts into smaller tracts; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5.303. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  All terms as defined in the subdivision act shall control in this chapter unless indicated to the contrary in this section. 
(2)  Alley: A dedicated public way of thirty (30) feet or less in width affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(3)  Block: That property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
(4)  City engineer or engineers: The staff engineer or consulting engineer of the city. 
(5)  City planner or planners: The staff planner or consulting planner of the city. 
(6)  Clerk: The city clerk of the city. 
(7)  Commission: The planning commission of the city. 
(8)  Council: The city council of the city. 
(9)  Cul-de-sac: A minor street of short length, having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
(10)  Easement: A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and shall be designated a public or private easement, depending on the nature of the use. 
(11)  Final plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat (stage 2) of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision act and this chapter and suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
(12)  Improvements: Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities and other additions to the natural state of land which increase its value, utility or habitability. 
(13)  Lots: A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described or fixed in a recorded plat. 
(14)  Major thoroughfare: Any street with an existing or proposed right-of-way of one hundred twenty (120) feet or more. 
(15)  Marginal access street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare; and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(16)  Master plan: The comprehensive future land use plan for the municipality, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the municipality and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the commission and/or the council. 
(17)  Minor street: A street supplementary to a secondary street intended to serve the local needs of the neighborhood and of limited continuity used primarily as access to abutting residential properties. 
(18)  Municipality: The City of Southfield. 
(19)  Parcel or tract: A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the subdivision act. 
(20)  Person: Individual, partnership, firm, corporation or association. 
(21)  Preliminary plat (stage 1): A map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(22)  Preliminary plat (stage 2): A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the subdivision act. 
(23)  Proprietor: A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
(24)  Public reservation: A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition. 
(25)  Public utility: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under governmental regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
(26)  Public walkway: A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access through residential areas, and located so as to connect to two (2) or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel. 
(27)  Secondary thoroughfare: A street intended to serve as a major means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares and has considerable continuity within the framework of the major thoroughfare plan. 
(28)  Street: A right-of-way dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, land or however otherwise designated, and includes the land between right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, curbs and gutters, shoulders, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas and other areas within the right-of-way lines. 
(29)  Subdivision act: The Subdivision Control Act, Michigan Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as amended. 
(30)  Subdivision: The division of land as defined in Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended. 
(31)  Turnaround: A minor street of short length with two (2) openings to traffic, beginning from the same street, and projecting parallel to each other and connection at their termination by a loop. 
(32)  Words: Single words shall include the plural and masculine words shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 5.304. - Procedure. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through three (3) phases: Prepreliminary plat investigation, preliminary plat (stages 1 and 2), and final plat, all in accordance with the procedure set forth in this article. 
Sec. 5.305. - Initial investigation. 
    Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the planning department and other municipal departments concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the municipality with reference to this chapter and with the proposals of the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should not submit a preliminary plat at this time. The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors: 
(1)  The proprietor shall secure a copy of chapter 45, zoning, the subdivision regulations, engineering design standards, and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the city. 
(2)  The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the intended use. 
(3)  An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision shall be made by the proprietor. 
(4)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(5)  Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the city and health standards of the county and the state shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
Sec. 5.306. - Preliminary plat (stage 1). 
    The procedure under this stage 1 for preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows: 
(1)  Filing: 
(a)  Ten (10) copies including one (1) reproducible copy of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision with written application in triplicate shall be submitted to the planning department. 
(b)  Submittal with the planning department shall be at least fifteen (15) days prior to the regular commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. Should any of the data required in this section be omitted, the planning department shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and commission action shall be delayed until the required data is received. The planning department shall place the proposed preliminary plat on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting following submittal. 
(c)  The school board of school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed preliminary plat by the proprietor. A letter or document from the school board or school board superintendent indicating awareness of the proprietor's intentions and any school board recommendations shall be submitted to the commission as part of the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Preparation: The preliminary plat (stage 1) should be drawn to scale and show the arrangement of lots, blocks and streets. Dimensions of all lots shall be shown but may be approximated. It is the intent of this chapter that the preliminary plat (stage 1) be done in sufficient detail to permit planning review and yet not require precisely engineered plans which would be expensive to alter. At this stage, the planning commission shall have the authority to require major alterations to be made in the plat if this is found necessary to comply with the intent of this chapter. It is not necessary that the preliminary plat (stage 1) be prepared by and sealed by a surveyor; provided, however, that the outside dimensions of the plat shall be based upon an accurate boundary survey prepared by a surveyor. 
(3)  Identification and description: The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include: 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision; 
(b)  Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description; 
(c)  Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor, and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designated the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land; 
(d)  Scale of plat, one inch equals one hundred (100) feet as minimum acceptable scale; 
(e)  Date, northpoint and scale. 
(4)  Existing conditions: The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include: 
(a)  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals eight hundred (800) feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings within one-half mile such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets; 
(b)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions; 
(c)  Property and lot lines and private streets of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land within two hundred (200) feet of proposed plat, shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision; 
(d)  Location, width and names of existing or prior platted streets, alleys, private streets and public easements on land within two hundred (200) feet of the tract being proposed for subdivision; 
(e)  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or immediately adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, and all such facilities within two hundred (200) feet of the tract that will be used to service the proposed subdivision; 
(f)  Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two (2) feet. 
(5)  Proposed conditions: The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include: 
(a)  Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways; 
(b)  Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions; 
(c)  Indication of the proposed use of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision; 
(d)  An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" or as "outlots" on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified, the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat; 
(e)  An indication of system proposed for sewage disposal by a method approved by the council; 
(f)  An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method approved by the council and the state department of health; 
(g)  An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the council and, if involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain commissioner; 
(h)  In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
Sec. 5.307. - Preliminary plat (stage 1) review by planning commission. 
    Review of the preliminary plat (stage 1) by the commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  The commission shall review the preliminary plat at its regular meeting and shall act on the proposed plat within thirty (30) days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing. 
(2)  The commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of chapter 45, zoning, within the various elements of the master plan and within the standards of this chapter. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the commission via the clerk's office to send notice by registered or certified mail to the proprietor and to the owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of meeting of the commission to consider the preliminary plat; such notice shall be sent not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. 
(4)  The commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove or approve the preliminary plat (stage 1): 
(a)  Should the recommendation be a conditional approval as to subdivision layout, the preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the council until such conditions have been satisfied by the proprietor. The revised layout shall be marked as a revision. 
(b)  Should the commission recommend disapproval of the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of that meeting. A copy of the minutes and a copy of the subdivision layout shall be forwarded to the council. 
(c)  Should the commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it shall recommend approval of the plat; the chairman and secretary shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat, returning one (1) copy to the proprietor, forwarding ten (10) copies to the council via the clerk's office, with recommendations for approval, and retaining one (1) copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the commission files. 
Sec. 5.308. - Preliminary plat (stage 1) review by city council. 
    Review of the preliminary plat (stage 1) by the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  The council will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the recommendation of the commission. Following the receipt of such recommendation, the council shall consider the plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda and shall make such recommendations in writing as it deems fit and proper. Such meeting shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the date of filing of the preliminary plat with the planning department unless this time requirement is waived in writing by the proprietor. 
(2)  Should the council approve the preliminary plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat (stage 2). 
(3)  Approval of the preliminary plat (stage 1) shall not constitute approval of the preliminary plat (stage 2). It shall be deemed as approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat (stage 1) as a guide to the preparation of a preliminary plat (stage 2). 
(4)  The approval of the council shall be effective for a period of six (6) months. Should the preliminary plat (stage 2) in whole or in part not be submitted within this time limit, a preliminary plat (stage 1) must again be submitted to the commission for approval, unless the council shall, by resolution, extend the time limit. 
(5)  No installation or construction of any required subdivision or project improvements shall be made before the final plat has received council approval and only after the engineering plans have been approved by the city engineer. 
(6)  If the preliminary plat (stage 1) submitted meets all of the requirements of a preliminary plat (stage 2) as required by this chapter and the subdivision act, the council may give tentative approval of the submitted plat in accordance with the provisions of section 5.309. 
Sec. 5.309. - Preliminary plat (stage 2). 
    The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat (stage 2) by city council requires tentative and final approval as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plat (stage 2)-Tentative approval. 
(a)  Filing: 
1.  Ten (10) copies, including one (1) reproducible copy, of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the subdivision act shall be filed with the clerk. 
2.  The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat (stage 1) as approved, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat (stage 1) which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this chapter. 
3.  If the plat includes parcels to be set aside for the use of the property owners of the subdivision, written statements shall be submitted with the preliminary plat (stage 2) indicating the following: 
a.  How legal title to the land is to be held; 
b.  How such property shall be regulated; 
c.  Provisions for the payment of taxes; 
d.  Persons or corporations responsible for maintenance; 
e.  How maintenance is to be guaranteed; 
f.  How maintenance and development are to be financed; 
g.  Other relevant facts related to the above. 
Legal documents providing for the above shall be submitted to the city attorney for review and such documents shall be acceptable to council prior to approval of the final plat. 
4.  The clerk shall check the proposed plat for completeness. Should any of the data required in the subdivision act, section 5.306(1)-(4), or section 5.309, be omitted, the clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delayed until the required data is received. 
5.  The clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and complete preliminary plat to the city engineer and city planner for their technical review and recommendation. 
(b)  Council review-Tentative approval: 
1.  The clerk shall place the preliminary plat (stage 2) on the regular council agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The council shall act on the preliminary plat within forty-five (45) days after the date of filing with the clerk unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, of the time required for approval by the council. 
2.  The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall be reviewed by the city engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage 1) and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
3.  The preliminary plat (stage 2) documents shall be reviewed by the city planner as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage 2). 
4.  Should the council tentatively approve the preliminary plat, the clerk shall record the approval on the plat and return one (1) copy to the proprietor. 
5.  Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat (stage 2). 
6.  Tentative approval of the council shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months. Should the preliminary plat (stage 2), in whole or in part, not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat (stage 2) must again be submitted to the council for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the council. 
(2)  Preliminary plat (stage 2) review by council-Final approval. 
(a)  The proprietor shall file a preliminary plat with the clerk, together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval in sections 112 to 119 of the subdivision act. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of the preliminary plat (stage 2) from each of the required authorities. 
(b)  The council shall take action on the preliminary plat within twenty (20) days of the submission of all necessary approved plats. 
(c)  If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the council and meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval, the council shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
(d)  The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given. 
(e)  Final approval shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the council in writing. 
(f)  No installation or construction of any required subdivision or project improvements shall be made before the final plat has received approval of the council and only after the engineering plans have been approved by the city engineer, and any deposits required under section 5.310(2) of this chapter have been received by the city. 
Sec. 5.310. - Final plat. 
    The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  Filing and preparation. 
(a)  The final plat prepared in such manner as to comply with the published specifications of the state department of the treasury, together with the written application in triplicate, shall be submitted to the clerk ten (10) days prior to the regular meeting of the council. If the proprietor wishes to have an approved copy of the final plat, he may submit a seventh copy for approval. 
(b)  The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the subdivision act. 
(c)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat (stage 2) as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this chapter. 
(d)  The proprietor shall submit such evidence of title, either the opinion from an attorney-at-law as to title showing all interests of record, or a policy of title insurance in an amount of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), ensuring the city that the proprietor has title to the property. 
(2)  Final plat review. 
(a)  The council shall review the final plat and take action to approve or disapprove within twenty (20) days of the date of filing of the final plat with the clerk unless this time requirement is waived in writing by the proprietor. The council shall require of the proprietor as a condition of final plat approval a cash deposit, certified check or surety bond, whichever the proprietor elects, running to the city to ensure the time specified in the contract and the performance of any contract relation with the city relative to improvement of streets and public places and shall require either a cash deposit, certified check or surety bond, whichever the proprietor elects, running to the city for the full cost of any required public sanitary sewer and water facilities to ensure the installation of such required public sanitary sewer and water facilities, within the time specified in the contract, after approval of the plat; provided, that the city shall rebate to the proprietor, as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project, or comparable reductions in the amount of the surety bond, certified check or letter of credit. All improvements shall be installed in accordance with chapter 48, subdivision and project improvements. 
(b)  After the council has approved the final plat, no change shall be made therein unless such final plat is resubmitted for review and approval in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the approval of the final plat by the council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the subdivision act. A reproducible copy of the final plat approved by the council shall be filed with the city planner upon certification of approval by the city clerk. 
(d)  When the deposits required in 5.310(2)(a) have been received by the clerk, he shall transcribe a certificate of approval of the council on the approved final plat and deliver it to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(e)  No construction of improvements shall be commenced until notice of the approval of the final plat by the council. 
Secs. 5.311-5.314. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAND DIVISION 

Sec. 5.315. - General. 
    No lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat shall be further partitioned or divided, nor shall any unplatted parcel or tract of land be further partitioned or divided, into parcels which are ten (10) acres or less in area except upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Upon request signed by all parties of interest, a lot or parcel of land as described above may be divided or partitioned into two (2), three (3) or four (4) parts in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  When division results in parcels which exceed the area and width of the original platted size or recorded description, the city assessor may permit such division. 
(2)  When division results in parcels which are smaller than the area and width of the original platted size or recorded description, the city assessor may permit such division if certified by the city planner that the resulting parcels satisfy the minimum lot size requirements of chapter 45, zoning, and that the resulting parcels are similar or greater in width and area as compared to other parcels in the surrounding area. In those zoning districts where there is no minimum lot size requirement, the minimum parcel size shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet and the minimum parcel width shall be forty (40) feet. 
(3)  When division results in parcels which do not satisfy the minimum lot size requirements of chapter 45, zoning, the assessor may permit such division if the resultant lot sizes have been approved by the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  The city assessor shall give notice of any proposed revision of land to the city treasurer. 
Sec. 5.316. - Limitations. 
    In no case shall any division or combination of land be approved when any one (1) of the following conditions is not satisfied: 
(1)  There shall not be any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property. 
(2)  When public sewer and public water is not available, the resulting lot size and width of any residential lot shall not be less than the minimum requirements of the State of Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (currently twelve thousand-square-foot lot are minimum and a sixty-five-foot lot width minimum). 
(3)  Every resultant parcel shall abut a public street, private street or permanent access easement not less than sixty (60) feet in width unless a lesser width is approved by the city council. In instances where a new public or private street or permanent easement is to be provided, the land division shall be reviewed by the city planner to ensure that the proposed division would result in development of the land in such a manner as to be compatible with surrounding land use and development. 
(4)  When any portion of the property to be divided is presently developed, the existing development shall not become nonconforming under the provisions of the zoning chapter as a result of the division. No person, agency or commission shall approve the division of developed land unless the building department certified that the proposed division is in accordance with the provisions of this requirement. 
(5)  For those parcels abutting existing road rights-of-way which do not meet the right-of-way width proposed in the future land use plan the land necessary to add the needed right-of-way width shall be dedicated prior to approval of the division. 
(6)  When approval of the division of land is conditioned upon the combination of parts of two (2) or more platted lots, the applicant shall submit a fully executed affidavit in form legally sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds and signed by all persons who may have any legal or equitable interest in the parcels acknowledging that they understand the partitioned or divided parcels may not thereafter be developed or used separately but only in conjunction with the adjoining parcel or parcels of land unless such further division is approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  When parcels have been subdivided into lots within the last two (2) years, no division shall be approved if such division will result in parcels of less than the average of the original platted size. 
Sec. 5.317. - Design standards and improvements. 
    All design standards and improvements required in articles V and VI for subdivisions shall be applicable to all divisions of land unless the council finds that no good purpose would be served. 
Sec. 5.318. - Permits not to be issued. 
    Building or occupancy permits shall not be issued by the department of building and safety engineering for the use of any parcel of land which has not been created in conformance with this article IV, except for parcels created prior to adoption of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.319. - Appeals. 
    Decisions of the city assessor or city planner shall be final unless an appeal in writing is made to the council by the petitioner. 
Sec. 5.320. - Fees. 
    The council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to petitioners for the division of land. 
Secs. 5.321-5.324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, § 4.1 et seq. 

Sec. 5.325. - Major thoroughfare location and arrangement. 
    The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of chapter 45, zoning and the master plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned major thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares, and such part shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. The standards for county roads are intended to be in harmony with all of the road and right-of-way standards and policies of the county road commission. 
Sec. 5.326. - Minor street location and arrangement. 
    The proposed subdivision street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. The street layout shall provide for a continuation of streets in adjoining subdivisions or for the proper projections of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided. 
Sec. 5.327. - Streets in relation to other rights-of-way. 
    Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the city council may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land as for residential, parks in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such districts shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
Sec. 5.328. - Major thoroughfare and minor street intersection. 
    Council shall require an increase in the minor street right-of-way width and a traffic divider where a residential subdivision street intersects with a major or secondary thoroughfare. Such traffic divider shall be in accordance with chapter 48 and in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
Sec. 5.329. - Marginal access streets. 
    Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontages with an approved screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
Sec. 5.330. - Street rights-of-way widths. 
    Street rights-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum right-of-way widths: 
Street type Right-of-way width (1) Major thoroughfare ..... 120 feet (2) Secondary thoroughfare .....  86 feet (3) Industrial roads .....  70 feet (4) Minor streets .....  60 feet (5) Marginal access streets .....  34 feet (6) Cul-de-sac streets .....  60-foot street and 110-foot diameter turnaround (7) Alley .....  20 feet  
Sec. 5.331. - Half streets. 
    Half streets shall be prohibited except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter; and where the council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted. 
Sec. 5.332. - Access to streets. 
    Access to streets across all ditches shall be provided by the proprietor in a standard method approved by the city council. 
Sec. 5.333. - Vertical street curves. 
    Major, secondary and minor streets shall have profile grade changes, where the grade change is over two (2) percent, connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to the following algebraic differences: 
(1)  Major thoroughfare: Twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade, expressed in feet per hundred; 
(2)  Secondary thoroughfare: Fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in rate of grade, expressed in feet per hundred; 
(3)  Minor street: Ten (10) times the algebraic difference in rate of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. 
Sec. 5.334. - Horizontal street curves. 
    The radii of the minimum horizontal center line curvature for major, secondary and minor streets shall be as follows: 
(1)  Major thoroughfare: Twelve (12) degrees-Four hundred seventy-five-foot radius; 
(2)  Secondary thoroughfare: Nineteen (19) degrees-Three hundred-foot radius; 
(3)  Minor street: Twenty-eight (28) degrees-Two hundred-foot radius. 
    A minimum of at least fifty-foot tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves. 
Sec. 5.335. - Vertical street visibility. 
    The minimum vertical visibility (measured from four-and-one-half-foot eye level to eighteen-inch tail light) shall be: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet on major thoroughfares; 
(2)  Three hundred (300) feet on secondary thoroughfares; 
(3)  Two hundred (200) feet on minor streets; 
(4)  One hundred (100) feet on minor streets less than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
Sec. 5.336. - Horizontal street visibility. 
    The minimum horizontal visibility (measured on center line) shall be: 
(1)  Three hundred (300) feet on major thoroughfares; 
(2)  Two hundred (200) feet on secondary thoroughfares; 
(3)  One hundred (100) feet on minor streets. 
Sec. 5.337. - Street intersections. 
    Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to ninety (90) degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of center line fifty (50) feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or secondary thoroughfare. 
Sec. 5.338. - Easements and utilities. 
    Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds and shall include provision for maintenance of surface drainage. Such easements shall be a total of not less than twelve (12) feet wide, usually six (6) feet dedicated from each lot or parcel. Recommendations on the proposed layout of public utility easements should be sought from all of the public utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the approved preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
Sec. 5.339. - Requirements for underground wiring. 
    The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution lines for telephone and electric service to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways. Those telephone and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. The proprietor shall bear any increase in costs, if any, over the normal mode of construction of telephone and electrical lines and facilities, as determined by the telephone or electric company involved, in accordance with the valid rules and regulations of the telephone or electric company involved. 
Sec. 5.340. - Block dimensions. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards except where, in the opinion of the commission, physical conditions may justify a variation: 
Block length (in feet) 
measured between 
right-of-way lines Block width (in feet) 
measured between right-of-way lines Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum (1) Blocks containing lots of 85 feet or less in width 715 1,000 210 360 (2) Blocks containing lots of 86 feet or more in width 900 1,500 300 700  
_____ 
(3)  Large lots subdivisions of one-half acre or greater shall not be restricted by the above dimensions if the lot length to width, within the block, does not exceed a three (3) to one (1) ratio. All other patterns which cannot be described as having blocks shall be reviewed and approved by the commission, and shall be subject to adjustments by the commission. 
Sec. 5.341. - Aerial easements. 
    Aerial easements three (3) feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for street light dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicate lot numbers) are subject to street light drop-out rights:" 
Sec. 5.342. - Public walkways. 
    Locations of public walkways shall be required by the council to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation from the subdivision to a school or park. Right-of-way of all such public walkways shall be at least thirty (30) feet and shall be in the nature of a dedication for this purpose. 
Sec. 5.343. - Public reservations. 
    When consideration is given by the proprietor to the allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds, school sites, parks and recreation facilities, as indicated in the master plan and chapter 45, zoning, such areas shall be provided by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Dedication to the municipality; 
(2)  Reservation of land for the use of property owners by deed or covenants; 
(3)  Reservation for acquisition by the city or school board within a period of two (2) years. Such reservation shall be made in such a manner as to provide for a release of the land to the proprietor if the city or the school board does not proceed with the purchase. 
    Due regard shall be shown by the council for preserving outstanding natural features such as scenic spots, watercourses or exceptionally fine groves of trees. 
Sec. 5.344. - Lot sizes and shapes. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Lot widths, areas and building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 45, zoning. 
(2)  Residential lots having excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three (3) to one (1) shall normally be considered a maximum. 
(3)  Corner lots in residential areas shall be platted a minimum of at least fifteen (15) feet wider than interior lots in order to permit conformance to setback lines on side-lotted streets. 
(4)  Lots intended for purposes other than single-family residential use shall be specifically designated for such purposes. 
Sec. 5.345. - Lot arrangement. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Every lot shall front or abut on a street. 
(2)  Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines, or as nearby as possible thereto. 
(3)  Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or secondary thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots with an approved screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, or such other treatment as may be adequate for protection of residential properties, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between building and such trafficway. 
(4)  Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets. Any deviation shall require the review and approval of the planning commission. 
Sec. 5.346. - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers and easements, where appropriate, shall be required. 
Sec. 5.347. - Required improvements. 
    It is the purpose of this section to establish and define the public improvements which will be required to be constructed by the proprietor as conditions for final plat approval. All construction shall be in accordance with chapter 48 and in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers. When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or reasonably near the service area of a public sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots. 
(2)  Storm drainage. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Where surface drainage is required, easement provisions shall ensure unrestricted flow of storm drainage. 
(3)  Water supply. When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or reasonably near the service area of a public water supply system, fire hydrants and other required water systems appurtenances shall be constructed in such manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat, both for domestic use and fire protection. If a public water supply system does not exist or is not available, a subdivision water supply system, if feasible, as determined by the city engineer, shall be installed by the proprietor. 
(4)  Streets. All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with chapter 48. 
(5)  Trees. Existing trees near street rights-of-way should be preserved by the proprietor. At least one (1) tree per lot shall be provided within the street right-of-way. Such trees shall have at least one and one-half-inch caliper measured one (1) foot above the ground. The type of tree and planting location shall be approved by the department of parks and recreation. The following trees shall not be permitted: 
a.  Box Elder; 
b.  Soft Maples (Red, Silver); 
c.  Elms; 
d.  Poplars; 
e.  Willows; 
f.  Horse Chestnut (nut bearing); 
g.  Tree of Heaven; 
h.  Catalpa. 
(6)  Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets throughout any subdivision except in zoning districts having a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more. Sidewalks shall be required along all major and secondary thoroughfares, regardless of lot size. 
(7)  Drain for sump pump discharge. Lots not served by storm sewers constructed on the near side of the street shall be served by a sump pump drain line system located and constructed according to the requirements of chapter 48. 
Cross reference- City water utility, § 2.31 et seq.; city sewer service, § 2.101 et seq.; sewage disposal utility, § 2.168 et seq.; tree regulations, § 3.21 et seq.; subdivision and project improvements, § 5.361 et seq. 
Secs. 5.348-5.350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 5.351. - Standard details, standard specifications and general supplementary conditions. 
    The city standard details, standard specifications and general supplementary conditions as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be complied with. 
Sec. 5.352. - Compliance required. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 5.353. - Review fees. 
    Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, attorney fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided for by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 5.354. - Planning review fees. 
    Fees shall be charged for the planning review of preliminary plats (stage 1) by the city on the basis of the schedule from time to time established by resolution of the city council. There shall be no additional planning review fee charged for preliminary plats (stage 2) or final plats which are in substantial conformance to a previously approved preliminary plat (stage 1). 
Secs. 5.355, 5.356. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 5.357. - General. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
CHAPTER 48. - SUBDIVISION AND PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities and services, tit. II; required improvements in subdivisions, § 5.347. 

Sec. 5.361. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of subdivision and project improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.362. - Compliance required. 
    All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, which are or will come under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter. No water supply system, public sanitary sewer, or public storm sewer designed to serve more than one (1) premises shall be constructed, reconstructed or altered in the city unless the request for construction, reconstruction or alteration is approved by the city engineer and appropriate permits are obtained from the city, county, state and other governmental agency that may be involved. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.363. - Permits required. 
    Permit to construct. Application shall be made to the city engineer on forms prescribed by the city engineer and shall be accompanied by plans and other information required by this chapter. At the time of application, the review fee, cash deposit, and testing fee deposit shall be paid and a cost opinion shall be provided as required further within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1505, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.364. - Fees and deposits. 
(1)  Review fee. At the time of an application for a permit, there shall be paid a fee of two (2) percent of the cost of the proposed improvements as estimated by the registered professional engineer or land surveyor who prepared the plans for the improvements. The city engineer shall, from time to time, review this fee and make a report and recommendation to the council concerning the reasonableness of such fee. The city council, upon receiving such report and recommendation from the city engineer may, by resolution, change such fee or prescribe such additional fees as may be deemed reasonable and necessary. 
(2)  Inspection deposit. At the time of application for a permit, the applicant shall deposit with the engineering department to cover the cost of inspection, a percentage of the total contract price as follows: 
Contract amount Deposit required $0.00 to $5,000.00 $1,000.00 $5,000.00 to $50,000.00 20%, not less than $1,000.00 $50,000.00 to $100,000.00 18%, not less than $10,000.00 Over $100,000.00 15%, not less than $18,000.00  
A signed and sealed engineers cost opinion or a copy of the contract for the improvements shall be submitted with the application. The amount of the money remaining in the deposit shall be reviewed by the office of the city engineer from time to time during construction of the project and at completion of construction. If the funds are insufficient to cover the inspection costs, the city engineer shall require that the contractor or owner make an additional deposit. If at the completion of the project it is ascertained that the total inspection cost to the city was less than the amount deposited, the surplus shall, upon written request, be returned to the contractor or owner after the final acceptance of the project. The amount deposited shall be used to pay the cost of on-site inspection, inspection supervision, and an administration fee. Soils, compaction and materials inspection as found necessary by the city engineer shall be paid for by a separate deposit as stated in subsection (4) below. 
(3)  Cash deposit. At the time of application for a permit, the applicant shall place with the city a cash deposit in an amount to be set by the city engineer, but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The purpose of this deposit is for the protection and restoration of public and/or private property other than the property owned or controlled by the landowner or developer. It will be used in case the contractor fails to repair or restore such properties. The cash deposit or any unused portion thereof will be returned to the contractor upon final acceptance of the project or subdivision improvements. 
(4)  Testing fee deposit. The city engineer shall estimate the amount and cost of testing of materials, workmanship and completed facility required on the project and shall require that a deposit be made by the owner or developer to cover the estimated costs. The city engineer shall order necessary testing from an approved testing company and the testing company shall be paid from the money deposited. The owner or developer may, at their option, hire a testing company acceptable to the city and pay for the service directly. In this case the owner or developer shall not deposit monies to cover the costs but shall instruct the testing company to provide testing at the direction of the city engineer. A "testing company" as used herein shall be a professional engineering firm established to and experienced in providing materials and field testing services. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 1505, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.365. - Bonds and insurance. 
(1)  Performance guarantee and utility dedication surety. At the time of the issuance of a permit, the owner shall deposit a performance guarantee in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated construction cost for such improvement in the form of cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit. It is the intent of the performance guarantee to ensure that a permitted improvement, once undertaken, is completed or is, at the owner's option, terminated in a manner which leaves the city's existing utility system undamaged or restored and intact. At the time of issuance of a permit the owner shall also furnish a utility dedication surety. It is the intent of the utility dedication surety to ensure that all or the completed part of a permitted improvement can be accepted by the city without encumbrance. The utility dedication surety shall be in the form of cash escrow or an irrevocable bank letter of credit and shall be deposited with the city treasurer. Release of utility dedication surety shall be made after public improvements of the project have been installed properly in accordance with the approved plans, city standards, and have been accepted by the city council. The utility dedication surety shall be established in accordance with the schedule below: 
Cost Of Construction Surety Escrows Up to $10,000.00 $1,000.00 $10,000.01 to $50,000.00 10% but not less than $3,000.00 $50,000.01 to $100,000.00 10% $100,000.01 or more $10,000.00  
(2)  Insurance. At the time of issuance of a permit for subdivision and project improvements under the ultimate jurisdiction of the engineering department of the city the contractor shall procure and maintain, during the life of any contract or agreement for such construction, insurance meeting the requirements of the general supplementary conditions as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  Maintenance and guarantee bond. Prior to acceptance of any project or subdivision improvements by the city, the owner or contractor who has installed such improvements shall furnish to the city a bond on the form provided and with sureties acceptable to the city, guaranteeing to maintain the improvements and to repair any defects therein for a period of two (2) years from and after the date of acceptance by the city council of the improvements. Such bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the contract price for the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.366. - Submittal and review. 
    For city approval of plans for improvements the applicant shall furnish to the engineering department, along with the application for a permit, five (5) sets of the project plans and specifications, including the general plan, for the system on which he desires approval. The city engineer shall review the plans for conformity to the standards set forth in this chapter, and certify that they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the city. The applicant, after making any changes requested, shall then submit the appropriate number of plans to the city engineer for final approval. The city engineer shall then review these revised plans for conformity to the comments mentioned above, and if they have been properly made, will request additional plans as necessary for ultimate approval and construction permit by the state and/or county departments. No construction shall be started until such permit(s) have been issued and all fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.367. - Plan requirements. 
(1)  All plans, easements, descriptions and design computations, maps and sketches shall be prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor as is appropriate to the project or subdivision. All such documents shall bear the seal of the person who prepared them. 
(2)  Plans submitted shall be on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch white prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared. Judgment should be exercised in the design, layout and presentation of proposed improvements. 
(3)  For projects or subdivisions having more than one (1) sheet of plans, a cover sheet displaying a general plan having a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall be provided showing the overall project or subdivision and indicating the location of all improvements shown in the detailed plans. Superimposed on this general plan shall be one-foot contours of the area including the area at least one hundred (100) feet outside of the subdivision or project site. Street names, street and easement width, lot lines, lot dimensions and lot numbers shall be shown in all plans. Where possible the utilities shall be located in accordance with the city standards as established by the city engineer. Easements shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. Sewers in easements shall be kept at least two (2) feet away from side or rear lot lines. 
(4)  City standard details and specifications as adopted by resolution of the city council shall be incorporated as part of the plans by reference. 
(5)  The standard notes as adopted by the city council shall be placed on the plans. 
(6)  The requirements of chapter 19, which relates to the site grading and drainage, and of chapter 49, soil erosion and sedimentation control of this City Code, may be combined on the plans with the requirements of this chapter. 
(7)  Easements shall be shown on the plans. 
(8)  Note on the plans other permits, such as county road, state highway, and drain commissioner, which are required. 
(9)  Note on the plans the testing required for acceptance of the improvements. 
(10)  Prior to starting any improvement design, the applicant may make use of maps and information available on the city's website under the engineering department. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to verify utility locations provided by the city. 
(11)  All sewers shall be shown in plan and profile. Profiles of sewers shall indicate the size, class of pipe, invert and slope of the sewer and type of bedding and shall indicate the existing ground along the route of the sewer and the proposed or existing top of curb or edge of pavement grade. The locations of compacted porous backfill required shall be indicated on the profile together with other existing or proposed utilities. 
(12)  Elevations shall be on city datum. Bench marks for the work shall be indicated on the plan. 
(13)  Finished grades of structures and hydrants shall be indicated on the plan or profile for all structures. 
(14)  Water main fittings. The plan shall indicate only such fittings, such as bends and reducers, which are not obviously otherwise identified. Indicate the locations, by proper dimensions, of such fittings. 
(15)  Curve data for all street and property line curves shall be indicated. 
(16)  The top of curb grade and elevation shall be indicated on the plan or profile for proposed paving project. 
(17)  A positive (white) photostat of the plat for subdivisions accurately reduced to a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet shall be furnished to the city for the purpose of obtaining addresses for lots in subdivisions. 
(18)  A copy of the computed plat for subdivisions shall be submitted with the engineering plans. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.368. - Design standards. 
    The following design standards shall be complied with in addition to the engineering design standards that shall be promulgated from time to time by the public works department: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  Minimum slopes. The following table of minimum slopes for sanitary sewers shall be adhered to: 
Size and minimum slope 
10" at 0.30% 
12" at 0.22% 
15" at 0.15% 
18" at 0.12% 
21" at 0.10% 
24" at 0.08% 
Note: In the city, the minimum allowable size of a sanitary sewer is ten (10) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Bedding. A note or detail shall show that all sewer pipe shall be installed on a class B, or better, bedding. 
(c)  Manholes. Sanitary sewer manholes shall be spaced an average of three hundred (300) feet apart with an absolute maximum spacing of three hundred thirty (330) feet. Manholes shall be placed in the street right-of-way. In general, sanitary sewers will not be approved in the rear lot easement. 
(d)  Profile. The sewer profile shall indicate the length of run between each manhole, the size, class of pipe, etc., and slope of sewer between each manhole, and the class of bedding if class A bedding is required. Top elevations of all manholes shall be indicated. 
(e)  Depth. A minimum depth from top of curb (or road center line) to the top of any sanitary sewer of eight and one-half (81/2) feet at local control points, or a minimum of nine (9) feet at locations where the sewer grade is parallel to the road grade shall be provided. 
(f)  Design. Design data to support the pipe sizes used shall be submitted with the plans. The sewer shall be designed to meet the requirements of the county drain commission and the state department of environmental quality. 
(2)  Storm sewers. 
(a)  Design. Drainage systems shall be designed for a ten-year storm. The rational methods for arriving at stormwater runoff shall be used. The formula for rainfall intensity shall be equivalent to I = 175/T + 25 in which T is the time of concentration. The consulting engineer shall use judgment in arriving at proper impervious factors. The consulting engineer shall submit a map outlining the various areas which drain to the point of inlet used for design together with the storm sewer design computations and shall place his professional engineer seal thereon. 
In general, sufficient capacity shall be provided in the storm sewer system to take fully developed (fully paved and sewered) upstream drainage into the system. 
(b)  Design elevation. Where the hydraulic gradient is above the top of the sewer pipe the design elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be indicated on the profile. 
(c)  Manholes. Manhole spacing for storm sewers shall be as follows: 
Diameter of sewer (inches) Absolute maximum manhole spacing 12-15 330' 18-30 350' 36 and 42 400' 48 450' 54 and 60 500' 66 and larger 600'  
Note: Minimum size of storm sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
Note: Height of horizontal elliptical pipe shall be used as the criteria for manhole spacing. Catch basins shall not be constructed over a sewer line to replace manholes. 
(d)  Profile. The profile for the storm sewer shall indicate: The length of run between each manhole, the size, type (such as C-76 Class IV, etc.) and slope of sewer between each manhole, and the class of bedding if Class A bedding is required. Show top elevations of all manholes. Where possible, the slope of the sewers shall provide a minimum velocity of two and five-tenths (2.5) feet per second for the sewer running full. Limits of required power compacted granular backfill shall be shown on the profile. 
(e)  Bedding. A note or detail shall show that all sewer pipe shall be installed on a class B except where better bedding is required by a note on the plans. 
(f)  Depth. Where possible provide a minimum of three (3) feet of cover from the top of curb (or road center line) to the top of any storm sewer. If the depth of cover to the top of pipe is less than one (1) foot, ASTM Specification C-76, class IV pipe shall be used. If the cover is between one (1) foot and three (3) feet from the top of curb to top of pipe, use C-76 class IV pipe. All catch basin leads within a street shall be C-76, class IV pipe, including the leads to the manhole. 
(g)  Catch basins. In general catch basins shall be located as follows: 
(i)  Five (5) feet back of the radius return of street intersections. One hundred (100) feet maximum distance along the street between a high point and a corner catch basin is allowed when drainage is required to go around the corner. Carrying drainage around the corner should be avoided insofar as is possible. 
(ii)  At all low points in streets. 
(iii)  On residential streets and residential collector streets at intermediate points along the street such that there is a maximum of six hundred (600) feet of drainage draining from a high point to a catch basin or from a previous intercepting catch basin to this catch basin. A maximum of nine hundred (900) feet of drainage is allowed from two (2) directions. On secondary and principal thoroughfares the spacing shall be designed for the paved area served. 
(iv)  Field catch basins shall be provided at all low points in easements. Locate intercepting field catch basins such that not more than six hundred (600) feet of drainage runs into any one (1) catch basin other than a low point catch basin. Twelve hundred (1,200) feet of drainage is allowed to run into a low point catch basin. Locate field catch basins in rear lot easement swale when such swale changes direction by more than forty-five (45) degrees. 
(h)  Easement grades. Finished easement grades shall be indicated on the plans. 
(i)  Open drains. Improved open drains may be permitted under special circumstances in accordance with section 5.374 of this chapter on variances. 
(j)  Headwalls. Headwalls and inlet structures shall be placed as required. 
(k)  Joints. All pipes shall have modified grooved tongue with rubber gasket joints. Sizes twenty-seven-inch and larger shall have inside of joints cement pointed. 
(3)  Water mains. 
(a)  Piping arrangement. Any water main in excess of sixteen hundred (1,600) feet in length between interconnections may be required by the engineer to be oversized. On dead ends where there is no possibility of a future extension a main installed not exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length. Where a dead end exceeds four hundred (400) feet in length, the developer will be required to extend the main to provide a loop or oversize the main, as directed by the engineer. No dead-end main shall connect to a looping main of smaller size. Water mains shall be designed and constructed with five (5) feet of earth cover from finished grade. Hydrants or blow-offs shall be installed at the end of all dead-end water mains. 
(b)  Minimum pipe sizes. 
(i)  Detached single-family and two-family residential buildings. The minimum size of water mains in these developments shall be eight (8) inches. 
(ii)  Attached single-family buildings of three or more dwelling units and low-rise multiple-family buildings. The standard size of water mains in these areas shall be twelve (12) inches and eight (8) inches. Eight-inch mains may be used only where it completes a good looped system and where the distance used between intersecting or looping water mains is one thousand (1,000) feet or less. 
(iii)  All other developments. The standard size of mains in these areas shall be twelve (12) inches. Eight-inch mains may be used only where it completes a good looped system and where the project designer can present design calculations which demonstrate that the required fire flow as established by the city engineer can be delivered by the mains in the project or subdivision with the minimum pressure loss stated in subsection (f) below. 
(c)  Valving. Gate valve spacing in general will be regulated by the requirement that in any single case of accident, breakage or repair not more than one (1) fire hydrant will be removed from service by the resultant main isolation and that no more than one thousand (1,000) feet of water main must be removed from service. This one thousand (1,000) feet is to be considered an absolute maximum. An average of six hundred (600) to eight hundred (800) feet between valves must be maintained. Gate valves shall be located in the system such that not more than four (4) valves need be turned off to isolate any section of water main. Where possible, gate valves shall be located at street intersections five (5) feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. Sufficient valves shall be placed in single-family and low-rise multiple-family building areas such that not more than thirty (30) lots or dwelling units shall be serviced within such section of water main which can be so isolated. 
(d)  Hydrants. 
(i)  Street rights-of-way. In streets serving detached single-family and two-family dwelling unit buildings, maximum hydrant spacing shall be six hundred (600) feet. In streets serving all other land uses the maximum spacing shall be five hundred (500) feet. Where hydrants are placed within the block they shall be located approximately twenty-five (25) feet from the side lot line. Where near a street intersection, they shall be located fifteen (15) feet from the intersecting street right-of-way. Hydrants shall be placed within fifteen (15) feet of the curb line or shoulder to allow access by fire department equipment. Where a ditch lies between the hydrant and curb or shoulder, a culvert, minimum length twenty (20) feet, shall be installed in the ditch and fill placed to allow access to the hydrant. In all cases hydrants will be located in highly visible and accessible locations. Where street rights-of-way are one hundred (100) feet or wider, and buildings or residences are facing this right-of-way, hydrants shall be located alternately on both sides of the street. 
(ii)  Detached single-family and two-family dwelling unit buildings. Hydrants shall be placed in the street right-of-way so that no building is more than three hundred fifty (350) feet from a hydrant. 
(iii)  All other developments, buildings and structures. No part of any building or structure shall be more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from a hydrant. This distance shall be measured along the shortest feasible exterior route for laying hose. If the two-hundred-fifty-foot limit cannot be met from existing hydrants, additional water mains shall be installed with hydrants spaced no more than five hundred (500) feet apart to provide the required coverage. Such water mains shall be constructed in easements and the easements and water mains, with appurtenances, shall be dedicated to the city. Hydrants shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the exterior wall of the building unless a closer location is allowed by the fire department. Driveways capable of accepting fire department equipment shall be provided adjacent to the hydrants. Plans for such additional water mains and appurtenances shall be reviewed and approved by the fire department prior to start of construction. Hydrants shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet to walls, earth mounds, berms, and other such obstructions. Four-inch diameter steel pipes filled with concrete shall be provided in parking lot and drive areas to protect hydrants from damage by vehicular traffic. The arrangement of the pipes is subject to approval by the fire department. The fire department may allow curbing in lieu of the pipes. 
(iv)  Hydrant leads. All hydrant leads shall be not less than six (6) inches, and six-inch leads shall be not more than forty (40) feet in length. Eight-inch leads will generally be required on rights-of-way wider than sixty-six (66) feet when the hydrant is located on the side opposite of the main. No hydrant leads may be connected to six-inch dead-end mains. All hydrant leads shall be valved. 
(v)  Hydrant pattern. Hydrants shall be approved Southfield Standard. All hydrants shall have two (2) four-inch steamer connections. 
(e)  Materials. All materials for pipes, fittings and appurtenances shall comply with the requirements of the standard specifications. 
(f)  Design. Pipe shall be sized to carry maximum day flow plus fire flow with pressure losses no greater than two (2) feet per one thousand (1,000) feet of pipe. 
(4)  Paving. 
(a)  Cross section. The paving section shall conform to the city's standard details and standard specifications as to width, thickness, minimum radius, jointing and other details of design and construction. All pavement shall be concrete with integral curb. Widening lanes on existing roads with shoulder and ditch may be constructed without curb if allowed by the city engineer. 
(b)  Grades. The minimum longitudinal grade shall be four-tenths (0.4) percent and the maximum shall be six (6) percent. Variations from these values may be allowed by the city engineer if the conditions of the project warrant such variations. The minimum slope around intersection returns shall be five-tenths (0.5) percent. 
(c)  Subbase and underdrain systems. A six-inch compacted granular subbase and underdrain system may be required if ground conditions are such as to make its use necessary. The consulting engineer shall make his own determination as to ground conditions and if requested shall furnish the city engineer with a statement of his determination and recommendation. If ground conditions are encountered during construction which warrant such subbase and underdrain system in the opinion of the city engineer he shall require that they be installed. 
(d)  Street and traffic signs. The developer or owner of the project shall have signing installed as required by the city traffic engineer. 
(5)  Sidewalks. 
(a)  Standard section, slope, location. Sidewalks, if included on project plans, shall be built on the specified line and grade. Width of walk is to be five (5) feet minimum. All sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four (4) inches, except at driveways where it shall be six (6) inches thick. All drive approaches shall be six (6) inches thick. The sidewalk shall pitch toward the street at the rate of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot of width. The street edge of the sidewalks shall be set above the top of curb at a rate of not less than one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot of width of parkway or berm area. All residential sidewalk shall be one (1) foot off the property line. This standard location may be varied to respect natural features or amenities located in or near the right-of-way. Such variation is subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Ramps. At curbed street intersections and drive crossings, sidewalk ramps conforming to the standard details shall be installed with detectable warnings in accordance with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
(c)  Materials and workmanship. All materials and workmanship shall conform to the city's standard specifications. 
(d)  Joints. In all sidewalks, an expansion joint shall be placed at not more than fifty (50) feet. At street, driveway or crosswalk intersections, an expansion joint shall be placed between the new walk and the existing walk, driveway or curb. A contraction joint shall be placed at intervals of five (5) feet and at right angles to forms and walk surface. 
(6)  Drain for sump pump discharge. 
(a)  Materials and workmanship. All materials and workmanship shall conform to the city's standard specifications. 
(b)  Location. In single-family detached developments the drain may be placed along the rear lot line with wyes placed to serve each house backing on the line. In existing single-family detached developments the drain may be placed in the street right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk with leads to the property line on the near side only. In this case the drain shall be placed no deeper than three and one-half (31/2) feet, shall be laid at a grade paralleling the pavement grade, and shall be constructed after water and gas services have been installed. In two-family, attached single-family, townhouse and low-rise multiple developments which have separated basements serving individual units, the drain shall be placed in a manner consistent with other utilities in the project development plans. 
(c)  Application. Drains constructed under requirements of this section shall be used solely to accept sump pump discharge. They shall not be used to accept roof or yard drainage. 
(d)  Design. The drain shall be sized to accept simultaneously the discharge from all connected sump pumps pumping at their rated capacity. Minimum pipe size shall be eight (8) inches in diameter. The pipe shall be laid at a grade to produce a minimum velocity of two and one-half (21/2) feet per second when the pipe is running full. Cleanouts shall be placed at one-hundred-foot intervals along the drain and at the upper end of the line. The drain may discharge to a storm sewer wye connection, manhole, or catch basin. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.369. - Standard details, standard specifications, standard plan notes, general conditions and general supplementary conditions. 
    The city standard details, standard specifications, standard plan notes, general conditions and general supplementary conditions as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be complied with during preparation of plans and during construction of the improvements. The standard plan notes shall be placed on the plans. These specifications, details, notes and conditions are available on the city's website under the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.370. - Compliance with other laws, codes and ordinances. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner, developer and contractor to meet the requirements of other parts of this Code applicable to the subdivision or projects as well as laws and rules administered by other governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.371. - Easements. 
    Easements must be prepared on city forms and submitted to the city engineer for review before he recommends issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.372. - Preconstruction meeting, inspection, testing and acceptance. 
(1)  After the requirements for issuance of the permit have been met and it has been recommended for issuance by the city engineer and before construction is started the contractor shall request a preconstruction meeting. The city engineer shall arrange the meeting and at the meeting shall review with the contractor the plans for the improvements, city requirements, other utilities and any other items pertinent to the improvements. 
(2)  Subdivision and project improvements shall be inspected during construction by an inspector assigned by the city engineer and/or the department of public services to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The contractor shall notify the city engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours before commencing work so that inspections may be scheduled. 
(3)  The inspector will inform the city engineer as to the progress of the work, the manner in which it is being done, and the quality of the materials being used. The inspector will call to the attention of the contractor any failure to follow the approved plans and city standard details and specifications that he may observe. The inspector shall have the authority to reject materials or suspend the work until any questions on the performance of the work can be referred to and decided by the city engineer. The inspector shall have no authority to direct the contractor's operations or to change the plans or specifications. 
(4)  In no instance shall any action or omission on the part of the inspector release the contractor of the responsibility of completing the work in accordance with the plans and specifications. 
(5)  The city engineer shall have authority to ensure that the finished work will be in accordance with the plans and specifications. He shall also have authority to reject all work and material which does not conform to the plans and specifications. 
(6)  The city engineer shall require such testing of materials and workmanship as is in his opinion necessary to ensure proper completion of the work. This testing shall include but not be limited to testing of density of material used to backfill excavations. 
(7)  Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements and upon receipt of the following items the city engineer shall recommend to the city administrator that the improvements be accepted by the city council. 
(a)  A quitclaim deed or bill of sale from the developer for these improvements; 
(b)  A letter from the engineers who designed the improvements indicating that the construction of these improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plans; 
(c)  A letter from the engineers who designed the improvements indicating the final construction cost of these improvements; 
(d)  Three (3) sets of as-built drawings; 
(e)  Sworn statements from the contractors, indicating that all labor and materials have been paid in full; 
(f)  Maintenance and guarantee bond on the city form in favor of the city in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the final construction cost of these improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.373. - Restoration. 
    The contractor shall restore, at his own expense, any public and/or private property damaged as a result of any act or omission on his part or on the part of his employees, agents or subcontractors to a condition equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done. If the contractor fails to begin to repair or restore such damage or injury within forty-eight (48) hours after ordered to do so by the engineering department the city engineer may order city forces to do so or may hire another contractor to make required repair and restoration and deduct the cost thereof from the cash deposit required under section 5.364 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
Sec. 5.374. - Variances. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from these engineering design standards and other requirements of this chapter when it determines that undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe other conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the subdivision or project improvement such that a strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of his property; and 
(2)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property right of the applicant; and 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 4-30-07) 
CHAPTER 49. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, adopted November 27, 2008, as amended by Ord. No. 1567, adopted February 17, 2009, amended ch. 49 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 49 consisted of §§ 5.501-5.573, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification of this Code. 
Cross reference- Soil removal and landfills, § 5.251 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 5.501. - Purpose. 
    The city soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance (this chapter) is intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city residents and the public health, safety and welfare of the community by regulating earth change activities, which can harm the environment through erosion and the unnatural accumulation of sediment. The city council adopts this chapter pursuant to the provisions of part 91, soil erosion and sedimentation control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended (part 91), being MCL 324.9101 et seq. and the administrative rules promulgated by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5.502. - Definitions. 
    The city adopts by reference the definitions in part 91 and the rules unless expressly given a different meaning in this chapter. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  Accelerated soil erosion means the increased loss of the land surface that occurs as a result of human activities. 
(2)  Agricultural practices means all land farming operations except plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops. 
(3)  Authorized local official means any person or persons appointed by city council who are authorized as ordinance enforcement officers responsible with the enforcement of chapter 49 of the City Code. 
(4)  Authorized public agency means a state agency or an agency of a local unit of government authorized by MDEQ under section 9110 of part 91 to implement soil erosion and sedimentation control procedures with regard to earth changes undertaken by it. 
(5)  Certificate of completion means a signed, written statement by the soil erosion engineer that the specific construction and inspections have been performed and that such work complies with the applicable requirements of part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(6)  City means the City of Southfield, Michigan. 
(7)  Designated agent means a person who has written authorization from the landowner to sign the application and secure a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit in the landowner's name. 
(8)  Earth change means a human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production. 
(9)  Engineering department means the city engineering department. 
(10)  Grading means any leveling, stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(11)  Lake means the Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or impounds that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of continued occurrence of water, and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater than one (1) acre. "Lake" does not include sediment basins and basins constructed for the sole purpose of stormwater retention, cooling water, or treating polluted water. 
(12)  Landowner means the person who owns property in the city or who holds a recorded easement on the property or who is engaged in construction in a public right-of-way in accordance with sections 13, 14, 15, and 16 of Highway Obstructions and Encroachments; use of Highway by Public Utilities, 1925 PA 368, as amended, being 247.183, 247.184, 247.185 and 247.186 of the Michigan Complied Laws. 
(13)  MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(14)  Municipal enforcing agency means the engineering department, as designated by the city council under section 9106 of part 91. 
(15)  Municipality means any of the following: 
a.  A city. 
b.  A village. 
c.  A charter township. 
d.  A general law township that is located in a county with a population of two hundred thousand (200,000) or more. 
(16)  Non-erosive velocity means a speed of water movement that is not conducive to the development of accelerated soil erosion. 
(17)  On-site authorized agent means the person identified on the permit application by the landowner or the designated agent to be authorized and responsible for making decisions on behalf of the landowner. 
(18)  Part 91 means part 91, soil erosion and sedimentation control, of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, being MCL 324.9101 et seq. 
(19)  Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means those control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and sedimentation and which are maintained after project completion. 
(20)  Rules means the rules promulgated pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, being MCL 24.201 to 24.328 for the administration of part 91. 
(21)  Sediment means solid particulate matter, including both mineral and organic matter that is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the actions of wind, water, or gravity and has been deposited elsewhere. 
(22)  Sediment basin means a naturally occurring or constructed depression used for the sole purpose of capturing sediment during and after an earth change activity. 
(23)  Soil erosion means the wearing away of land by the action of wind, water, or gravity; or a combination of wind, water, or gravity. 
(24)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control permit or permit means a permit issued by the soil erosion engineer to authorize work to be performed under the provisions of part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(25)  Soil erosion engineer means a person and/or other designees who has/have a certificate of training in soil erosion and sedimentation control from MDEQ and that is appointed by the engineering department to perform the responsibilities for administering and enforcing part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(26)  Stabilization means the establishment of vegetation or the proper placement, grading, or covering of soil to ensure its resistance to soil erosion, sliding, or other earth movement. 
(27)  State agency means a principal state department or a state public university. 
(28)  Stop work order means an order that stops all work on a project until any and all violations of part 91, the rules and this chapter are corrected, except for remedial measures to correct the violation. 
(29)  Stormwater retention basin means an area which is constructed to capture surface water runoff and which does not discharge directly to a lake or stream through an outlet. Water leaves the basin by infiltration and evaporation. 
(30)  Stream means a river, creek, or other surface watercourse which may or may not be serving as a drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, 1956 PA 40, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq., and which has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of the continued flow or continued occurrence of water, including the connecting waters of the Great Lakes. 
(31)  Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means interim control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and sedimentation and which are not maintained after project completion. 
(32)  Violation of part 91 or violates part 91 means a violation of part 91, the rules, or this chapter, or a permit issued under part 91 or this chapter. 
(33)  Waters of the state means the Great Lakes and their connecting waters, inland lakes and streams, as defined in the rules, and wetlands regulated under part 303, wetlands protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, being MCL 324.30301 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5.503. - Municipal enforcing agency. 
    The engineering department is hereby designated as the municipal enforcing agency responsible for administering and enforcing part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.504. - Jurisdiction. 
    The engineering department shall administer and enforce this chapter throughout the city except within the territorial boundaries of a governmental unit that has been designated by MDEQ as an authorized public agency pursuant to section 9110 of part 91. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.505. - Rules adopted. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference and incorporates into this chapter as if fully set forth herein, the rules adopted by MDEQ pursuant to part 91 and duly filed with the Secretary of State. Said rules shall be available for public distribution at a reasonable charge and will be available for public inspection at the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.506. - Fee schedule. 
    All fees for administering and enforcing this chapter shall be paid to the city in accordance with a fee schedule determined by resolution of the city council. The city council may revise the fee schedule by adopting a written amendment to the fee schedule from time to time. All fees shall be doubled if work starts without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.507. - More restrictive provisions. 
    To the extent that any provisions or requirements of this chapter are more restrictive than, or are in addition to, the provisions or requirements of part 91 or the rules, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 5.508. - Permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued by the department of building and safety engineering until the permit required under this chapter has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5.509. - Activities requiring a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. 
(a)  A landowner or designated agent who contracts for, allows, or engages in an earth change in this city shall obtain a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit in the landowner's name from the engineering department, unless exempted in section 5.510 of this chapter, before commencing an earth change which: 
1.  Disturbs one (1) or more acres of land; or 
2.  Is located within five hundred (500) feet of the waters of the state regardless of the amount of land disturbed; or 
3.  Is located within five hundred (500) feet of a storm drain inlet regardless of the amount of land disturbed. 
(b)  If an earth change is under the jurisdiction of two (2) or more municipal or county enforcing agencies, a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit from the engineering department is required for the activities under the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(c)  If a soil erosion engineer serves a notice of violation in person or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to a person who owns land on which an earth change has been made that may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation or adjacent properties or waters of the state, the landowner shall obtain a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit and implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures that will effectively reduce soil erosion or sedimentation from the land on which the earth change has been made (see section 324.9116). 
(d)  An earth change activity that does not require a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit under part 91, the rules or this chapter is not exempt from enforcement procedures under part 91, the rules or this chapter, if the activity exempted results in soil erosion and off-site sedimentation of adjacent properties or the waters of the state (see R323.1704(2)). 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9116; R323.1704. 
Sec. 5.510. - Permit exemptions and waivers. 
(a)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit is not required for the following: 
1.  Normal road and driveway maintenance, such as grading or leveling, that does not increase the width or length of the road or driveway and that will not contribute sediment to lakes, streams, drains, or regulated wetlands. 
2.  An earth change of a minor nature that is stabilized within twenty-four (24) hours of the initial disturbance and that will not contribute sediment to lakes, streams, drains or regulated wetlands. 
3.  Plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops. 
4.  Earth change associated with well locations, surface facilities, flow lines, or access roads relating to oil or gas exploration and development activities regulated under part 615, supervisor of wells, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, being MCL 324.61501 et seq., provided the permit application to drill and operate contains a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that is approved by MDEQ under part 615. However, those earth changes shall conform to the same standards as required for a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit under part 91, the rules and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9115; R323.1705. 
Sec. 5.511. - Permit application; designated agent; meeting with soil erosion engineer. 
(a)  A landowner or designated agent shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application to the engineering department. Copies of the permit application containing state prescribed information are available from the engineering department or the city website. 
(b)  The permit application shall be signed and dated by the landowner or designated agent. If the landowner is a corporation, include the name and title of the authorized corporate representative. 
(c)  If a designated agent is signing the application for the landowner, the landowner shall either also sign the application or provide a letter authorizing the designated agent to act on his/her behalf including authority for the designated agent to designate an on-site authorized agent. 
(d)  The soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application shall be accompanied by a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, the required fees and any other documents that the soil erosion engineer may require. 
(e)  The landowner or designated agent shall meet with the soil erosion engineer, if requested, to ensure that the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meets the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R323.1706. 
Sec. 5.512. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan; contents. 
    A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be designed to effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation, and shall identify factors that may contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation, or both. The plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale on sheets not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size and include, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
(a)  A site location sketch showing the landowner's property boundaries and all waters of the state and major roads within five hundred (500) feet of the property boundary. 
(b)  A boundary surveyor legal description of the site. 
(c)  Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and also the designated agent if the landowner is not completing the application. 
(d)  A map or maps at a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch or as otherwise determined by the engineering department. The maps shall include: property boundaries; proximity of proposed earth change activities to waters of the state; predominate land features including structures and vegetation on-site and extending fifty (50) feet beyond property boundaries; and existing and proposed topographical contour intervals or slope descriptions. The engineering department shall determine the required contour information necessary to effectuate the provision of this chapter. Single-family home construction projects, or similar projects in size, may submit written information concerning the slope of the project area instead of a topographical sketch or map unless the engineering department determines, in writing, that a topographical sketch or map is needed. 
(e)  A soils survey or a detailed written description of the soil types of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change. 
(f)  Details for the proposed earth changes including all of the following: 
1.  A description and the location of the physical limits of each proposed earth change. 
2.  A description and the location of all existing and proposed on-site drainage and dewatering facilities including downspouts from eaves troughs and storm and sump leads or discharge points for single-family residential sites, if applicable. 
3.  The timing and sequence of each proposed earth change. 
4.  A description, the location, and estimated costs of all proposed temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures along with a schedule for installing and removing each temporary control measure. 
5.  The location, a description, and the estimated costs of all proposed permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities along with the schedule for the installation and maintenance of all control measures and facilities. 
(g)  Any other information required by the soil erosion engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R323.1703. 
Sec. 5.513. - Earth change requirements; time; sediment removal; design installation, and removal of temporary or permanent control measures; standards and specifications. 
(a)  A person shall design, construct, and complete an earth change in a manner that limits the exposed area of any disturbed land for the shortest possible period of time as determined by the soil erosion engineer. 
(b)  A person shall remove sediments caused by accelerated soil erosion from runoff waters before it leaves the site of the earth change. 
(c)  A person shall design a temporary or permanent control measure that is designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through or from, the earth change area to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity. 
(d)  A person shall install temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures before or upon commencement of the earth change activity and shall maintain the measures on a daily basis. Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be removed after permanent soil erosion measures are in place and the area is stabilized. A person shall stabilize the area with permanent soil erosion control measures pursuant to approved plans and under approved standards and specifications as prescribed by subsection 5.513(f) below. 
(e)  A person shall complete permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches or any disturbed land area as approved in the timing sequence schedule but no later than five (5) calendar days after final grading or the final earth change has been completed. If it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth change has been completed or if significant earth change activity ceases, then a person shall maintain temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures until permanent soil erosion measures are in place and the area is stabilized. 
(f)  A person shall install and maintain temporary and permanent control measures in accordance with the standards and specifications of all of the following: 
1.  The product manufacturer; 
2.  MDEQ; 
3.  County drain commission; and 
4.  Standards formally adopted by the city engineering department. 
(g)  If a conflict exists between standards and specifications referenced in this section, then the soil erosion engineer shall determine which specifications are appropriate for the project. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R323.1708, 323.1709, and 323.1710. 
Sec. 5.514. - Application review and permit procedures. 
(a)  The soil erosion engineer shall approve, disapprove, or require modification to an application for a permit within thirty (30) calendar days after the filing of a complete application for permit. A complete application includes the completed application, plans and required fees. The soil erosion engineer shall notify an applicant of approval by first class mail. If an application is disapproved, then the soil erosion engineer shall advise the applicant by mail of its reasons for disapproval and conditions required for approval. The soil erosion engineer need not notify an applicant of approval or disapproval by mail if the applicant is given written approval or disapproval of the application in person. A permit given to the applicant either in person or by first class mail constitutes approval. 
(b)  Upon determination that a permit applicant has met all the requirements of part 91, the rules, and this chapter, the soil erosion engineer shall issue a permit for the proposed earth change on a form that contains state prescribed information as well as that prescribed by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9112, R323.1707. 
Sec. 5.515. - Permit application disapproval. 
    The soil erosion engineer shall disapprove a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application where: 
(a)  The proposed work would cause uncontrolled soil erosion and/or off-site sedimentation; or 
(b)  The work proposed by the applicant will interfere with an existing drainage course in such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property; or 
(c)  The land area for which the work is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other such hazard to persons or property; or 
(d)  The soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application is incomplete or does not comply with the provisions of part 91, the rules or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.516. - Permit modification; permit revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The soil erosion engineer may provide written authorization for modifications to a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit or the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan upon receiving a request from the landowner or on-site authorized agent. No work in connection with any proposed modification shall take place without the written approval of the soil erosion engineer. The soil erosion engineer may require new fees if the scope of the earth change activity has changed. 
(b)  Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
1.  A violation of the condition of the permit. 
2.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose relevant facts in the application or in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
3.  A change in a condition that requires a temporary or permanent change in the activity. 
4.  Authorized work is abandoned or suspended for a period of six (6) months. 
5.  Notice will be given to the permit holder of revocation or suspension of the permit in person or by certified mail and posting. If the permit has been revoked for any reason, a new soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application accompanied by new plans and fees would be required for any earth change activities. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.517. - Permit expiration; extension of time. 
(a)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control permits shall expire automatically upon the project completion date specified in the permit. If a project completion date is not specified then the permit shall expire one (1) year from the permit issuance date. The duration of a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall not exceed a period of two (2) years. Permits shall automatically expire if construction has not commenced within one (1) year of the date of issuance. 
(b)  If the landowner is unable to complete the earth change activities prior to the permit expiration date, the landowner or designated agent may request an extension of time provided the request is made in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the permit expiration date. The request shall include all relevant necessary sustaining reports, supporting documentation, and fees. 
(c)  If an extension of time is granted, the soil erosion engineer shall issue a written extension, which specifies a revised permit expiration date, not to exceed one (1) year. 
(d)  An extension does not release the owner, or the person furnishing an irrevocable letter of credit, or a person furnishing a cash bond, or a person furnishing a certificate of self-insurance from their responsibilities and/or liabilities thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.518. - Earth change requirements generally. 
    A person, the landowner, and the on-site authorized agent engaged in an earth change shall: 
(a)  Conduct the earth change in a manner that will effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation. 
(b)  Plan, implement, and maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with part 91, the rules, and this chapter, which effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and off-site sedimentation. 
(c)  Carry out the earth change activities in accordance with an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and in compliance with all the requirements of the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(d)  The soil and erosion sedimentation control permit must be posted on-site and clearly visible from the road. The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan must be available for inspection to the site of the earth change at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R323.1702; R323.1704(4). 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT; BOND REQUIREMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9108. 

Sec. 5.519. - Cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit. 
(a)  The soil erosion engineer may, as a condition for the issuance of a permit, require the landowner to post a cash bond or an irrevocable letter of credit with the engineering department in an amount sufficient to assure the installation and completion of such protective or corrective measures as may be required by the engineering department. 
(b)  A cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall include and be made on the conditions that the landowner shall comply with all of the provisions of part 91, the rules, and this chapter; all terms and conditions of the permit; and that the landowner shall complete all work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. 
(c)  In the event that the landowner fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit; or fails to comply with the provisions of part 91, the rules, or this chapter; or fails to implement the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, the soil erosion engineer may order such work as necessary to provide for effective soil erosion and sediment control. The landowner or person issuing the irrevocable letter of credit or making the cash deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses, including legal, that the engineering department incurs in causing any and all work to be done to comply with the provisions of part 91, the rules or this chapter. In the case of a cash bond, the soil erosion engineer shall authorize the engineering department to refund any unused portion to the person who posted the bond. 
(d)  The engineering department may establish a list of pre-qualified contractors for use in ordering work required under subsection 5.519(c). 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE VII. - NOTICE OF COMPLETION; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 

Sec. 5.520. - Completion. 
    Upon satisfactory execution of the approved plans and permit conditions and other requirements imposed under this chapter, the landowner shall file a written notice of completion with the soil erosion engineer. The soil erosion engineer shall make a final inspection within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice of completion and shall issue a certificate or letter of completion and release of bond if the landowner has satisfactorily complied with the plan, permit conditions and this chapter. If the project is to be completed in different phases, the landowner may submit a written notice of completion for a project phase and the soil erosion engineer may issue separate certificates of completion and authorize a proportionate release of a cash bond for each completed project phase. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION; COMPLIANCE TIME; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 5.521. - Enforcement. 
    The city engineer or soil erosion engineer, in cooperation with the building department, may issue a stop work order, or revoke a permit upon its findings that there is a violation of part 91, the rules, or this chapter, or a finding that there is a violation of a permit or an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R323.1712. 
Sec. 5.522. - Notice of violation. 
    If a soil erosion engineer determines that soil erosion or sedimentation of adjacent properties or the waters of the state has or will reasonably occur from land in violation of part 91, the rules, or this chapter, the engineering department may seek to enforce a violation by notifying the landowner through a notice of violation served in the following manner: 
(a)  In person; 
(b)  By certified mail, with return receipt requested. If a notification is served on a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the land or upon the building or structure. 
    The notice shall contain a description of the violation and what must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time limit to comply with part 91, the rules, and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9117. 
Sec. 5.523. - Compliance; time. 
    Within five (5) calendar days after a notice of violation has been served under section 5.522 of this chapter, a person who owns land subject to part 91, the rules, or this chapter, shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with part 91, the rules, or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9118. 
Sec. 5.524. - Entry upon land; construction; implementation, and maintenance of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures; cost. 
    Not sooner than five (5) calendar days after notice of violation has been served in person or mailed under section 5.522 of this chapter, if the condition of the land, in the opinion of the engineering department, may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of adjacent properties or to the waters of the state, and if soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with part 91, the rules, and this chapter are not in place, the engineering department, or its designee, may enter upon the land and construct, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with part 91, the rules, and this chapter. However, the engineering department shall not expend more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the cost of the work, materials, labor, and administration without prior written notice in accordance with the notice of violation provided in section 5.522 of this chapter to the landowner that the expenditure of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made. If more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is to be expended under this section, then the work shall not begin until at least ten (10) days after the notice of violation has been mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested and posted, or served in person. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9119. 
Sec. 5.525. - Reimbursement of engineering department expenses; lien for expenses. 
    All expenses incurred by the engineering department under section 5.524 of this chapter to construct, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to bring land into compliance with part 91, the rules, and this chapter shall be reimbursed to the engineering department by the landowner. All persons that receive notice of expenditures incurred shall have thirty (30) days to pay the fines/costs to the city's engineering department. 
    If the fines/costs are not paid, the engineering department shall have a lien on the property for the expenses incurred under section 5.524 of this chapter for bringing the land into conformance with part 91, the rules, or this chapter. However, with respect to single-family or multifamily residential property, the lien for such expenses shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or recorded after the date of such expenditure. The city shall collect such fines/costs through the procedures prescribed at section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9120. 
Sec. 5.526. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates part 91, the rules or this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction issued by an authorized local official and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  A person who knowingly violates part 91, the rules or this chapter or knowingly makes a false statement in an application for a permit or in a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each day of violation. 
(c)  A person who knowingly violates part 91, the rules or this chapter after receiving a notice of violation under section 5.521 or 5.522 is responsible for payment of a civil fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day of the violation. 
(d)  Civil fines collected under subsection (a), (b) and (c) that are payable to the city shall be deposited into the city's general fund. 
(e)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall be filed with the 46th Judicial District Court for resolution pursuant to chapter 87 of the revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 
(f)  A default in payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this section or an installment of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means authorized under the revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, as amended, being MCL 600.101 et seq. 
(g)  In addition to a fine assessed under this section, a person who violates part 91, the rules, or this chapter, is liable to the state and/or the city for damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources resulting from the violation. The court may order a person who violates this part to restore the area or areas affected by the violation to their condition as existing immediately prior to the violation. 
(h)  Lessees, contractors, or other individuals undertaking an earth change, as well as the landowner and on-site authorized agent, are liable for civil penalties prescribed in section 5.526. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.9121. 
ARTICLE IX. - INJUNCTION; INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION; INTERFERENCE WITH ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5.527. - Injunction. 
    Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, MDEQ or the city may maintain an action in its own name in a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain or prevent violations of part 91, the rules or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.528. - Right of entry and inspection. 
    An agent appointed by MDEQ or the city engineering department may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions or practices that may be in violation of part 91, the rules, or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
Sec. 5.529. - Interference with administration and enforcement. 
    No person shall unlawfully hinder, oppose or resist the soil erosion engineer in the discharge of the administration and enforcement of part 91, the rules or this chapter. No person shall remove, mutilate or conceal any notice or placard posted by the soil erosion engineer except by written permission of the soil erosion engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 11-27-08) 
CHAPTER 50. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1394, adopted July 22, 1996, deleted ch. 50, historic preservation, and enacted similar provisions as herein set out in §§ 5.601-5.609. Former ch. 50 derived from Ord. No. 1150, § 1, adopted October 9, 1984. 
Cross reference- Burg Historic District, § 5.701 et seq.; Brooks School Historic District, § 5.725 et seq.; general building regulations, § 8.201 et seq. 

Sec. 5.601. - Purposes of chapter. 
    Historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose, and the city may regulate the construction, reconstruction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the limits of the city as provided in this chapter. The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(a)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving areas in the city which reflect elements of its cultural, social, spiritual, economic, political engineering or architectural history or its archaeology; 
(b)  Stabilize and improve property values in each historic district and the surrounding areas; 
(c)  Foster civic beauty and community pride; 
(d)  Strengthen the local economy; 
(e)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city, the state and of the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.602. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Advisory board means the historic designation advisory board which shall be considered a standing committee as defined by the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act (MCL 399.201 et seq.) and created by section 5.603. 
(2)  Commission means the historic district commission created by section 5.604. 
(3)  Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
(4)  Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource or any of the following conditions: 
(a)  The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports; 
(b)  The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members; 
(c)  The deterioration of exterior chimneys; 
(d)  The deterioration of exterior plaster or mortar; 
(e)  The ineffective weatherproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows and doors; or 
(f)  The serious deterioration of any documented exterior architectural feature or significant landscape feature which, in the judgment of the commission, produces a detrimental effect upon the character of the district. 
(5)  Department means the building department. 
(6)  Design treatment levels means categories of standards used by the historic district commission as general guides in the determination of appropriateness of proposed work within a historic district. One (1) or more of these categories shall be selected for each historic district at the time of designation by the process as described in this chapter. The design treatment levels are as follows: 
(a)  Restoration: Bringing back into a former or unimpaired state or condition which existed at a date prescribed by the ordinance establishing the district. Authenticity of a restoration would require the removal of incompatible exterior elements and the replacement of all damaged or deteriorated elements with replicas of the same design and materials. A restoration design treatment level shall not be assigned without the written consent of the owner of the affected property at the time of designation. An appellant seeking a permit shall be responsible for documenting the authenticity of proposed work to the satisfaction of the commission. 
(b)  Rehabilitation: Putting back in good condition. This would not require the removal of all nonoriginal materials, but would encourage the removal of nonoriginal materials which are incompatible with the defined elements of design for the particular structure and district. The design of new construction or alteration would not require a duplication of the original design and construction, but must be compatible with the existing structures and the district's defined elements of design. The use of original materials or construction techniques would be encouraged but contemporary methods and materials would also be acceptable when compatible with the defined elements of design for the district. 
(c)  Conservation: Giving new life and making vital by cleaning, repairing and replacing of worn, cracked or broken parts with compatible materials and/or protecting from blight or deterioration through normal maintenance. The use of contemporary building methods or materials would be acceptable if they are compatible with the defined elements of design for the district. 
(7)  Elements of design are the characteristic relationships of the various features within a historic district which are significant to the appearance of the district. Elements of design to be defined for each historic district are: 
(a)  Height; 
(b)  Proportion of buildings front facades; 
(c)  Proportion of openings within the facade; 
(d)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades; 
(e)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets; 
(f)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections; 
(g)  Relationship of materials; 
(h)  Relationship of textures; 
(i)  Relationship of colors; 
(j)  Relationship of architectural details; 
(k)  Relationship of roof shapes; 
(l)  Walls of continuity; 
(m)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatments; 
(n)  Relationship of open space to structures; 
(o)  Scale of facades and facade elements; 
(p)  Directional expression of front elevations; 
(q)  Rhythm of building setbacks; 
(r)  Relationship of lot coverages; 
(s)  Degree of complexity within the facades; 
(t)  Orientation, vistas, overviews; 
(u)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance; 
(v)  General environmental character. 
(8)  Historic district means a district designated by the city council for the purposes of this chapter. An historic district shall include an area or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one (1) resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture of particular significance to the city, the state or to the United States of America. Historic districts may be either publicly or privately owned in whole or in part. These districts include significant landscape features, surface textures, and street furniture located therein. 
(9)  Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in the history of architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
(10)  Proposed historic district means an area or a group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries having defined boundaries and which is or are under review by the advisory board for recommendation to the city council for designation under this chapter. 
(11)  Work means any demolition, alteration, moving, repair, excavation, new construction or erection of any resource including a building, fence, wall or other structure or significant landscape feature, including pavements. The term also includes any removal of an architectural or significant landscape feature, as well as reconstruction, alteration, a change of surface treatment, a change of color by painting or other means or any demolition of a structure, a portion thereof or significant landscape feature. 
(12)  Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its size or shape. 
(13)  Bureau means The Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State. 
(14)  Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource. 
(15)  Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
(16)  Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the city, state or nation. 
(17)  Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under section 5.605. 
(18)  Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
(19)  Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the exterior appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes of this chapter. 
(20)  Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this chapter. 
(21)  Resource means one (1) or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.603. - Historic designation advisory board. 
(a)  The city council shall establish an historic designation advisory board which shall be a standing committee as defined in the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act (MCL 399.201 et seq.). The board shall have a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Seven (7) members of the advisory board shall be permanent members with full voting privileges. Four (4) of the permanent members shall be the city planner (ex officio), the chairman of the planning commission (ex officio), the building official (ex officio), and a member of the parks and recreation board. An ex officio member may designate another member of his or her staff to fill his or her position. The remaining three (3) permanent members of the advisory board shall be appointed by the city council and shall include at least one (1) representative from a duly organized local historic preservation organization. In addition, two (2) ad hoc members shall be appointed to the advisory board to represent each proposed historic district under consideration. Ad hoc members shall have voting privileges only on matters concerning the area they represent. Ad hoc members shall be property owners, residents or other persons having a demonstrated special affiliation with the area under consideration. When only a single resource constitutes the proposed historic district, at least one (1) of the ad hoc members shall be an owner, or part owner, of the resource, and the owner or part owner so appointed may designate a person to represent the owner or part owner on the board. Ad hoc members must be residents of the city except in a case where no resident is available to represent the ownership interest as required herein, in which case a nonresident may serve. The ad hoc members shall be appointed within twenty-one (21) days from the date of city council action authorizing the advisory board to conduct a study of the proposed district. 
(b)  Appointments of permanent members shall be for three (3) years on a staggered-term basis. Terms of ad hoc members shall terminate at the time of designation or the termination of consideration of their area for designation as an historic district. Permanent members shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies for the unexpired term of an appointed position may be filled by appointment by the city council. 
(c)  The advisory board shall conduct regularly scheduled meetings. All meetings of the advisory board shall be open to the public. A majority of members serving and eligible to vote shall constitute a quorum with respect to matters before the advisory board. The vote of the majority of members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present constitute the action of the advisory board. Notices of meetings, including an agenda of matters to be considered, shall be mailed to all known property owner organizations, community organizations and citizens' district councils in any area to be considered for designation at such meetings. Notices of all meetings, including an agenda of matters to be considered, shall be mailed to any existing historical preservation societies in the city, including but not limited to any historical district associations, the mayor, the city council, the city administrator, the city planning commission, the planning department, the building department, and the parks and recreation department. Interested persons shall be given reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter before the advisory board before it reaches a decision. The advisory board shall keep a record, which shall be open to public view, of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
(d)  The advisory board will be provided with reasonable staff assistance within the determination of the city administrator upon the request therefor by the advisory board. 
(e)  The advisory board shall conduct studies for each proposed historic district, including: 
(1)  A photographic inventory of resources; 
(2)  Basic research for each proposed historic district and the resources within that district; 
(3)  Determination of the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources and the percentage of historic resources located within each district; in determining the significance of resources the board shall be guided by the criteria for inclusion in the national register of historic places as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria established or approved by the bureau, if any. 
The advisory board's preliminary report shall address at a minimum the charge to the board, the composition of the board membership, the historic district(s) being considered, the boundaries of the proposed historic district(s) in both writing and on map(s), the history of each proposed district, and the significance of each district as a whole as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district relative to the evaluation criteria. 
A copy of the advisory board's preliminary report shall be sent to the city planning commission, the Bureau, the Michigan Historical Commission, and to the State Historic Preservation Review Board, and shall be made available to the public as provided by state law. Not less than sixty (60) calendar days from transmittal of the advisory board preliminary report, the advisory board shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed historic district designation at which time the requirements, procedures, standards and responsibilities of historic district designation shall be generally explained. Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner provided by state law. Written notice shall be mailed by first-class not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the city's tax rolls. 
(f)  The advisory board's final report to the city council shall contain the recommendation of the advisory board and a draft of the proposed ordinance establishing the new historic district, including the design treatment levels and the definitions of the elements of the design. 
(g)  The advisory board shall also maintain a current listing of potential historic districts and a brief statement of significance for each. Such listing shall be made available to the city planning commission and the planning department for consideration relative to the city master plan. Such listing also shall be made available to the building department. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.604. - Historic district commission. 
(a)  An historic district commission is hereby established. It shall be composed of seven (7) members. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. Members shall reside in the city. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The membership shall include, if available, a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two (2) years of architectural experience or who is an architect registered in this state, and at least two (2) members selected from lists of citizens submitted by one (1) or more duly organized historical preservation organizations. 
(b)  Appointments shall be for three (3) years on a staggered term basis; initial terms may be for less than three (3) years to satisfy the staggered term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the position in the same manner as the original appointment. All vacancies, whether from expiration of terms or from resignation, removal, or other cause shall be filled within sixty (60) calendar days. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, the commission shall be responsible for the implementation and administration of this chapter; this responsibility shall include the following powers and duties: 
(1)  As provided by section 5.603(e), the review of advisory board reports and recommendations concerning proposed historic districts in relation to the city's officially adopted master plan; the practical budgetary effects on city resources; legal implications for the owners, residents and the city; and the historical and architectural values of the district. Upon completion of any such review, the commission may submit its recommendation to the city council regarding the proposed historic district designation, design treatment levels and elements of design. A copy of any such recommendation also shall be transmitted by the commission to the advisory board. 
(2)  The review of building permit applications, as provided in this chapter, for designated historic districts, interim historic districts, and proposed historic districts. 
(3)  To request that the building department require the correction of defects or repairs on buildings in designated historic districts as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  To review all city-licensed or city-funded physical development projects affecting designated or proposed historic districts or which may have demonstrable effects on designated or proposed historic districts as provided in this chapter; 
(5)  To conduct regularly scheduled meetings. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and notices shall be sent by first-class mail not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before a meeting. A majority of members serving shall constitute a quorum. Notices of meetings, including an agenda of matters to be considered, shall be mailed to all known property owner organizations, community organizations and citizens district councils in any proposed historic district or in any designated district where a permit application is to be considered at such meetings. Notices of all meetings, including an agenda of matters to be considered, shall be mailed to any existing historical preservation societies in the city, including but not limited to any historic district associations, the mayor, the city council, the city administrator, the advisory board, the city planning commission, the planning department the building department, and the parks and recreation department. Interested persons shall be given reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter before the commission before it reaches a decision. The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions, which shall be made available to the public consistent with state law; 
(6)  To advise the city council and other city agencies in the administration of any gifts, purchase or sale of property, administration of a loan and grant program or tax incentive program or any other program concerning historic preservation; 
(7)  To promulgate guidelines defining documentation requirements for work in designated districts; 
(8)  To make periodic inspections of all designated historic districts for violations of this chapter; 
(9)  To make available copies of the designation, design treatment level assignment and defined elements of design for any designated district. 
(d)  Staff assistance for the commission will be provided within the determination of the city administrator. 
(e)  The commission may delegate to its staff such responsibility and authority as it determines will be appropriate to carry out routine enforcement activities. The commission may also delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff or to another delegated authority. The commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by its staff or other delegated authority to determine whether or not the delegation of such authority should be continued. 
(f)  The directors (or designees thereof) of the planning department and the building department shall have the right to participate in meetings of the commission on the same basis as members, except that these officers (or their designees) shall not have voting rights on any matter taken up by the commission, including matters of procedure, and shall not be counted as members for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.605. - Establishment of designation by ordinance. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of a request to city council from any person residing, doing business or owning property in the city to designate a resource or resources as an historic district, or on its own initiative, the city council, after making a determination that there are reasonable grounds for such a request, may adopt a resolution directing that the advisory board make a study to determine whether the proposed district meets the criteria under the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  After the adoption of a resolution directing the advisory board to study a proposed historic district, the commission shall, for a period of up to one (1) year from the date of the public hearing before the advisory board, review all building permit applications for informational purposes only and shall inform the applicant of the existence of the request to have the resource or resources designated an historic district. This review period shall be extended by a resolution of the city council extending the period of consideration of the proposed historic district. 
(2)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historical, architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution of interim historic district designation, requiring that all applications for permits for work within the proposed historic district, be referred to the commission. For a period of one (1) year after the adoption of such a resolution, the commission shall review permit applications for work within such proposed historic districts with the same powers which would apply if the proposed historic district were a designated district, notwithstanding provisions to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter. After the expiration of the one (1) year period following adoption of such a resolution, the commission review shall be for informational purposes only, as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section. In reviewing permits for work in proposed historic districts, the commission shall consider the following: 
a.  The architectural or historical value and significance of the structure or feature and its relationship to the historical value of the proposed historic district; 
b.  The relationship of the exterior architectural features or landscape features to the remainder of the structure, site or area forming the proposed historic district; 
c.  Any other factor, including aesthetic, which the commission deems to be pertinent; 
d.  The provisions of subsection 5.605(d)(5). 
(b)  The city council shall establish historic districts by ordinance and may establish districts previously considered and rejected; modify boundaries of an existing historic district; or eliminate an existing historic district in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act (MCL 399.201 et seq.). City zoning maps shall reflect established historic designations. In all historic district designations, the boundaries, elements of design, and design treatment levels shall be specified in the designation ordinance. An ordinance establishing an historic district, modifying the boundaries of an existing historic district, or eliminating an historic district shall also be filed with the register of deeds by the city clerk. 
(c)  In evaluating the significance of resources to be included in historic districts, the historic designation advisory board and the city council shall be guided by the criteria for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, as published at 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria established or approved by the bureau, if any. The historic designation advisory board shall make available to the public a document stating the criteria for historic designation. 
(d)  Permit applications are required as follows: 
(1)  Before work, as defined in this chapter, commences within an historic district, an interim historic district, or proposed historic district, the person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a building permit with the building department, and no work shall begin before the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complete building permit application, the building department shall, within seven (7) calendar days, forward the same, together with all plans, specifications, and supporting materials which make it complete, to the commission. All plans, elevations, construction documents, and any other information deemed necessary by the commission to make the application complete and to determine the appropriateness of the proposed work shall be submitted to the commission by the applicant before the application will be considered to have been received by the department or by the commission. 
(3)  The commission shall approve a building permit application for work which it determines to be appropriate in a designated or interim historic district through the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. In reviewing plans for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67, using those standards in relation to the design treatment levels and the defined elements of design for a designated historic district to give consideration to the permit application. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior's Standards and are established or approved by the bureau. The commission shall also consider the following: 
a.  The historical or architectural value and significance of the resource structure and its relationship to the historical value of the surrounding area; 
b.  The relationship of any exterior architectural features of the resource to the remainder of the resource and to the surrounding area; 
c.  The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; 
d.  Any other factor, including aesthetic, which the commission finds to be relevant. 
(4)  If it is determined by the director of the building department that work is immediately necessary for the protection of the public health and safety, the department may issue a building permit for the necessary work and shall immediately notify the commission of that action. 
(5)  Pursuant to the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act (MCL 399.201 et al.) as amended, an application for inappropriate work adversely affecting the exterior appearance of a resource which cannot be granted a certificate of appropriateness shall be permitted by the commission through the issuance of a notice to proceed if any of the following conditions prevail and the commission finds that the work is necessary to substantially improve or correct any of these conditions: 
a.  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or the occupants; 
b.  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program which is of substantial benefit to the community. Substantial benefit shall be found only if the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances and the improvement program is otherwise feasible; 
c.  Retention of the resource would cause undue financial hardship to the owner. Undue financial hardship shall be found only when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to an appropriate vacant site within the historic district have been attempted and exhausted by the owner, for a minimum period of one (1) year; 
d.  Retention of the resource would not be in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(6)  In cases of resource additions, demolitions or new construction in a designated historic district, the commission shall conduct a public hearing. The commission may also conduct a public hearing on other historic preservation matters for informational purposes. All notices of public hearings shall be mailed to the applicant, all persons to whom any real property within five hundred (500) feet of any part of the premises in question is assessed and the occupants or building managers within five hundred (500) feet of the premises. All known property owner organizations, community organizations, and citizens district councils in the historic district or proposed historic district within which the premises is located, historic preservation societies in the city including, but not limited to, any historic district associations, the mayor, the city council, the historic designation advisory board, the building department, and the city planning commission. The commission shall conduct a public hearing no sooner than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) calendar days from the time the notice is mailed. Such notice shall include the time and place of the hearing and a general description of the nature of the work proposed. 
(7)  For work in designated or interim historic districts, within sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of a complete application by the commission or within such further time as the applicant and the commission agree upon in writing, the commission shall determine: 
a.  Whether the proposed work will be appropriate according to the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (36 C.F.R. part 67), in which case the commission will issue a certificate of appropriateness; or 
b.  Whether the proposed work will be inappropriate according to the secretary's standards and the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district, but is without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this chapter, and where, one or more of the conditions of section 5.605(d)(5) have been met, in which case the commission may, in lieu of a certificate of appropriateness, issue a notice to proceed; or 
c.  Whether the proposed work will be inappropriate according to the secretary's standards and the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district, in which case the commission will issue a denial. A denial shall be issued to the permit applicant in writing, accompanied by a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for the denial and, if appropriate, a notice that the application may be resubmitted for the commission's review when suggested changes have been made. The written notice of denial shall also include notification of the applicant's right of appeal as provided for in section 5.608(b); 
d.  If the commission fails to act on a permit application within sixty (60) calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, or to act within such extended period of time as has been agreed to in writing by the commission and the applicant, the building department shall issue to the applicant a building permit for the proposed work as if the commission had issued a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. 
(8)  If the commission issues a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed, or a denial for proposed work in a designated or interim historical district, the commission shall immediately forward its decision, together with the building permit application, plans and specifications to the building department. 
(9)  If the commission decides to issue a denial for work in a designated or interim historic district, it shall forthwith state on the record the reasons for such decision, and may include an appropriate alternative proposal. Thereupon, the commission shall notify the applicant and the building department of such decision, transmitting to each a copy of the reasons and any alternatives suggested by the commission. The building department, upon receipt of the commission's report, shall be bound by the commission's decision and shall deny the applicant a building permit for the proposed work. 
(10)  The commission's review of permit applications for work in proposed historic districts shall be for informational purposes only unless the proposed historic district has been designated an interim historic district by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.606. - Consideration of interior features. 
    The commission may review and act upon interior features only if specifically authorized to do so in the ordinance designating the district or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.607. - Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance of any structure within any historic district. Ordinary maintenance includes any repair which does not change the external appearance of the resource and is not defined as work in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.608. - Powers and duties of commission; enforcement. 
(a)  If it is determined by the commission that a resource in an historic district is being demolished by neglect, the commission, on its own initiative, and to ensure that the resource shall be preserved and protected in consonance with the purposes of this chapter, may: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; the commission may also file a petition with the building department requesting that the building department require the correction of defects or necessary repairs of the resource; or 
(2)  If the owner does not make the necessary repairs within a reasonable time, the commission may then file a petition with the building department requesting that the building department, as the agent of the commission and pursuant to an order from the Circuit Court, enter the property and cause the necessary corrections or repairs to be made and the cost, if not paid promptly by the property owner to be reported to the city assessor for levy as a special assessment against the property. 
(b)  In addition to other enforcement rights created by this chapter, the requirements of an historic district may be enforced upon the complaint of any property owner or association of property owners within the district. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under section 5.605(d)(1) through (10) of this chapter may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal provided in MCL 399.205(2). 
(c)  Any person or organization, individuals partnership, firm, corporation, institution, or agency of government performing work within a designated historic district, prior to the issuance of the required building permit or contrary to conditions specified in any permit issued for work within a district shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  In cases where there is imminent danger of the loss of a designated historic resource, the commission may request the law department to seek such injunctive relief as it deems necessary and appropriate to preserve the resource. 
(e)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this chapter may be ordered by the commission and/or by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 5.609. - Effect of proposed projects on designated or proposed historic districts. 
    The head of any city agency having direct or indirect jurisdiction over a proposed city or city-assisted physical development project and the head of any city agency or authority or corporation established by the city having power to finance, license, permit, authorize or contract for any physical development project shall, prior to authorization or approval, take into account the effect of the proposed project on any designated or proposed historic district. If the proposed district is within or immediately adjacent to a designated or proposed historic district, the responsible agency or authority or corporation shall so advise the commission and shall comply with all reasonable requests of the commission for information on the proposed project. The commission shall determine the demonstrable effects of the proposed project and report same to the mayor, city council and city administrator within sixty (60) days of being advised of the proposed project by the responsible agency, authority or corporation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a delay or interruption in project activities pending completion of the commission's review and report. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to diminish the rights and powers held by the city council with respect to such project activities. 
    A city-financed, licensed, permitted, authorized or contracted physical development project shall be considered to have a demonstrable effect on a designated or proposed historical district when any condition of the project creates a change, beneficial or adverse, in the quality of the historical, architectural, archaeological, engineering, social or cultural significance that qualified the property for designation as an historic district or may qualify the property for designation as an historic district. Generally, adverse effects occur under conditions which include: 
(a)  Destruction or alteration of all or part of a resource; 
(b)  Isolation from or alteration of the surrounding environment of a resource; 
(c)  Introduction of visual, audible or atmospheric elements that are out of character with the resource and its setting; 
(d)  Transfer or sale of a city-owned resource without adequate conditions or restrictions regarding preservation, maintenance or use; and 
(e)  Neglect of a resource resulting in its deterioration or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 7-22-96) 
CHAPTER 51. - BURG HISTORIC DISTRICT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, § 5.601 et seq. 

Sec. 5.701. - Intent. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a historic district to be known as the Burg Historic District; and is established in accordance with the provisions of section 5.605. 
    This historic district designation is hereby certified as being consistent with the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1188, 11-25-85) 
Sec. 5.702. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the Burg Historic District are as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk; and more particularly described as follows: 
    A parcel of land being all of Lots 37 and 38 and part of Lot 36 of Supervisor's Plat No. 1, part of Section 20 and part of the west one-half of Section 21 Township 1 North, Range 10 East, City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan, being further described as beginning at a point, said point being distant south 89 degrees 07 minutes 30 seconds east, thirty-three feet along the east-west one-fourth line of Section 21 and north 01 degrees 55 minutes and 50 seconds west, 123 feet from the west one-quarter corner of said Section 21; thence along the east right-of-way line of Berg Road north 01 degrees 55 minutes 50 seconds west, 430.59 feet; then south 89 degrees 44 minutes 24 seconds east, 384.70 feet; thence 5.01 degrees 54 minutes 29 seconds east, 434.72 feet; thence north 89 degrees 07 minutes 30 seconds west, 384.70 feet, to the point of beginning, containing 3.817 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1188, 11-25-85) 
Sec. 5.703. - Design treatment levels. 
    The design treatment level of the Burg Historic District shall be conservation as provided in section 5.602(5). 
(Ord. No. 1188, 11-25-85) 
Sec. 5.704. - Elements of design. 
    The defined elements of design, as provided for in section 5.602(6) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. All of the buildings in the district shall be one (1) to two and one-half (21/2) stories in height, meaning they may have two (2) full stories with an attic or a finished third floor within the roof. 
(2)  Proportion of buildings front facades. Proportion varies in the district, depending on style, size and age of buildings. 
(3)  Proportion of openings within the facade. Areas of voids generally constitute between five (5) percent and twenty-five (25) percent of the front and side facades, excluding the roof. Window openings are usually taller than wide, divided into individual panes with muntins and mullions. A variety of sizes and shapes exist within the district. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The structures in the district display a variety of placement of openings within the facades. The Town Hall, Fire Hall and Methodist Church exhibit a regularity of opening placement. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. There is a variety of placement of buildings on the streets, either Berg Road or Civic Center Drive. 
(6)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. Porches exist on most of the buildings in the district, with the exception of the D.P.S. Garage. Positions of porches contribute to a variety of the design of the buildings and may either be placed asymmetrically on the front of the building depending on the original design. 
(7)  Relationship of materials. The districts' predominant building material is wood. Buildings are wood frame construction with wood siding. Wood details and trim are prevalent. Original roofing materials have been replaced by asphalt shingles and fieldstone foundations have been replaced with cement block. Common red brick walkways have been added for pedestrian circulation. Newer buildings, the Fire Hall and D.P.S. Garage, are cement block construction. 
(8)  Relationship of textures. The most common textural relationship in the district is provided in the horizontal wood siding on the buildings. Additional textural relationships are provided for in the wood detailing and trim, shingle patterns, running bond paving and textures in lawn and landscape materials. 
(9)  Relationship of color. The most prevalent color for the buildings is white provided for in the painted white wood siding or painted cement block of the structures. Shutters are either black or other dark colors. Roofs, not original, are dark colors. Walkways are common red brick. Original color schemes for any given building may be determined by a professional paint analysis and deemed appropriate for that building. 
(10)  Relationship of architectural details. Architectural details generally relate to style. The predominant architectural style at the Burgh is reflective of its rural midwestern surroundings. Simple wood frame construction with a minimum to moderate amount of detailing utilizing indigenous materials typifies the architectural detailing for the district. 
(11)  Relationship of roof shapes. The predominant roof types in the district are either hipped or gabled, with gables frequently intersecting. The buildings which were originally residences have roof shapes of greater complexity. 
(12)  Walls of continuity. There are no major walls of continuity caused by the placement of buildings on the site. Buildings are sited at right angles to each other. Some buildings walls are set on the same line. 
(13)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatment. The characteristic landscape features and surface treatments for the district include open lawn areas traversed by walkways, planted with large shade and small ornamental trees. Some deciduous and evergreen shrub and groundcover beds are planted adjacent to the buildings. Most plant material is typical of ornamental plantings used in the region from 1840 to 1900. An asphalt parking lot has been added in recent years. 
(14)  Relationship of open space to structures. Most of the open space in the district is used as landscaped lawn areas with walks and flower beds. The Parks House, Simmons House, Methodist Church and the D.P.S. Garage all are set off by large open spaces on their front or side yards while the Fire Hall and Town Hall are set in a smaller space. A courtyard has been established in their side yard. The open space within the district serves as a commons. Visually, it is not divided according to lot lines but has a unified appearance. 
(15)  Scale of facades and facade elements. The scale of all the buildings in the district is relatively small, directly relating to human scale. 
(16)  Directional expression of front elevations. The majority of the buildings in the district have vertically expressed front facades with the exception of the D.P.S. Garage which is horizontal. 
(17)  Rhythm of building setbacks. There is no consistent setback for the buildings within the district. 
(18)  Relationship of lot coverage. Lot coverage averaging over the entire district runs approximately six (6) percent. Lot coverage in the north third of the district is greater; approximately fifteen (15) percent. 
(19)  Degree of complexity within the facade. The degree of complexity is determined by what is appropriate for a given style. The buildings in the district exhibit simple forms, colors, materials and textures within the facades. The two (2) houses in the district have a greater amount of complexity in their facades. 
(20)  Orientation, vistas, overviews. The Simmons House, D.P.S. Garage, Methodist Church and Parks House are oriented south toward Civic Center Drive with large open spaces between the buildings and the road. The Town Hall and Fire Hall front west, toward Berg Road, with relatively short setbacks. 
(21)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance. The Town Hall, Fire Hall and Methodist Church generally exhibit a symmetrical appearance, while the D.P.S. Garage, Simmons House and Parks House exhibit an asymmetrical appearance. 
(22)  General environment character. The character of the district is based on its origin as a late nineteenth to early twentieth century midwestern farming settlement with residential, commercial, and governmental uses. Cohesiveness for the district through the use of uniform building materials, colors, textures, siting of buildings and common green space. 
(Ord. No. 1188, 11-25-85) 
CHAPTER 52. - BROOKS SCHOOL HISTORIC DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, § 5.601 et seq. 

Sec. 5.725. - Intent. 
(a)  An historic district to be known as the "Brooks School Historic District" is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of section 5.605. 
(b)  This historic district designation is hereby certified as being consistent with the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 4-25-88) 
Sec. 5.726. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the Brooks School Historic District are as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be: 
Legal Description 
Parts of the E 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of Section 21, Township 1 North, Range 10 East, City of Southfield, County of Oakland, Michigan, described as beginning at a point at the NE section corner, thence S 01-55'-30? E, 375 feet, thence S 88-21'-24? W, 711.13 feet and N 88-15'-27? W 463.58 feet along the northerly line of Highway I-696, thence N along the 1/8 line to N section line, thence easterly to point of beginning, except W 315 feet and except beginning at the NE corner of Section 21, thence southerly along the section line a distance of 91 feet, thence northerly to a point in the N line of said Section 21, said point lying westerly 91 feet from the NE section corner, thence easterly 91 feet to beginning. Said exception taken by highway. 
Sidwell No. 24-21-201-008 
Sidwell No. 24-21-201-009   
6.606 Acres  
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 4-25-88) 
Sec. 5.727. - Design treatment level. 
    The design treatment level of the Brooks School Historic District shall be conservation as provided for in section 5.602(5)(c). 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 4-25-88) 
Sec. 5.728. - Elements of design. 
    The defined elements of design, as provided for in section 5.602(6), shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. All buildings in the district shall be no taller in height than the existing Brooks School building. 
(2)  Proportions of building front facades. Shall be similar in nature to the Brooks School building. 
(3)  Proportions of openings within the facade. Areas of voids generally constitute between five (5) percent and thirty (30) percent of building facades. Window openings are of several different sizes and shapes. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The existing structure displays a variety of placements of openings within the facades. Most facades exhibit a regularity of opening placement. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. There is no defined rhythm of building spacing. 
(6)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The main building entrance is asymmetrically placed on the east facade, while a secondary entrance is symmetrically placed on the west facade of the building. 
(7)  Relationship of materials. The district's predominant building material is brick. The Brooks School is of wood frame construction with a brick facade in a running bond pattern. Original roofing materials have been replaced by asphalt shingles. There is minor detailing in limestone window sills. 
(8)  Relationship of textures. The most common textural relationship in the district is provided in the brick facade of the building. Additional textural relationships are provided for in the limestone and brick detailing and shingle patterns. 
(9)  Relationship of color. The most prevalent color for the district is provided by the natural brown of the brick facade of the Brooks School. Window trim is painted dark brown with limestone sills. 
(10)  Relationship of architectural details. Architectural details generally relate to style. The predominant architectural style of the historical buildings in Southfield reflect their rural midwestern surroundings. Minimal architectural detailing in the masonry of the Brooks School typifies the architectural detailing for the district. 
(11)  Relationship of roof shapes. The predominant roof type in the district is hipped and/or gabled, with gables intersecting. The Brooks School also has a cupola. 
(12)  Walls of continuity. There are no major walls of continuity in the district. 
(13)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatment. There are no significant landscape features or surface treatments in the district. 
(14)  Relationship of open spaces to structures. The Brooks School is set at the intersection of Eleven Mile Road and Lahser Road set off to the south and west by large open space typical of a school yard. 
(15)  Scale of facades and facade elements. The scale of the Brooks School building is relatively small, directly relating to human scale. 
(16)  Directional expression of front elevation. The Brooks School building facades are horizontally expressed. 
(17)  Rhythm of building setbacks. The district setback is set by the building facades of the Brooks School. 
(18)  Relationship of lot coverage. Lot coverage in the district runs approximately three (3) percent. 
(19)  Degree of complexity within the facade. The Brooks School exhibits simple forms, colors, materials and textures within the facade. 
(20)  Orientation, vistas, overviews. The Brooks School is oriented north/south and east/west along the alignments of Eleven Mile and Lahser Roads. 
(21)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance. The Brooks School exhibits an asymmetrical appearance. 
(22)  General environmental charter. The character of the district centers on the architectural style, scale of materials and the Brooks School structure itself. Cohesiveness for the district shall be provided by maintaining the use of uniform building materials, scale, colors, textures and siting of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 4-25-88) 
CHAPTER 53. - LOG CABIN HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 5.750. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a historic district to be known as the Log Cabin Historic District; and which is established in accordance with the provisions of section 5.605. 
(b)  This historic district designation is hereby certified as being consistent with the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 5.751. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the Log Cabin Historic District are as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be: 
    Legal Description: A parcel of land located in the W. 1/2 of the N.W. 1/4 of Section 27, T.1N., R.10E., City of Southfield, Oakland County, Michigan and more particularly described as commencing at the N.W. corner of said Section 27, distant S. 01 10'00? W., 1731.55 feet along the west line of said Section 27 and S. 41 52'00? E., 87.94 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING; thence continuing S. 41 52'00? E., 261.29 feet; thence S. 87 39' 40? W., 178.65 feet; thence along a line 60.0 feet each of and parallel to the said west line of Section 27, N. 01 10'00? E., 201.91 feet to the point of beginning and contains 0.41 acres. 
.61 acres       Sidwell No. 2427-101-013 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 5.752. - Design treatment levels. 
    The design treatment level of the Log Cabin Historic District shall be conservation as provided for in section 5.602(5). 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 5.753. - Elements of design. 
    The defined elements of design, as provided for in section 5.602(6) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height: All buildings in the district shall be one-story and no taller than the existing log cabin structure. 
(2)  Proportions of building front facades: Shall be similar in nature to the existing log cabin building. 
(3)  Proportions of openings within the facade: Areas of voids generally constitute between five (5) and twenty-five (25) percent of building facades. Window openings are of several different sizes and shapes. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to void in front facades: The existing structure displays a variety of placements of openings within the facades. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of building on streets: There is no defined rhythm of building spacing. 
(6)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections: The main building entrance is asymmetrically placed on the west facade. 
(7)  Relationship of materials: The districts predominant building materials are logs, primarily twelve inches (12?) in diameter or larger. The logs are hand hewn and interior construction is wood paneling, all fitted without nails. Roof is asphalt shingles. An addition of modern wood construction is located on the north end of the structure. Windows are of wood construction. 
(8)  Relationship of textures: The predominant textural relationship is provided in the log construction of the building. 
(9)  Relationship of color: The most prevalent color for the district is provided by the dark brown stain on the exterior log surfaces. Window frames are also dark brown and the roof is tan. 
(10)  Relationship of architectural details: Architectural details for this district relate primarily to the hand-hewn and fitted log cabin construction of the building. Minimal and/or "rustic" architectural detailing typifies this district. 
(11)  Relationship of roof shapes: The predominant roof type in this district is hipped and/or gabled. 
(12)  Wall of continuity: There are no significant walls of continuity within the district. 
(13)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatment: The site is heavily wooded with some major evergreen and deciduous trees. The trees are important to retain the historic character of a "log cabin in the woods". Surface treatment is natural ground covers with a gravel drive. Extensive lawns or paving are incongruous with the nature of this district. 
(14)  Relationship of open spaces to structures: The log cabin is set adjacent to Lanser Road and overlooks the ravine to the rear of the property. 
(15)  Scale of facades and facade elements: The scale of the log cabin is small, directly relating to human scale. 
(16)  Directional expression of front elevation: The log cabin's front elevation is horizontally expressed. 
(17)  Rhythm of building setbacks: The districts setback is determined by the setback of the log cabin building from Lanser Road. 
(18)  Relationship of lot coverage: Lot coverage in the district runs approximately five (5) to ten (10) percent. 
(19)  Degree of complexity within the facade: The log cabin exhibits simple form, color, and texture within the facade. 
(20)  Orientation, vistas, overviews: The log cabin is oriented north/south along Lahser Road. A significant vista, from the rear of the building, overlooks a ravine containing the Evans Branch of the Rouge River. 
(21)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance: The log cabin exhibits an asymmetric appearance. 
(22)  General environmental character: The character of this district centers on the original log cabin construction of the building. Cohesiveness for the district relies on maintaining and preserving the integrity of this structure and limiting and controlling any future additions to the building or significant site development. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 12-11-89) 
CHAPTER 54. - McDONNELL HOUSE HISTORIC DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, § 5.601 et seq. 

Sec. 5.754. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a historic district, and which is established in accordance with the provisions of section 5.605. 
(b)  This historic district designation is hereby certified as being consistent with the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1316, 1-14-91) 
Sec. 5.755. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the McDonnell House Historic District area as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be: 
Legal Description 
Part of the W 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of Section 11, T1N, R10E, City of Southfield, County of Oakland, Michigan described as beginning at a point 260 feet east and 60 feet north from the SW section corner, thence N 265 feet, thence S 89-50'-30? E 178.72 feet, thence S 265 feet, thence N 89-50'-30? W 178.72 feet to a point of beginning. 
Sidwell Parcel 2411-351-041       1.087 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1316, 1-14-91) 
Sec. 5.756. - Design treatment level. 
    The design treatment level of the McDonnell House Historic District shall be conservation provided for in section 5.602(5). 
(Ord. No. 1316, 1-14-91) 
Sec. 5.757. - Elements of design. 
    The defined elements of design, as provided for in section 5.602(6) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. All of the building in the district shall not exceed two and one-half stories in height, meaning they may have two (2) full stories with an attic of a finished third floor within the roof. 
(2)  Proportion of buildings front facades. Proportion varies in the district, depending on style, size and age of buildings. 
(3)  Proportion of openings within the facade. Areas of voids generally constitute between five (5) percent and twenty-five (25) percent of the front and side facades, excluding the roof. Window openings are usually taller than wide, divided into individual panes with muttons and mullions. A variety of sizes and shapes exist within the district. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The structure in the district displays a regular placement of openings within the facade. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The McDonnell House faces Twelve Mile Road with out buildings behind the main house. The setback of the building is approximately eighty-five (85) feet from the front lot line and no buildings shall be permitted in this existing yard. 
(6)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projects. The house has a front porch. 
(7)  Relationship of materials. The district's predominant building material is wood. Buildings are wood frame construction. Wood details and trim are prevalent. Original roofing materials have been replaced by contemporary building materials. Original wood clapboard siding has been covered with contemporary building materials that maintain the horizontal character of the original clapboard siding. 
(8)  Relation of textures. The most common textual relationship in the district is provided in the horizontal siding on the buildings. Additional textural relationships are provided for in the wood detailing and trim, shingle patterns, and textures in lawn and landscape materials. 
(9)  Relationship of color. The most prevalent colors of the buildings are white and forest green. 
(10)  Relationship of architectural details. Architectural details generally relate to style. The predominant architectural style of the McDonnell House is reflective of its rural Midwestern surroundings and American Greek Revival architecture. Simple wood frame construction with a minimum to moderate amount of detailing utilizing indigenous materials typifies the architectural detailing of the district. 
(11)  Relationship of roof shapes. The predominant type of roof in the district is gable. Any modifications to the McDonnell House or other existing or new structures should maintain the same roof pitch. 
(12)  Walls of continuity. There are no major walls of continuity caused by the placement of the house on the site. 
(13)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatment. The characteristic landscape features and surface treatments for the district include open lawn areas traversed by walkways, planted with large shade and small ornamental trees. Some deciduous and evergreen shrub and groundcover beds are planted adjacent to the buildings. Most plant material is typical of ornamental plantings used in the region from 1840 to 1900. The driveway and parking areas are gravel and dirt, which reflects elements of the culture and architectural history of the district. 
(14)  Relationship of open space to structures. Most of the open space in the district is used as landscaped lawn areas. 
(15)  Scale of facades and facade elements. The scale of all the buildings in the district is relatively small, directly relating to human scale. 
(16)  Directional expression of front elevations. The McDonnell House has a vertically expressed front facade. 
(17)  Rhythm of building setbacks. The front setback is determined by the McDonnell House. 
(18)  Relationship of lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage for buildings in the district shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent. 
(19)  Degree of complexity within the facade. The degree of complexity is determined by what is appropriate for a given style. The McDonnell House exhibits simple forms, colors, materials and textures within the facades. 
(20)  Orientation, vistas, overviews. The McDonnell House is oriented south toward Twelve Mile Road, with an open yard between the buildings and the road. Any building addition to the district shall adhere to the guidelines established herein. 
(21)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance. The McDonnell House generally exhibits a symmetrical appearance. 
(22)  General environmental character. The character of the district is based on its origin as a late nineteenth to early twentieth century Midwestern farmstead. Cohesiveness exists for the district through the use of uniform building materials, colors, textures, siting of buildings and common green space. 
(Ord. No. 1316, 1-14-91) 
CHAPTER 59. - CITY CENTRE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 5.990. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City Centre Advisory Board Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 5.991. - Establishment. 
    In order to promote economic activity in the city centre, and to provide for the maintenance, security, and operation of the city centre, the city centre advisory board is hereby established pursuant to Act No. 146 of the Public Acts of 1992. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 5.992. - Boundaries of the city centre. 
    The city centre advisory board shall exercise its authority within the area designated as the City Centre Mixed Use Area in the city's future land use plan as delineated on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Note- Said Exhibit "A" referred to in § 5.992 above is not set out in this article, but is on file and available for inspection of the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 5.993. - Organization. 
    The city centre advisory board shall be composed of eleven (11) members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. At least seven (7) of the members of the board shall be nominees of the businesses located within the boundaries of the city centre as defined in the preceding section. One (1) member of the board shall be a resident from a residential area adjacent to the city centre, and one (1) member of the board shall be an officer, official, or other representative of the city. Of the members first appointed, three (3) shall be for one (1) year, three (3) shall be for two (2) years, and three (3) shall be for three (3) years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, members shall serve for a term of three (3) years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor with the concurrence of council for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. A chairperson of the board shall be elected by the members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 1680 , § 1, 8-31-17) 
Sec. 5.994. - Powers and duties. 
    The city centre advisory board shall manage programs initiated by the city to promote economic activity and to provide for the maintenance, security, and operation of the city centre. The board shall have those powers prescribed by Act No. 146 of the Public Acts of 1992. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 5.995. - Financing. 
    The costs, in whole or in part, of projects in the city centre initiated by the city pursuant to Act No. 146 of the Public Acts of 1992 may be financed by the city by one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Grants and gifts to the city. 
(2)  City funds. 
(3)  The issuance of general obligation bonds of the city. 
(4)  The issuance of revenue bonds by the city under the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, being Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, or under any other applicable revenue bond act. The issuance of bonds shall be limited to the part or parts of the city centre that are public improvements. 
(5)  The levying of special assessments against land or interests in land or both. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 5.996. - Budget. 
    The board shall operate on a fiscal year which coincides with the city's fiscal year. The board shall provide the city administrator with a copy of its proposed budget on or before the first day of February. Any requests for appropriation of city funds or the levy of a special assessment shall be specifically identified in the proposed budget. Funds appropriated to the board by the city to fund any portion of the board's activities shall be held by the city and may be disbursed to the board from time to time from payments of expenses incurred by the board. The board shall submit an annual accounting of its financial records to the city within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of each fiscal year. The city controller or his or her designee shall have the right at any time to examine the financial records of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Title VI - FOOD AND HEALTH (RESERVED) 
Title VII - BUSINESS AND TRADES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police regulations, tit. IX. 

CHAPTER 70. - LICENSES 

Sec. 7.1. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this chapter. Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed licensed under this Code for the balance of the current license year. 
Sec. 7.2. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
Sec. 7.3. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
Sec. 7.4. - License application. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license. 
Sec. 7.5. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise provided as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin January 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on December 31 of that year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one (1) year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of issuance thereof. 
Sec. 7.6. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant therefore until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for license is made. Applicants for any license are subject to inquiries regarding such applicant's recording of prior criminal convictions; all inquiries shall be conducted pursuant to section 1.500 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 9-25-89) 
Sec. 7.7. - Where certification required. 
    No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification is made. 
Sec. 7.8. - Health officer's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the health officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the sanitary requirements of the state and of the city. 
Sec. 7.9. - Fire chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the fire chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
Sec. 7.10. - Police chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the chief of police is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character. 
Sec. 7.11. - Building and safety engineering director's certificate. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the director of building and safety engineering shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by Title V of this Code, or other zoning regulations of the city, nor until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
Sec. 7.12. - Bonds. 
    Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in Chapter 71 or elsewhere in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one (1) or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond; any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing the license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
Sec. 7.13. - Later renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time they shall be due shall be paid as late fees with an additional twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee required for such licenses under the provisions of Chapter 71 for the first fifteen (15) days that such license fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses under Chapter 71, plus fifty (50) percent of such fee. 
Sec. 7.14. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city, as provided in this Code, such license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license. 
Sec. 7.15. - Fees, when paid. 
    The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the city treasurer upon or before the granting of such license or permit. 
Sec. 7.16. - Exempt persons. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to the exemption and the reasons therefor. 
Sec. 7.17. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city clerk or city administrator for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any such action of the city clerk or city administrator, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five (5) days after receipt of the notice of such suspension. The city council may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the city council shall be final. The same procedure shall apply where a license application is denied. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for the trade, profession, business or privilege for a period of one (1) year after such revocation. 
Sec. 7.18. - "Cause" defined. 
    The term "cause" as used in this chapter shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
Sec. 7.19. - License renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
Sec. 7.20. - Exhibition of license. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
Sec. 7.21. - Exhibition on vehicle and machine. 
    No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk. 
Sec. 7.22. - Displaying invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
Sec. 7.23. - Transferability; misuse. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another nor shall he make any improper use of the same. 
Sec. 7.24. - Misuse automatic revocation. 
    In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his license or permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, or to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the automatic revocation of such license or permit. 
CHAPTER 71. - FEES AND BONDS REQUIRED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1511, enacted April 25, 2005, deleted ch. 71, which consisted of §§ 7.31-7.40, and enacted new provisions to be designated as ch. 71, § 7.31. Former ch. 71 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification of the Code. 

Sec. 7.31. - Schedule established. 
    The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this Code shall be established from time to time by a resolution of the city council. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired. 
(Ord. No. 1511, 4-25-05) 
CHAPTER 72. - VENDORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1517, enacted May 16, 2005, deleted ch. 72, §§ 7.51-7.61, which pertained to peddlers and which derived from the original codification of the Code. Said ordinance enacted new provisions to be designated as ch. 72, §§ 7.51-7.64. 
Cross reference- Uninvited peddlers going upon private property declared a nuisance, § 9.3. 

Sec. 7.51. - Definitions. 
(a)  Chief means the Southfield Chief of Police. 
(b)  Clerk means the Southfield City Clerk. 
(c)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association, organization, society, or any other business entity. 
(d)  Vendor shall mean any person, other than a solicitor as defined in section 7.602 of this Code, who sells or offers to sell goods, merchandise, or services of any kind for immediate or future delivery or performance while: 
(1)  Traveling by foot, wagon, cart, motor vehicle, or other conveyance from place to place. 
(2)  Using or occupying any lot, right-of-way, building, tent, or other structure for a period of less than six (6) consecutive months. 
(3)  Outside of a building or structure using a stationary cart, stand, wagon, concession trailer, motor vehicle, or any other method of display. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.52. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to: 
(a)  Veterans exempt from local license requirements pursuant to state law. 
(b)  Salespersons calling upon business establishments. 
(c)  Vendors located on city property pursuant to a written lease agreement. 
(d)  Vendors required to be licensed under a more specific licensing provision contained in Title VII of this Code. 
(e)  A vendor conducting a temporary, outside sale accessory to its principal business conducted within a structure. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.53. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of vending without first obtaining a license from the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.54. - Duration. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year issued, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the license. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.55. - Transfer prohibited. 
    No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred to or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.56. - Application for license. 
    Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file a verified application on a form provided by the clerk containing the following information: 
(a)  Proof of age, address, and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's drivers license or other legally recognized form of identification. If the applicant's vending activities will be conducted through a business which has a different name, identify the name and form of the business; 
(b)  A brief description of the vending activity to be conducted, including the methods to be used and a description of the types of goods and services to be sold; 
(c)  The dates, hours, and locations for which the right to engage in vending is sought; 
(d)  Proof that the applicant has permission to use the property where the vending activity will be conducted; 
(e)  If employed, the name, address, and telephone number of the employer; or, if acting as an agent, the name, address, and telephone number of the principal who is being represented; 
(f)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor (other than traffic violations); the nature of the offense or violation; the date when and place where such offense occurred; the court where such offense was adjudicated; and the penalty or punishment imposed; 
(g)  A statement as to whether or not a governmental license issued to the applicant has ever been suspended or revoked; and if so, the reason for the revocation or suspension; 
(h)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(i)  A description and license number of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the vending activity; 
(j)  A copy of a valid, current, Michigan sales tax license, or, if exempt, a copy of a current exemption certificate, if required for the goods or merchandise sold; and 
(k)  Such other information as the clerk shall determine to be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.57. - Health department approval prior to selling food. 
    Any person licensed under this chapter shall obtain approval from the Oakland County Health Department prior to selling any food or beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.58. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Prior to the issuance of a license, a certificate of occupancy, if required, shall be obtained from the building department. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.59. - Single event. 
    If a person sponsors or organizes a single event with a duration of five (5) days or less at which ten (10) or more vendors are present, such person shall have the option of applying for a single license on behalf of all participating vendors. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.60. - Administrative fee. 
    An administrative processing fee shall be paid for a vendor's license in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council resolution pursuant to section 7.31 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.61. - Application review and license issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the clerk shall forward it to the chief for review of the application, as deemed necessary, to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  After such review, the chief shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and return the application to the clerk who shall, if the application is approved, deliver the license to the applicant. 
(c)  The license shall show the name, address, and photograph of the licensee; the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered; the date of issuance; and the length of time that the license shall be in effect. The license shall also show the license number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.62. - Denial of license. 
(a)  Upon the chief's review of the application, the chief may refuse to approve an application for a license under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The location and time of vending would endanger the safety and/or welfare of the licensee or his or her customers. 
(2)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense; trafficking in controlled substances; any violent acts against persons or property, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation. 
(4)  The applicant has been denied a license or had a license revoked by the city within the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the chief that the reasons for such earlier denial or revocation no longer exist. 
(5)  Any other reason that relates to the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  The chief's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application and the applicant shall be notified by the clerk that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.63. - License display. 
    Every person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times conspicuously display the license while conducting vending activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
Sec. 7.64. - License revocation. 
    Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended in accordance with section 7.17 of this Code, for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a license; 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the licensee in the course of conducting vending activities; 
(c)  Conducting vending activities contrary to the provisions contained in the license or any provision of the City Code; 
(d)  Conviction for any crime identified in section 7.62; or 
(e)  Conducting vending activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance; constitute a breach of the peace; or endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 5-16-05) 
CHAPTER 74. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[5] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter deleted. See 1975 P.A. 169. 

CHAPTER 75. - SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Used automobile dealers, § 7.121 et seq.; auctioneers, § 7.181 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7.111. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of dealer in secondhand goods or junk dealer without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be issued by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of Act 350 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended (C.L. '48, Sec. 445.401 et seq.). The fee for such licenses shall be as specified in Chapter 71 of this Code. A licensee under Chapter 76 of this Code shall not be required to obtain an additional license under this chapter. 
Sec. 7.112. - Statutes applicable. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter the provisions of Act 350 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended, and the provisions of Act 231 of the Public Acts of 1945, as amended (C.L. '48, Sec. 445.471 et seq.) shall apply to licensees under this chapter. Any licensee who shall violate any provision of such statutes shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and punished as prescribed in Chapter 1 hereof. 
Secs. 7.113-7.115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 7.116. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license therefor. In accordance with the provisions of Act 273 of Public Acts of 1917, State of Michigan, (C.L. '48, Sec. 446.201 et seq.) pawnbroker licenses shall be issued by the mayor. The fee for such license shall be as prescribed in Chapter 71 of this Code. Any licensee violating any of the provisions of Public Act 273 of 1917, as amended, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and punished as prescribed in Chapter 1 hereof. The provisions of Act 231 of the Public Acts of 1945, State of Michigan, as amended (C.L. '48, Sec. 445.471 et seq.) shall also apply to pawnbrokers licensed under the provisions of this chapter and any licensee violating any provision of the same shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and punished as provided in Chapter 1 hereof. 
CHAPTER 76. - USED AUTOMOBILE DEALERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Secondhand dealers, § 7.111 et seq. 

Sec. 7.121. - Definitions. 
(1)  In the interpretation of this chapter "dealer in secondhand vehicles" shall mean any person who engages in the business of purchasing, selling, trading or exchanging any kind of secondhand motor vehicle and parts and accessories, or who keeps a store, place or lot for the purposes of carrying on and/or maintaining the business of purchasing, selling, trading or exchanging any kind of secondhand motor vehicle and parts and accessories, is hereby declared to be a dealer in secondhand motor vehicles. 
(2)  In the interpretation of this chapter "place of business or lot" shall mean a single platted lot or any group of contiguous lots having one (1) or more common entrances or exits shall be construed as one (1) used automobile lot or place of business. 
(3)  "License." A license for dealing in secondhand motor vehicles shall include the right to deal in used trailers, tractors, motorcycles, automobile parts and accessories, but not the operation of a separate storage yard where used trailers, secondhand motor vehicles, automobile parts and accessories, and other similar items are kept or stored. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 7.1. 
Sec. 7.122. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of dealer in secondhand vehicles without first having obtained a license therefor. 
Sec. 7.123. - Application. 
    Application for a license to carry on and/or maintain a business of dealer in secondhand vehicles shall be made by the owner or his authorized agent upon blanks to be furnished by the city clerk and shall contain, in addition to that information required by Chapter 70, the following: 
(1)  The length of time engaged in the business as a used automobile seller, buyer, trader or dealer prior to the application, stating where and inclusive dates engaged in such business; 
(2)  The date and number of the license from the Michigan Secretary of State authorizing the conduct of a business in secondhand vehicles; 
(3)  Whether or not the applicant or his authorized agents has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or city law governing the purchase, selling, trading or exchanging of vehicles, whether new or secondhand and the nature of such violation. 
Sec. 7.124. - Approval required. 
    No license shall be issued under this chapter except upon certification of the police chief, the fire chief and the director of the department of building and safety engineering. 
Sec. 7.125. - Licenses; regulations governing. 
(1)  Except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 70 shall govern all phases of the issuance of licenses to dealers in secondhand vehicles. The license fee and bond to be posted shall be as specified in Chapter 71. 
(2)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. Where the licensee is a corporation, the transfer of the controlling interest in the corporation shall be deemed a transfer of the business which will require the issuing of a new license therefor. 
Sec. 7.126. - Limited to one place. 
    A single license under this chapter shall be valid for only one (1) store, place or lot for the purpose of carrying on and/or maintaining the business of dealer in secondhand motor vehicles and parts and accessories thereto of any description in any place other than his licensed place of business. 
Sec. 7.127. - Open or uncovered sales lots. 
    In the case of open or uncovered sales lots where the business of dealing in secondhand motor vehicles shall be carried on and/or maintained, the following regulations, in addition to those required by Chapter 45, Zoning, shall apply: 
(1)  The surface of the lot used by any dealer in the conduct of his business shall be constructed of a dustless and durable Portland cement concrete, or asphaltic concrete, complying with the Michigan State Highway Specification #412 and maintained in a usable condition. 
(2)  Adequate ingress and egress to the lot shall be provided by means of clearly limited and defined drives for vehicles and such drives shall be surfaced as provided in subparagraph (1) of this section. Such places of ingress and egress shall be situated so as not to constitute a menace to the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic on the abutting streets. 
(3)  All places of business and sites upon which businesses have been licensed to operate under the provisions of this chapter shall be kept neat and orderly at all times, and in cases of open or uncovered sales lots, automobiles and vehicles shall not be parked closer than four (4) feet from the lot line. 
(4)  There shall be installed wheel chocks of concrete or similar permanent material so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting beyond the limits as set forth above. 
(5)  Open lots shall be lighted by "moon glow" or equivalent-type lights on supports to extend not more than fourteen (14) feet above the surface of paved parking area. 
(6)  The lot shall be drained by providing subsurface drainage for the entire lot by installing catch basins and/or storm lines to the nearest outlet to eliminate surface water. 
(7)  Whenever any such open lot shall abut either the rear or side lot lines of any residentially zoned property, there shall be erected a coped wall of solid masonry construction, not less than six (6) feet in height adjacent to such lot lines. 
(8)  Each such lot shall have thereon a suitable permanent structure or building which provides not less than seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet of floor space at the first floor level, and such building shall be provided with running water and sanitary facilities as required by Chapter 98, Building Regulations. 
(9)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this section and each of the subsections thereof where the strict application of the provisions would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon the owner of property which is the subject of regulation under this chapter, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board of appeals may attach thereto such conditions regulating the location, character and other features of the proposed use as it may deem reasonable. In furtherance of the purpose of this chapter, in granting a variance the board of appeals shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
Sec. 7.128. - Records to be kept. 
    Every dealer licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall keep in his place of business named in such license so issued to him a record of the purchase and sale of all automobiles, motor vehicles and accessories thereof and all other records as are required by the Michigan Secretary of State. Such records shall be kept up to date and legibly written in the English language, and all such records and stock in trade shall be open to the inspection of the police department of the city or any member thereof without the formality of legal process. 
Sec. 7.129. - Insurance required. 
    Each dealer in secondhand vehicles shall carry public liability and property damage insurance upon each automobile or motor vehicle operated by him upon the streets and alleys of the city in the amounts prescribed in Chapter 71. 
Sec. 7.130. - Posting a copy of chapter. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall post in a conspicuous location in his place of business a copy of this chapter, such copies to be furnished by the city clerk. 
CHAPTER 77. - CITY CHAUFFEURS AND PUBLIC CARRIERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7.141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Administrator or city administrator means the city administrator of the city or his designated agents. 
(2)  Chief means the chief of police of the city or his designated agents. 
(3)  City means the City of Southfield. 
(4)  City chauffeur means every person who is employed for the principal purpose of operating a motor vehicle while in use as a public or common carrier of persons or property in a manner such that the transference or conveyance of such persons or property originates within the city. 
(5)  Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a public carrier vehicle. 
(6)  For hire means for remuneration or reward of any kind, paid or promised, either directly or indirectly. 
(7)  Licensee means any person, as in this section, who is licensed as a city chauffeur according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Motor vehicle for hire means a motor vehicle not equipped with a taximeter, designed to carry persons for public hire at an hourly rate. A motor vehicle for hire shall be deemed a public carrier for purposes of this chapter. 
(9)  Owner means (a) any person, firm, association or corporation renting a motor vehicle or having the exclusive use thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period of greater than thirty (30) days; (b) a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or if a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. 
(10)  Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations or natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
(11)  Public carrier means any person who holds himself out to the public as being engaged in the business of a common carrier as at the common law, either directly or through any device or arrangement, including those who operate over fixed routes or between fixed termini, in the transportation by motor vehicle from place to place upon or over the streets or highways of this city, or for the purpose of transporting any package, or baggage or any person who may choose to employ him for such purpose, in a manner such that the transference or conveyance of such package, baggage or person originates within the city. 
(12)  Public place as used in this chapter shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, cemetery, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public and any other place, which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(13)  Registrant means any person, as defined in this section, to whom a public carrier vehicle is registered according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(14)  Registration means registration certificate or certificates and registration plates issued under the laws of this city pertaining to the registration of public carriers. 
(15)  Revocation means that the city chauffeur's license or public carrier registration and privilege to operate a public carrier on the public highways is terminated and shall not be renewed or restored except that an application for a new license or registration may be presented and acted upon by the clerk after the expiration of at least one (1) year after the date of revocation. 
(16)  Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(17)  Taxicab means a vehicle on which a taximeter is affixed. A taxicab shall be deemed a public carrier for purposes of this chapter. 
(18)  Taxicab business means soliciting or picking up passengers for hire within the city by the use of a taxicab. 
(19)  Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.142. - City chauffeur's license required. 
    No person shall drive, cause to be driven or permit to be driven any taxicab, or motor vehicle for hire, while in use as a public carrier, upon the streets, alleys or public ways in the city unless the driver thereof is licensed as a chauffeur by the city according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.143. - City chauffeur's license; application, contents. 
    Every application for a city chauffeur's license shall be made upon a form furnished by the clerk and shall contain such provisions not inconsistent with this chapter as the clerk may determine. At a minimum such application shall contain the following information regarding the applicant: full name, date of birth, physical description of the applicant, business address and telephone number, home address and telephone number, two recent photographs, state chauffeur's license number and date of expiration, social security number. Each application must be accompanied by a state chauffeur's license, a social security card, and a set of the fingerprints of the applicant prepared by the city police department. All applicants must be a United States citizen or eligible to work in the United States, pursuant to federal law and must submit appropriate documentation to substantiate such status. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.144. - City chauffeur's licenses; examination of applicants. 
    Every application shall be referred by the clerk to the chief of police, who, through his agents assigned by him, shall investigate and make a recommendation as to the acceptability of the applicant's qualifications. The chief of police shall establish rules and regulations for the examination of the applicant as to his physical, mental and ethical qualifications to operate such a motor vehicle in such a manner as not to jeopardize the health or safety of persons or property. The chief of police shall, within ten (10) days, examine the applicant and return such application to the clerk together with the result of such examination or determination and his recommendation in respect thereto. The recommendation of the chief of police with respect to any application shall in all cases be binding upon and followed by the clerk. The examination shall include, but not be limited to, a test of the applicant's: 
(1)  Ability to operate a public carrier; 
(2)  Knowledge of the geography of the city; 
(3)  Knowledge of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.145. - City chauffeur's license, issuance of same. 
    The clerk shall issue to every person licensed as a city chauffeur, a city chauffeur's license. Every license shall bear thereon the distinguishing number permanently assigned to the licensee and shall contain the name, date of birth, place of residence, business address, photograph, physical description of applicant on the public vehicle card, fingerprint and signature of the licensee for the purposes of identification. No license shall be issued until the fee shown in section 7.170 of this chapter has been paid to the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.146. - Alteration of license prohibited. 
    No person shall deface, remove or alter any city chauffeur's license, or any entry made thereon by the clerk. 
Sec. 7.147. - Display of city chauffeur's license in vehicle. 
    The licensee shall have such license in his immediate possession at all times when operating a public carrier pursuant to this chapter, and shall conspicuously display his license on the inside of the vehicle, with a light shining on it at night, so that it may be easily seen both in the day and nighttime by occupants of the vehicle. 
Sec. 7.148. - Complaints and records thereof. 
    The clerk shall keep a complete and public record of the issuance of each city chauffeur's license and public carrier registration issued pursuant to this chapter, together with a record of all complaints, suspensions and revocations. Any person being aggrieved by reason of the conduct or action of any licensee or registrant may present his complaint to any police officer. Such complaint shall be promptly investigated by the chief of police and his finding filed with the clerk. The license or registration of any person complained of may be revoked as provided in section 7.171. 
Sec. 7.149. - Expiration of city chauffeur's license; renewal thereof. 
    Each city chauffeur's license shall expire on December 31 of the license year. The clerk may renew a city chauffeur's license from year to year upon application to the clerk as provided for in section 7.143 and upon endorsement by the chief of police as provided for in section 7.144. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.150. - Compliance with laws, regulations and public carriers code. 
    Any person who is granted the privilege of operating a public carrier or to whom is registered a public carrier pursuant to this chapter shall comply with and abide by the provisions of this chapter, all traffic regulations now in effect or hereinafter enacted, the regulations set forth in the "Public Carriers Code" as provided in section 7.173 and all state and federal laws. Failure to so comply may result in revocation of the city chauffeur's license pursuant to section 7.171. 
Sec. 7.151. - Registration as a public carrier required. 
    No person shall drive, cause to be driven or permit to be driven any taxicab, or motor vehicle for hire, while in use as a public carrier, upon the streets, alleys or public ways in the city, unless such vehicle is registered as a public carrier according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.152. - Application for registration as a public carrier; contents; fees. 
    Every owner or potential owner of a vehicle who desires that vehicle to be subject to registration in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall make application to the clerk for the registration thereof and issuance of a certificate of registration for each such vehicle accompanied by the required fees as established from time to time by a resolution of the council and upon the appropriate forms furnished by the clerk. 
    Applications shall be placed in an active file for a period of one (1) year from the date of application. If during the year, additional registration plates become available, approval of issuance of the registration plates shall be made by the city clerk and the police department, in accordance with the provisions of section 7.166, section 7.167-A or section 7.171. The successful applicant will be advised to supply the additional information indicated in the following portions of this chapter, pay the additional necessary fees outlined in section 7.170, and to meet all other requirements of this chapter, all within ninety (90) days of the date of notification. Failure to do so will indicate that the applicant has no intention of obtaining the approved registration plate and the registration plate will be considered to be available for issuance to other applicants by the city. 
    Every original application for a certificate of registration shall bear the signature of the owner or potential owner written with pen and ink and such signature shall be acknowledged by the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. The original application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, bona fide residence, telephone number and mail address of the owner or potential owner; 
(2)  The name, bona fide residence, telephone number and mail address of the business firm under which the registered vehicle will be operated; 
(3)  The color scheme, emblem identification or characteristic markings intended to be used by the owner of the vehicle to identify the vehicle as part of the business firm outlined in subsection (2) above; 
(4)  The hours of the day and the days of the week during which the registered vehicle will be in service; 
(5)  All items relating to the vehicle listed in the following paragraph if the vehicle is owned at the time of application. 
    Successful applicants will be required to supply the following information, after notification of approval, in addition to the foregoing information: 
(1)  A description of the vehicle including the make or name, style of the body, year, model, manufacturer's serial number or in the absence of such serial number, a number assigned by the secretary of state; 
(2)  Current State of Michigan vehicle registration number; 
(3)  Name and local address of the insurance carrier or bonding company retained pursuant to section 7.153. 
    Application for renewal of existing registration plates shall take the same form as original application and contain the same information outlined above. If a renewal application is not filed on an existing registration and all other elements of this chapter complied with, prior to the yearly expiration date, as outlined in section 7.158 of this chapter, this failure will indicate that the applicant has no intention of renewing the registration plate and continuing the carrier in public service and the plate will be considered to be abandoned and revoked and shall be available for issuance pursuant to this section to other applicants by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1366, § 1, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.153. - Insurance requirements. 
    Before issuance of registration as a public carrier, the applicant shall file a certificate, signed by a duly authorized officer of a company authorized to write insurance in the state, to the effect that a policy of insurance has been issued and is in full force and effect to the applicant, and that the premium has been paid as required thereon, together with a true copy of the policy contract or certificate of insurance. In cases where the insurance premium is payable monthly, proper certificates or evidence of payment of premiums shall be delivered to the clerk no later than the first of each month. 
    The minimum amount of the insurance coverage as to any one public carrier shall be in accordance with the laws of the state regarding "no fault" insurance and be in accord with the following minimums: 
(1)  On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one (1) accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
(2)  On account of any one (1) accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one (1) person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); 
(3)  On account of damage to property in any one (1) accident, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
    Such policy of insurance shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and that until the policy is revoked, as herein provided, the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or omission of the named assured. 
    Any insurance company whose policy has been so filed pursuant to this section shall file a notice in the office of the clerk of its intention to terminate and cancel such policy and give ten (10) days' notice thereof to the named applicant, whereupon ten (10) days after such filing such applicant or owner shall cease to operate or cause to be operated within the city such public carrier, and the registration issued therefor shall be automatically revoked and liability on such policy shall cease and terminate; provided, that the liability of the insurance company thereon for any act or omission of the applicant or owner occurring prior to the effective date of cancellation shall not be thereby discharged or impaired. The clerk may from time to time, at his discretion, require financial reports to be furnished to him by any or all insurance companies writing policies of insurance filed in compliance with this chapter. If the financial condition of any such companies shall at any time be found unsatisfactory or insecure with reference to the extent of the risks assumed or policies outstanding, the clerk, after ten (10) days' notice to the owner of any vehicle covered or affected by insurance policies issued by any such companies in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter, shall revoke the public carrier registration of such owners, unless a satisfactory policy, or bond, shall have been previously filed in the manner and form required by this section. 
    In lieu of insurance required the applicant may furnish a surety company bond or bonds, in a form to be approved by the city attorney in penal sums of not less for each public carrier than the amounts specified for insurance, and binding the principal and surety to the same conditions as are required in the insurance policies as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 1, 8-11-86) 
Sec. 7.154. - Inspection of vehicles and equipment. 
    No registration as a public carrier shall be issued by the clerk until such vehicle has been inspected by the Southfield Police Department and the chief of police or his authorized agent has certified in writing to the clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, that such vehicle is mechanically and structurally sound and is fit for public use. No inspection shall be made until the applicant has paid to the clerk the fee therefor as specified in section 7.170. Any city police officer may stop any vehicle registered under this chapter and inspect such vehicle, or may order the operator of such vehicle to convey the vehicle to a designated garage or inspection station in order to conduct such inspection. The public carrier registration of any vehicle found by any police officer to be in violation of the ordinances of this city or laws of the state shall be confiscated and delivered to the clerk, who shall conduct a hearing pursuant to section 7.171(5) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1366, § 1, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 7.155. - Communication system required. 
    No public carrier shall be issued registration by the clerk unless the provisions of this chapter relating to mobile radio communication equipment have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.156. - Listed telephone number required. 
    No public carrier shall be issued registration by the clerk unless the provisions of this chapter relating to listed telephone numbers and established place of business have been satisfied. 
Sec. 7.157. - Public convenience and necessity required. 
    No public carrier registration shall be granted by the clerk until public convenience and necessity require the operation of such additional public carrier as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 7.158. - Expiration of public carrier registrations. 
    All registrations issued under this chapter, unless sooner revoked or suspended by the clerk as provided in this chapter, shall expire on the thirtieth day of June, of the year following the registration year. 
(Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-15-83; Ord. No. 1366, § 1, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 7.159. - Vehicle color, emblem and identification. 
    No public carrier shall be issued registration by the clerk unless the vehicle to be registered has first been identified with characteristics sufficient to distinguish the particular vehicle from vehicles operated by other persons, firms or corporations engaged in the same or similar business. All vehicles operated by the same person shall be identified by the same color, emblem and other characteristics. 
Sec. 7.160. - Issuance of public carrier vehicle registration. 
    The clerk, upon registering a public carrier upon receipt of the required fees, shall issue a registration certificate which shall be delivered to the owner and shall contain upon the face thereof the date issued, the date of expiration, name and address of the owner, the registration number assigned to the vehicle, and such description of the vehicle as deemed necessary by the clerk, and the name and address and telephone number of the business operating such vehicle. 
Sec. 7.161. - Registration to be signed, carried and displayed. 
    Every owner upon receipt of a public carrier registration certificate shall write his signature thereon with pen and ink in the space provided. Every registration certificate shall be prominently displayed in the vehicle to which it refers in a position such that it may be seen and read from both inside and outside the vehicle. The person driving or in control of such vehicle shall display the registration to any customer, potential customer or Southfield police officer upon request. 
Sec. 7.162. - Registration plates; issuance, number. 
    The clerk, upon registering a public carrier, shall issue to the owner one (1) registration plate. The owner shall display such registration plate on the vehicle so registered as provided in this chapter. The registration plate shall display upon it the registration number assigned to the vehicle for which it is issued, also the name of this city, which may be abbreviated, and the year number for which it is issued, and/or the date of expiration thereof which may be shown by a tab or sticker furnished by the clerk. The registration plates and the required letters and numerals thereon, except the year number for which issued, shall be of sufficient size to be plainly readable from a distance of fifty (50) feet during the day light. In any year during which registration plates are furnished, the clerk shall furnish for each annual registration a year plate, tab or sticker designating the year of registration. 
Sec. 7.163. - Use of other registration plates prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a public carrier upon the streets or highways of this city under registration plates other than those issued for it pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 7.164. - Registration plates; attachment, display. 
    The public carrier registration plate issued for a vehicle shall be attached at the rear of the vehicle for which it is issued, securely fastened in a horizontal position so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at a height of not less than twelve (12) inches from the ground measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
Sec. 7.165. - Preparation, numbering and color of plates. 
    Public carrier registration plates shall be prepared by the clerk, who shall cause an individual numeral, letter or combination numeral and letter to be affixed or imprinted upon each set of plates, and cause a color or combination of colors to be affixed thereto, as he shall deem necessary in his discretion. 
Sec. 7.166. - Transfer of registration. 
(1)  If the owner of a currently registered vehicle acquires another vehicle with or without transferring his title or interest in such original vehicle the owner may have such registration transferred to the new vehicle, upon application to the clerk as provided for in section 7.152 and payment of the required fees as provided in section 7.170. 
(2)  If the owner of a currently registered vehicle is considering selling such vehicle, without any intention of continuing such vehicle in public service, the existing registration plate may be transferred to the new owner upon request made in writing by the original owner. Such application for transfer must be approved by both the city clerk and the chief of police after a review thereof and a payment of the fee as required under section 7.170. Provided, however, that unless such vehicle has undergone an issuance or renewal inspection within ninety (90) days from the date of application of such transfer, such transfer shall not be approved until the vehicle is presented for inspection and the necessary inspection fees paid. No transfer applications will be processed April 1 through June 30. 
(3)  Any ownership change of an existing vehicle registered pursuant to this chapter, whether by operation of law or otherwise, which is intended to effectively place the operation of the vehicle under the control of a nonregistered owner prior to official approval of a potential transfer as outlined above, shall automatically require revocation of the registration plate. 
(4)  Application for transfer of registration by a new owner, or potential new owner, shall be made in the same manner as original application for registration. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.167. - Taxicabs; rules for operation. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following subsections shall apply to the operation of taxicabs and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate, or permit to be operated, a taxicab in the city in violation thereof: 
(1)  Taximeter. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter, installed so that the amount of fare determined thereby is plainly visible to the customer, and shall be illuminated by a suitable light after sundown. The case of each taximeter shall be sealed and the cover and gear thereof intact. The chief of police shall inspect, test and approve each taximeter before the clerk may issue a registration for the vehicle. 
(2)  Establishment of taxicab stands. The chief of police may recommend to the traffic engineer that taxicab parking and waiting stands be established at specific locations on public streets, and on property open to the public with the permission of the owner of such property, provided such owner requests and consents to the establishment of such stands: 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish taxicab stands in the locations recommended by the chief of police, provided the traffic engineer determines such locations to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and as provided in this section. 
(b)  The traffic engineer shall exercise his authority to establish and regulate taxicab stands by issuance of traffic control orders which shall specify the rules and regulations adopted or established by him, including the maximum number of taxicabs which may park at any one (1) stand at once. Such traffic control orders shall become effective upon approval of the council, filing with the clerk, and the posting of appropriate signs. 
(c)  No taxicab stand shall be established within five (5) feet of the entrance to any building or within five (5) feet of any crosswalk. The first five-foot limitation shall be determined by measuring five (5) feet on either side of a point at the curb, opposite the door or entrance of building. The chief of police may recommend stands for night use only. No taxicab shall be permitted to park anywhere within a one-mile circle except at stands therein established as provided in this section. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the parking or standing of taxicabs outside of the one-mile circle, where parking is permitted, other than on authorized taxicab stands when such taxicab is not being used in the soliciting of business. 
(d)  The department of public works shall cause to be attached to a post or stanchion a metal sign which shall state the number of taxicabs, which shall be permitted to stand at such particular stand. 
(e)  No taxicab shall be permitted to park or stand at such a designated area except as provided in the traffic control order. 
(f)  No vehicle except a registered taxicab shall park or stand at any stand established under this section. 
(3)  Fares. The maximum rates of fare which shall be charged and collected for service by taxicabs shall be determined by resolution of the council and shall be reviewed and adjusted from time to time. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab a card on which shall be printed, in plain, legible type, the maximum rates of fare as provided by resolution of council, and shall indicate reference to this chapter. No fare shall be charged for the hire of any taxicabs which exceeds the maximum fares established by resolution of the council. 
(4)  Cruising. No taxicab, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than upon a taxicab stand, nor shall any taxicab driver seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro in a short space before or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, bus station or other place of public gathering, or in any manner obstructing or impeding traffic; but any taxicab driver may solicit employment by driving through any public street and at such speed as not to interfere with or impede traffic and may pass and repass until he shall have gone a distance of at least one-half (1/2) mile beyond such place. 
(5)  Soliciting passengers. No person shall solicit passengers for a public taxicab upon the streets of the city except the driver of the taxicab when sitting upon the driver's seat or inside his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is standing upon any taxicab stand or when actually engaged in carrying passengers, except that every taxicab driver shall be permitted to leave his taxicab to assist passengers into or out of such taxicab. Any taxicab driver may leave his taxicab or a taxicab stand to take care of the calls of nature and during such absence, his taxicab shall be parked at the rear of such taxicab stand and no such absence shall be longer than thirty (30) minutes. 
(6)  Intoxicating beverages. No taxicab or motor vehicle for hire driver or operator shall drink, nor shall the employer of any driver, permit the driver to drink any intoxicating beverage while on duty, or immediately prior thereto. 
(7)  Carrying additional passengers. No taxicab shall carry any other person than the person first employing a taxicab without the consent of the first passenger. 
(8)  Passengers in front seat. No persons shall be permitted to ride on the front seat with the driver of a taxicab. 
(9)  Change of fare. No change of fare shall be made until the taximeter shall be adjusted to the rate changed and the meter approved by the chief of police. No fare in excess of, or less than, the indication shown by the taximeter shall be charged. 
(10)  Loitering near taxicabs. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the driver or owner of a taxicab standing upon the public streets, to loiter at, within or near such taxicab. 
(11)  Operation of taxicab stands. Only registered taxicabs in such numbers as are set forth on the taxicab stand signs provided for in subsection (2) of this section may remain at taxicab stands while waiting for employment, and they must be parked in single file. The taxicab standing at the head of such parked line shall not be permitted to refuse to carry an orderly person who offers to hire such taxicab and agrees to pay the proper rate of fare, provided that the foregoing provisions shall not be construed to prevent any person from selecting any taxicab he may desire on the stand, whether it be at the head of the line or not. As taxicabs leave the parked line, those in the rear shall move up, and any taxicab seeking space on such stand shall not approach the same except from the rear thereof and shall move up as closely as possible to the last taxicab on the parked line. 
(12)  Right to collect fare in advance. It shall be the right of any city chauffeur to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment until so prepaid, but no city chauffeur of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so. 
(13)  Communication systems required. No registered taxicab shall be operated in the city unless the owner of such vehicle has established a place of business and has a two-way communication system. All registered taxicabs operating in the city shall at all times be able to maintain two-way communications with their business office. 
(14)  Listed telephone number required. Each taxicab business office shall have installed thereat a telephone service having a telephone number listed in the area telephone book under the name of the taxicab business. If such business telephone number is advertised in any publication, such advertisement shall also show the hours and days during which the business will be conducted or will be closed. 
(15)  Property lost or left in vehicle. Every city chauffeur of a taxicab, immediately after the termination of hiring or employment, shall carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, shall be taken to the city police station and deposited with the officer in charge within twenty-four (24) hours after the finding thereof. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply in case a profit corporation or a nonprofit corporation composed of members engaged in the taxicab business shall have a regularly established lost and found department, in which case such property must be kept subject to the call of the owner for at least thirty (30) days, at the end of which time it shall be disposed of in accordance with the law. 
(16)  Pictorial communications. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any communication by display or exhibition, on or within any taxicab, of any drawing, photograph, image, statuary, sign, symbol, characterization, portrayal or representation of any form which: 
(a)  Exposes or tends to expose any individual or any ethnic, racial or religious group to hatred, contempt, ridicule or obliquity; or 
(b)  Suggests or is likely to suggest any lewd or lascivious act; or 
(c)  Represents or tends to represent any private part of the human body which is customarily not exposed in a public place; or 
(d)  Condones, encourages or invites violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(17)  Trip sheet records. Every city chauffeur of a taxicab shall maintain a trip sheet record containing the date, cab number, name of driver, time of start and completion of work period, and the taximeter and odometer readings at the start and completion of the work period. The record shall also list in chronological order the address or street intersection at which a fare was picked up or discharged. The location at which the fare was picked up shall be recorded before beginning the trip or as soon as traffic conditions permit and the address at which the fare was discharged shall be recorded as soon as the passenger leaves the vehicle or as soon as traffic conditions permit. Taxicab owners shall be responsible for filing and maintaining trip sheet records for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(18)  Soliciting bus passengers. No city chauffeur of any taxicab shall ask or request persons to take passage in such vehicle when waiting to take passage on a bus at an established loading point for such bus. 
(19)  Advertising. It shall be lawful for any person to permit commercial advertising matter to be affixed to or installed on or within any taxicab, not inconsistent with subsection (16) above, provided such commercial advertising meets all regulations which shall be established by the chief of police and published in the public carrier's code. The chief of police shall establish regulations for the exhibition and display of such commercial advertising which are not in conflict with this chapter and which shall limit and regulate the location, size and physical composition of such commercial advertising material so as to prevent driver visibility restrictions, unnecessary distractions to other vehicle operators and physical dangers to pedestrians, passengers and other vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 5-27-80; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.167-A. - Public convenience and necessity. 
(1)  Number of taxicab registration plates. Factors affecting public convenience and necessity, which affect the number of taxicab registration plates to be in service at any given time, may be reviewed by council periodically to determine the level of service being provided by existing taxicabs and the need for issuance of additional taxicab registration plates, if any, or the removal of existing plates from service. The number of taxicab registration plates shall be established after a public hearing by council resolution in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(a)  All current taxicab registration plate holders and persons who have a current application on file for a certificate of registration in accord with section 7.152 shall be given notification by first class mail by the city clerk, addressed according to the clerk's registration records, mailed not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing, of the date, time and place of the public hearing. In addition, notice of the date, time and place of hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. 
(b)  In determining the need for additional taxicab registration plates, the council shall consider as a minimum the following factors: 
1.  The number of existing taxicabs operating in the city; 
2.  The manner in which existing taxicabs are operated; 
3.  The needs and demands of the public; 
4.  Traffic conditions; and 
5.  Such other relevant facts as the council may deem advisable. 
(2)  Procedure for selecting registration plate recipients. If council determines that additional taxicab registration plates should be issued, it shall direct the staff transportation committee to investigate all persons who at the time of the public hearing have applications for registration plates on file under section 7.152 of this chapter. The staff transportation committee shall consist of such administrative employees as may be appointed by council. Upon concluding such investigation, the committee shall file a report and recommendation to the council as to which of the applicants should receive the additional plates. The council, after considering the report and recommendation of the committee, shall by resolution grant such additional registration plates to such applicants as in its discretion deems advisable. In determining the applicants to be issued the additional registration plates the council may, among others, consider the following factors: 
(a)  Financial capability; 
(b)  Criminal record; 
(c)  Driving record; 
(d)  Proposed taxicab service levels; 
(e)  Past taxicab experience; and 
(f)  Other such factors as the committee may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 5-27-80; Ord. No. 1209, § 1, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.168. - Motor vehicles for hire. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following subsections shall apply to the operation of motor vehicles for hire and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate, or permit to be operated a motor vehicle for hire in the city in violation thereof: 
(1)  Public convenience and necessity. The city council is hereby vested with power and authority, upon the filing of an application for registration as a motor vehicle for hire, to ascertain and determine, after considering all existing public carrier facilities and the demand for or need of additional service, whether there exists a public necessity for such service and whether public convenience will be promoted by granting the application and permitting the operating of such vehicle as a public vehicle. The application shall be granted by resolution of the city council to that effect. Such resolution, after certification to the clerk, shall fulfill the requirements of section 7.157 of this chapter. An application shall be granted or denied within ninety (90) days of the filing of the application for registration with the clerk. The council may, if it deems advisable, conduct a public hearing and take the testimony of interested persons and experts in areas related hereto. 
(2)  Fares. The rates of fare which shall be charged and collected for service by motor vehicles for hire shall be determined by resolution of the city council. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each motor vehicle for hire, a card on which shall be printed, in plain, legible type, the rates of fare as provided by resolution of the city council, and shall indicate reference to this chapter. No fare shall be charged for the hire of any motor vehicle other than in accordance with the fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  Soliciting bus passengers. No city chauffeur of any motor vehicle for hire shall ask or request persons to take passage in such vehicle when waiting to take passage on a bus at an established loading point for such bus. 
(4)  Inapplicability of sections to motor vehicle for hire. When a motor vehicle for hire has been approved for registration as outlined in subsection (1) above, section 7.155 and section 7.159 shall not apply to such motor vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION, FEES, REVOCATION OF CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE AND PUBLIC CARRIER REGISTRATION, PUBLIC CARRIER'S CODE 

Sec. 7.169. - Administration, forms. 
    All licenses and registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall be administered by the clerk. The clerk shall collect fees as hereinafter provided, which shall be applied to the cost of administering this chapter. The clerk shall formulate and prepare all necessary forms for implementation of this chapter and shall maintain an index of all chauffeurs and registrants by name and by license number. 
Sec. 7.170. - Fees. 
    The applicant or registrant shall pay fees to the city clerk, the amount of such fees being determined from time to time by resolution of the council, in accordance with the following table of services: 
(1)  Vehicle, inspection of condition by police department, each vehicle: 
Section 7.154; 
(2)  Taximeter, inspection of: 
Subsection 7.167(1); 
(3)  Public carrier registration and registration plate: 
Section 7.152 
Each original issuance of a plate; 
Each renewal of a plate; 
(4)  City chauffeur's license: 
Section 7.145, each new license; 
Section 7.149, each renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 7.171. - Revocation of city chauffeur license or public carrier registration. 
    Any license or registration issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked as hereinafter provided. Any license or registration so revoked shall not be renewed or restored, except that an application for a new license or registration may be presented and acted upon by the clerk after the expiration of at least one (1) year after the date of revocation. 
(1)  A city chauffeur's license is automatically and simultaneously revoked whenever the licensee's state chauffeur's license is revoked, suspended or restricted by the secretary of state, or by a court of competent jurisdiction; or whenever the licensee's state chauffeur's license has expired; or when the licensee's certified driving record, as maintained by the secretary of state, indicates more than twelve (12) points in moving violations have been entered thereon in any two-year period. No notice is necessary on the part of the city to effectuate revocation of the city chauffeur's license under any of the aforesaid circumstances. 
(2)  A city chauffeur's license and any public carrier registration may be revoked upon a finding that the licensee or registrant has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or has violated any administrative rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. Such finding shall be according to subparagraph (5) of this section. 
(3)  A licensee or registrant to whom notification of revocation of registration or city chauffeur's license has been mailed, pursuant to this chapter shall forthwith surrender such license or registration to the clerk. The clerk shall then mutilate or cancel the license or registration. Any police officer shall confiscate a registration or license which has been revoked and which has not been surrendered to the clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any revoked license or registration. 
(4)  When a city chauffeur has been found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to proceedings held under subparagraph (5) below on two (2) occasions within a twelve-month period, the registration certificate and the registration plates of the vehicle involved in the latest violation shall be revoked regardless of the identity or relationship of the owner of such vehicle with the prior violation. 
(5)  Whenever the chief of police has reason to believe that a licensee or registrant has violated the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinance, or state or federal law, he may notify the clerk. The clerk shall then send a notice to the licensee or registrant by first class mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the licensee or registrant at the address indicated on the license or registration, informing the licensee or registrant of the violation charged and of the time, place and date of a hearing before the city clerk and chief of police for the purpose of determining whether or not there has been any such violation. The licensee or registrant may appear at the hearing, in which event he shall be heard. The hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days of the alleged violation. Witnesses to the violation shall be heard. Papers and documents may be received and examined by the clerk and the chief of police in their discretion. If the city clerk and the chief of police each find beyond a reasonable doubt, as a matter of fact, that the licensee or registrant has violated any provision of this chapter, or has violated any ordinance of the city, or has violated any state or federal law, such license or registration shall forthwith be revoked, and the clerk shall file a copy of the findings of fact and reasons for revocation in the licensee's or registrant's permanent file. A verbatim stenographic or other permanent record of such hearing shall be made and filed with the clerk, and retained for a period of not less than two (2) years. 
(6)  Notice of revocation pursuant to subparagraph (5) above shall be served personally upon the license or registrant, or the clerk shall mail such notice to the licensee or registrant by first class mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the licensee or registrant at the address indicated on the license or registration. Such notice shall contain the findings of fact made by the city clerk and the chief of police and the reasons for the revocation. The clerk shall file in the permanent file an affidavit of the service of such notice. 
(7)  A public carrier registration may also be revoked upon a finding being made pursuant to the provisions of this section that the vehicle is being unreasonably held from public service or that the number of passenger runs made by vehicle within a ninety-day period is less than twenty-five (25) percent of the average run established by the registered taxicabs during the normal course of operations as established by the passenger runs recorded under the provisions of subsection (18) of section 7.167. 
Sec. 7.172. - Interstate and interurban commerce. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any public carrier from coming into the city to discharge persons or goods accepted for transportation outside the city, and this chapter shall apply only insofar as it may be consistent with the Constitution or the laws of the United States and the State of Michigan. 
Sec. 7.173. - Public Carrier's Code. 
(1)  The city administrator shall formulate, prepare, publish, and file with the clerk, a regulation which shall be entitled "Public Carrier's Code." Such code shall specify: 
(a)  The personal conduct required of all persons licensed as city chauffeurs, necessary to protect the safety and welfare of those persons serviced by the licensee; 
(b)  The type and manner of dress or uniform necessary to identify a licensee as a Southfield city chauffeur; 
(c)  The standards of personal cleanliness and hygiene necessary to protect the health of those persons serviced by the licensee; 
(d)  Other regulations deemed necessary by the city administrator in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  The public carrier's code shall state that "Violations of the provisions of this code, at the unanimous decision of the clerk and the chief of police, may result in revocation of the violator's city chauffeur's license or public carrier registration, or both license and registration, pursuant to section 7.171 of this chapter." A copy of the code shall be presented to each applicant for a city chauffeur's license or public carrier registration. 
CHAPTER 78. - AUCTIONEERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Secondhand dealers, § 7.111 et seq. 

Sec. 7.181. - License. 
    No person shall engage in the trade or business of auctioneer without first obtaining a license therefor and payment of fees as provided in Chapter 71. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police. 
Sec. 7.182. - Prohibited activity. 
    No auctioneer shall knowingly misrepresent the quality of any goods sold by him. No auctioneer shall accept any goods from any minor for sale at auction. 
Sec. 7.183. - Auction accounts. 
    Every auctioneer shall keep a full and accurate account of all goods sold by him, indicating the prior owner, the price at which sold, and to whom sold. Such account shall be open for inspection by any police officer of the city at any reasonable time. No auctioneer shall fail to make such account accessible to any police officer upon demand. 
Sec. 7.184. - Prohibitions. 
    The following acts, omissions and practices in connection with auction sales are prohibited: 
(1)  The use of deceit, fraud or misrepresentation in the sale of any property; 
(2)  The substitution of another article for that bid upon by the prospective purchaser; 
(3)  The use of false bidders, cappers or puffers; 
(4)  The use of bells, buzzers, ballyhoo, loudspeakers or any variety of mechanical or excessive vocal sound to attract attention; 
(5)  The use of any false or misleading advertising matter; 
(6)  A sale by a person other than the licensed auctioneer named in the application; 
(7)  Failure to exhibit an auctioneer's license to a police officer on demand at the place where the auction is being conducted. 
Cross reference- Noise control, § 9.10 et seq. 
Sec. 7.185. - Exempt sales. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sheriffs, constables or other public or court officers or to any person acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling property in the course of their official duties or to any person selling property under and by virtue of any statute, state or federal. 
CHAPTER 79. - LIQUOR LICENSES AND RELATED PERMITS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1239, § 1, enacted December 21, 1987, deleted ch. 79, §§ 7.190-7.193, as derived from Ord. No. 1093, § 1, enacted April 26, 1982, and added new provisions in lieu thereof, as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor, § 9.151 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - DENIAL OF RENEWAL OF LIQUOR LICENSES AND RELATED PERMITS; OR REVOCATION HEARING PROCEDURES; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES ON LICENSED PREMISES; PENALTIES 

Sec. 7.190. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in this chapter: 
(1)  Licensee shall mean and include all persons, including their agents, servants and employees, holding a license to sell beer and wine or spirits for consumption on the premises issued by the state liquor control commission. 
(2)  Licensed premises shall mean the location at which a licensee is authorized to sell beer and wine or spirits for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  License means a license issued by the state liquor control commission to sell beer and wine or spirits for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Related permit means any permit issued by the state liquor control commission to a licensee for entertainment or other activities at the licensed premises which legally require such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 12-21-87) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 7.1. 
Sec. 7.191. - Enforcement officer. 
    The primary responsibility for ensuring compliance by any licensee under this chapter shall be reposed upon the chief of police who shall have the continuing responsibility to ensure that all licensees operating licensed premises within the city are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 12-21-87) 
Sec. 7.192. - Prohibited activities. 
    No licensee within the boundaries of the city shall knowingly engage in, allow or permit any of the following activities to be conducted by any person upon any licensed premises owned, occupied or controlled by such licensee: 
(1)  Dancing, monologues, dialogues, motion pictures, still slides, closed circuit television, contests or other performances for public viewing on the licensed premises, unless the licensee has been granted an entertainment or dance-entertainment permit by the state liquor control commission which is in legal effect at the time of the occurrence of such activity; 
(a)  This subsection shall not prohibit orchestra playing, piano playing, the playing of other types of musical instruments, singing or publicly broadcast television transmissions from federally licensed stations. 
(2)  The exposing to public view by any person of the less than completely and opaquely covered pubic region, genitals, anus, buttock, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(3)  The showing of films, television, slides, pictures or any form of reproductions, electronic or otherwise, which depict scenes wherein any person exposes to public view the less than completely and opaquely covered pubic region, genitals, anus, buttock, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(a)  This subsection shall not prohibit any publicly broadcast television transmission from federally licensed stations. 
(4)  The performance, or simulated performance, by any person of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, fellatio or cunnilingus; or the fondling or other erotic touching by any person of the genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; 
(5)  The showing of films, television, slides, pictures or any form of reproduction, electronic or otherwise, which depict scenes wherein any person performs, or simulates performance of, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, fellatio, cunnilingus or fondles or erotically touches the genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; 
(a)  This subsection shall not prohibit any publicly broadcast television transmission from federally licensed stations. 
(6)  The distribution, dissemination or circulation of obscene literature, pictures or advertising materials; 
(7)  The knowing permission of the licensed premises to be frequented by, or to become a place of repeated congregation of, prostitutes or of persons seeking to exchange sexual favors and services for valuable consideration in a commercial manner; 
(8)  The knowing allowance of the licensed premises to be used by any persons for the engaging in any illegal conduct in violation of any law of the state or ordinance of the city in legal effect at the time of such allowance, including, but not limited to, the use, possession or delivery of controlled substances, illegal gambling, and the possession of illegal gambling devices. 
(Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 12-21-87) 
Sec. 7.193. - Criteria for revocation or denial of renewal of licenses and related permits. 
    The city council may recommend revocation or denial of renewal of a license or related permit to the state liquor control commission upon a determination by it that based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at a public hearing, conducted in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 7.194, any of the following exist: 
(1)  A licensee has engaged in any of the prohibited activities specified in section 7.192; 
(2)  Personal property taxes, real property taxes or any other obligations due and payable to the city relating to the licensed premises have not been paid; 
(3)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(a)  Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes; 
(b)  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; 
(c)  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; 
(d)  Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit and/or entertainment which disturbs the peace, order and tranquility in the neighborhood of the licensed premises; 
(e)  Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises; 
(4)  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 12-21-87) 
Sec. 7.194. - Procedure for recommendation of denial of renewal or revocation of licenses and related permits. 
(1)  If the chief of police determines that any licensee has committed a violation of this chapter, the chief of police shall prepare a report in writing specifying (i) the specific factual details of such violation(s); (ii) the particular chapter subsection(s) violated; and (iii) any other information or recommendation relevant to a proper determination by the city council as to the nature of such violation(s) and the appropriate action to be taken by council. 
(2)  The chief of police shall file the original report prepared under subsection (1) with the city council, and serve a copy of such report upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) days from the date such report has been filed with the city council, the city clerk shall set a date for a hearing before council on the alleged violation(s) and for a determination by council as to whether or not council shall request and recommend to the state liquor control commission that the commission revoke or deny the renewal of any license or permit held in conjunction with such license. Notice of this hearing shall be served by the city clerk upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail not less than seven (7) days before the scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the licensee of its right to be represented by legal council at the hearing before city council. 
(4)  At all such hearings, the licensee shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being allowed to present live witnesses in its own behalf, by being allowed to present other evidence in its own behalf, and by being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel, in its own behalf. 
(5)  The city council shall prepare a written statement of its findings, which may be formal or informal in nature, within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, after the conclusion of all such hearings. Such statement of findings may be embodied in a resolution as described in subsection (6), below, if council determines that objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license or related permit is appropriate. 
(6)  If the city council determines after due notice and proper hearing upon a preponderance of the evidence presented that a violation of this chapter has been committed by a licensee, or that, even if no violation has been demonstrated, nevertheless the interests of public health, safety or welfare warrant that council object to renewal or request revocation of any existing license or related permit issued to such licensee, the council may adopt a resolution recommending to the state liquor control commission that it deny renewal or revoke any such license or related permit to such licensee. 
(7)  Within ten (10) days of the council's final approval of any such resolution, the city clerk shall forward a copy thereof to the state liquor control commission pursuant to MCL 436.17, as amended, as council's official notice of objection to renewal or request for revocation of any existing license or related permit. 
(Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 12-21-87) 
Sec. 7.195. - Licenses. 
    Any and all new liquor licenses and transfers of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on premises of any kind shall require the approval of the city council including, but not limited to: ownership of the license, stock in a corporation that owns a license, interest in a license through any entity, or location of the licensed premises. Applications for a new license or transfer shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. An application for a new license or transfer of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises will be considered by the city council based upon the following standards: 
(1)  All personal property taxes, real property taxes, water bills, or any other obligations due and payable to the city relating to the applicant and/or the proposed licensed premises shall have been fully paid and satisfied; 
(2)  The police chief shall have certified that the person(s) making application for the license is/are of good moral character; 
(3)  The location proposed and methods of operation must not detrimentally or unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses and/or residents; 
(4)  The location proposed must have adequate parking; 
(5)  All applicable health and safety codes and ordinances, including zoning, must have been met, and the premises shall have been certified by the director of building and safety engineering as in compliance with title V, zoning, of this Code, and a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the premises; 
(6)  The applicant has sufficient, measurable management experience in the alcohol/liquor business, including crowd control; 
(7)  The applicant has sufficient financial ability to build and/or operate the proposed facility on which the proposed liquor license is to be located; and 
(8)  Any other factor(s) determined by the city council that may affect the health, safety, and welfare or the best interests of the city and its residents. 
(Ord. No. 1629 , § 1, 9-7-14) 
Sec. 7.196. - Application and procedure. 
(a)  Each applicant for a new license or transfer of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises must make an application to the city clerk on forms provided by the city. This application is in addition to any application required by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission (the "liquor control commission"). The application shall include at least the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be provided, and a copy of any partnership agreement attached. If the applicant is a privately held corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers, members of the board of directors, and stockholders shall be provided, and a copy of the articles of incorporation attached. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers, members of the board of directors, and stockholders who own ten percent (10) percent or more of the corporate stock shall be provided. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members, managers and assignees of membership interests shall be provided, and a copy of the articles of incorporation attached; 
2.  Type of license desired; 
3.  The address and legal description of the property where the license it to be located; 
4.  If the facility is to be located in a proposed building for which site plan approval has not yet been obtained, or in an existing building that is to be remodeled, the applicant shall submit a conceptual plan showing the relationship of the building to the surrounding properties and uses, proposed building elevations, floor plans, seating arrangements, and site dimensions, including parking areas; 
5.  A written statement as to the applicant's character, experience, and financial ability to meet the obligations and business undertakings for which the license is to be issued; and 
6.  A written statement demonstrating that the location proposed and the methods of operation will not detrimentally and unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses, and residents. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a new license or transfer of a license, the city clerk will refer it to the police chief, building official, fire chief, planning director, city treasurer, and public works director, who shall each cause a thorough investigation of the application, the proposed licensed premises and the applicant. 
(c)  The applicant will be required to pay the new license or transfer of a license application fee in such amount as established by city council resolution from time to time. 
(d)  The applicant will be required to appear before the city council, making a presentation concerning the plans for the operation of the proposed licensed premises, and answer any questions pertaining to such plans. 
(e)  If the city council is satisfied that the issuance of a new license or transfer of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises will constitute an asset to the community and meets the standards of this chapter, it will adopt a resolution approving the new license or transfer of the license, subject to any conditions stated in the resolution. The applicant must comply with all representations made to the city council as part of this request for a new license or transfer of a license. If, following issuance of the license or transfer of the license it is determined that the project was not completed as required by the plans and specifications presented to the city council, the city council may request that the liquor license issued by the liquor control commission be revoked pursuant to the administrative rules of the liquor control commission, or may object to the renewal of the license for the following year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 7.194 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1629 , § 1, 9-7-14) 
Sec. 7.197. - Duty of continuing compliance. 
    Successful applicants for a new license or transfer of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises shall continue to comply with all city and state codes and the standards set forth in this chapter, including the plan of operation submitted to the city and any representations made to the city council in obtaining the requested license or transfer of a license. Licensee's failure to comply with all codes or variation from the plan of operation may result in a request by the city council to the liquor control commission to revoke the liquor license of the licensee, or the city council may object to the renewal of the license for the following year. 
(Ord. No. 1629 , § 1, 9-7-14) 
CHAPTER 80. - PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 7.221. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Public dance shall mean any dance to which admission may be had by payment of a fee, or by purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token obtained for money or any valuable thing, or in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property or where a dance is held in conjunction with or as entertainment to any place where food or beverages, either alcoholic or nonalcoholic, are sold, or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or without payment of a fee. 
(2)  Public dance hall shall mean any hall, room or place in which a public dance is given or public ball shall be held. 
(3)  Operator shall be any operator, proprietor, lessee, manager or employee of any public dance hall. 
(4)  Municipal dance shall be any dance or ball which is sponsored by the board of education, department of parks and recreation or schools of the city and conducted in a building owned or leased by the city. 
(5)  Teenage dance shall be any dance or ball where admission is granted to minors thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age inclusive. 
Sec. 7.222. - Licenses required. 
(1)  No person as defined herein shall conduct or sponsor any public dance or hall for hire without first being duly licensed as required in this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to municipal dances, dances or balls conducted by a religious or fraternal organization. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to private parties and receptions or to taverns or cocktail lounges, and other facilities licensed under the laws of the state. 
(2)  No operator, as defined herein, shall allow or permit the use of any public dance hall unless a license for such use shall have been obtained from the city clerk. 
Sec. 7.223. - Neighbor's consent. 
    No license to operate a public dance hall under this chapter shall be issued until the applicant for such license has filed a petition signed by at least fifty-one (51) percent of the persons living or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of any proposed location or any part thereof approving the issuance of such license. There shall be attached to such petition an affidavit signed by the party circulating such petition, which affidavit shall be in the following form: 
State of Michigan )  ss. County of Oakland )  
    The undersigned, first being duly sworn, deposes and says that the signatures upon the foregoing petition were obtained by him (or her); that the signatures are the signatures of the persons purporting to sign the same; and that he (or she) verily believes that the signers of such petition are persons living or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the proposed new location of the establishment to be licensed. 
_____
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
Notary public, 
Oakland County, Michigan 
My commission expires _____ . 
No license shall be granted until the city clerk shall have referred the petition to the police department and he shall have secured from the police department a certificate certifying that an investigation has been made by the police department of such petition and that such petition contains the signatures of fifty-one (51) percent of persons living or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the proposed new location. 
Sec. 7.224. - Application. 
    Every person or operator as defined herein desiring to obtain a license as required by this chapter shall file a written application at least two (2) weeks prior to the date on which license is desired on forms approved by the city clerk for the city, together with the license fee as provided in this chapter. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of each person, co-partnership, firm, corporation, society, club, association or organization conducting the public dance hall, public dance or public ball; 
(2)  The location of the public dance hall or the place where dance or ball is to be conducted; 
(3)  The name to be used by the applicant; 
(4)  Any other information required by the clerk of the city or the police department to aid in determining the moral character of the applicant. 
All applicants must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall not have been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
Sec. 7.225. - Inspection. 
    Before any public dance hall license or any license for any dance shall be issued, the city clerk shall request an inspection of the place to be licensed or where the dance is to be held. Upon full compliance of all pertinent rules or regulations of the department of building and safety engineering, the department of health, the fire department and the police department relating to the safety, health, convenience, comfort and morals of the public and upon the completion of the inspection by the city clerk and/or other departments involved, the city clerk may issue a license for the place to be used as a public dance hall or for a public dance or ball. 
Sec. 7.226. - Regulations. 
    Each licensee shall: 
(1)  At all times open each and every portion of the licensed premises for inspection by the police department and/or other city departments for the purpose of enforcing any provisions of this Code relating to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  At all times display the license granted under this chapter in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the licensed establishment. 
(3)  Provide proper ventilation and sufficient toilet and lavatory conveniences as required by the city plumbing regulations and by the board of health for the city. 
(4)  At all times provide adequate lighting in every part of the licensed premises. 
(5)  Provide sufficient fire exits free from all rubbish and inflammable material as required by the regulations of the state fire marshal and/or this Code. 
(6)  Provide private guard service which service shall be a licensed and bonded service registered within the state. At least one (1) uniformed guard shall be employed for every seventy-five (75) persons attending. The chief of police may at any time require additional protection which shall be provided. 
Cross reference- Plumbing regulations, § 8.451 et seq.; disorderly conduct, § 9.122; fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 
Sec. 7.227. - Compliance with codes. 
    No license shall be issued for any place in which public dances are to be held unless the building code, fire code and other pertinent provisions of the City Code as far as can be determined, are being complied with. 
Cross reference- Building code, § 8.201 et seq.; fire prevention regulations, § 9.181 et seq. 
Sec. 7.228. - Conduct on premises. 
    No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee shall: 
(1)  Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct; 
(2)  Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly persons of any type; 
(3)  Permit immoral, vulgar, lewd, obscene, improper or freak dancing; 
(4)  Permit smoking in the area designated for dancing; 
(5)  Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia on the premises; 
(6)  Permit overcrowding in the area designated for dancing (For the purposes of this chapter, "overcrowding" shall mean any number of persons in excess of the maximum number approved for the hall or building by the fire department and building department.); 
(7)  Permit intoxicated persons to dance or loiter on the premises; 
(8)  Employ a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(9)  Permit any persons under the age of seventeen (17) years to be upon the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian excepting where this chapter expressly allows persons between the ages of thirteen (13) and sixteen (16) inclusive to attend; 
(10)  Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises, nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way with any place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed or given away. This prohibition shall not apply while a state liquor control commission special beer and wine license is in effect at the licensed premises; 
(11)  Permit dancing on the licensed premises between the hours 2:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. without first having obtained a special permit from the city council. Applications for such special permit shall be filed with the city clerk at the time of filing the application; 
(12)  Permit noise or music to emerge from licensed premises which is disturbing to the surrounding area. 
Cross reference- Noise control, § 9.10 et seq.; alcoholic liquor regulations, § 9.151 et seq. 
Sec. 7.229. - License fees and transfers. 
    The fee to be paid for licenses issued under this chapter shall be as specified in chapter 71. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable. 
Sec. 7.230. - Teenage dances. 
    A licensee conducting or sponsoring a teenage dance shall, while the teenage dance license is in effect: 
(1)  Be permitted to admit minors thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age inclusive; 
(2)  Not permit admission of the general public; 
(3)  Not permit dancing between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.; 
(4)  Provide proper and adequate adult supervision, such supervision to be in the minimum ration of one (1) adult to every twenty (20) teenagers unless additional supervision is found to be necessary by the chief of police upon investigation of the application for the license. The applicant shall be informed in writing as to the necessity of any additional adult supervisors within one (1) week of filing the application. 
Sec. 7.231. - Suspension and revocation. 
(1)  Any dance license may be suspended or revoked as provided in Chapter 70. 
(2)  Any public dance hall may be entered at any time by any member of the police department or other city officer or employee in the course of his employment. Any police officer of the city may cause any public dance to be discontinued and the hall to be vacated during the progress of a public dance for any reason for which a license may be suspended or revoked. 
CHAPTER 81. - RECREATION, AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of parks and recreation, § 1.138. 

ARTICLE I. - POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 7.251. - Definitions. 
    The term "poolroom" as used in this chapter shall mean any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards and having two (2) or more pool or billiard tables. The term "bowling establishment" shall mean any place open to the public for bowling, and having two (2) or more lanes. 
Sec. 7.252. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a poolroom or bowling establishment without first obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police and director of building and safety engineering and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. No person shall be granted a license to operate a poolroom or bowling alley unless he is a citizen of the United States over the age of eighteen (18) years. Each license shall designate the number of pool or billiard tables or bowling lanes permitted under this chapter, and no licensee shall keep or maintain more tables or lanes than permitted by such license. 
Sec. 7.253. - Public institutions excepted. 
    This chapter shall not be applicable to bowling establishments or poolrooms operated and owned by public institutions. 
Secs. 7.254-7.260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THEATERS, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 7.261. - Show license. 
    No person shall conduct a circus, carnival or show, except in a theater licensed under the provisions of this chapter, without first obtaining a license therefor which shall be known as a show license. No license for a carnival shall be issued unless all rides have current state approval. 
Sec. 7.262. - Animal shows and exhibitions. 
    No person shall conduct any dog or pony show or menagerie, without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be known as an animal show license. No person shall conduct any panorama, exhibition of statuary or painting, or any other exhibition not otherwise licensed under this chapter and for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as an exhibition license. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any fair held under the direct management and supervision of any recognized agricultural association or society, nonprofit association or corporation, at which are exhibited agricultural or industrial products, principally. 
Sec. 7.263. - Theaters. 
    No person shall conduct a moving picture show, vaudeville, opera house, theater or other place for the giving of plays and other theatrical exhibitions where an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as a theater license. The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to exhibitions or shows given for charity or for the benefit of schools or benevolent, educational or fraternal or religious societies. 
Sec. 7.264. - Certification required. 
    No show, animal show, exhibition or theater license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of police, fire chief and director of building and safety engineering or their respective representatives. 
Sec. 7.265. - Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters and cabarets. 
(1)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or cabaret without being licensed therefor. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Adult bookstore: An establishment wherein more than twenty (20) percent of its stock in trade is comprised of books, magazines and other periodicals having as dominant theme matter, depicting, describing or relating the specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
(b)  Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section for observation by patrons therein. 
(c)  Cabaret: Any place wherein food and any type of alcoholic beverage is sold or given away on the premises and the operator thereof holds a yearly license to sell such beverages by the glass and which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
(d)  Specified anatomical areas: For the purposes of this section shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, pubic region; (ii) buttock; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(e)  Specified sexual activities: For the purposes of the section shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
3.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(3)  Application. Application for a license to engage in the business of operating an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater or a cabaret shall be made to the city clerk as provided in Chapter 70 of this Code. No such application for the original granting of such license shall be considered by the city clerk, unless such application is accompanied by a petition filed with such clerk and verified as to sufficiency. Such petition shall indicate a recommendation for approval of the granting of such license signed by fifty-one (51) percent or more of the persons owning real property within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the location of the proposed business as measured from the lot line, and provided further: 
(a)  The petition shall contain an affidavit signed by the party circulating such petition attesting to the fact that the petition was circulated by him and that the circulator personally witnessed the signatures on the petition and that the same were affixed to the petition by the person whose name appeared thereon and that the circulator verily believes that the signers of such petition are persons owning real property which is situated within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the location of the proposed business as measured from the lot line; 
(b)  The petition shall clearly state the name and address of the applicant, the address at which the intended business is to be operated, whether the intended business is an adult bookstore, and adult motion picture theater or a cabaret, and shall state that it is being circulated pursuant to section 7.263 of the City Code; 
(c)  Adjacent to every signature appearing on such petition shall be the full residence address of such signatory, together with a description of the property for which he qualifies as owner for purposes of the petition; 
(d)  "Persons owning real property" shall mean each and every person having an interest in fee simple in any such property, whether the interest be held by entireties, jointly, in common or otherwise, and each such person having such an interest shall be entitled to only one (1) signature on the petition regardless of the number of parcels in which he is interested; 
(e)  Names appearing as taxpayers in the records of the assessor shall be prima facie evidence of the owners of the fee interest for purposes of verification of the petition by the clerk. 
(4)  Certification required. No license shall be granted without the certification of the health officer, the fire chief, the police chief and the building and safety engineering director, as provided in Chapter 70 of this Code. Prior to certification the police chief shall cause an investigation to be made as to the character of the applicant and of the officers of the club, society or corporation and of the person who is to have general management of the business. If the applicant, or the officers of the club, society or corporation or the person who is to have general management of the business is found to have been convicted within the preceding two (2) years of the violation of any criminal statute of this state, except traffic offenses, or of any ordinance regulating, controlling or in any way relating to the construction, use or operation of any establishments included in this section which evidences a flagrant disregard for the safety or welfare of either the patrons, employees or person residing or doing business nearby, the police chief may refuse certification. Upon refusal of any certification required in this subsection the applicant shall have a right to a hearing and review before the city council, provided a written request is filed with the city clerk within five (5) days after notice of denial is received by the applicant. The city council may confirm such denial or order the license to be issued if it finds such certification should not have been refused under the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Term of license. The license year shall begin January 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on December 31 of that year. Original license shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the annual expiration date. 
(6)  Bond and fee required. No license shall be granted to any person unless the person shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with two (2) sufficient sureties, conditioned for the faithful observance of this section, the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the city and laws of this state. The bond shall not be accepted unless approved by the city attorney. 
(7)  Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to knowingly permit any exhibition or advertising in connection with any establishment regulated under this section depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical activities to be displayed in any manner which is visible from any public street or highway. 
(8)  Conduct of licensees and patrons. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any obscene or disorderly conduct or permit the use of any immoral, profane or indecent language, or to permit such business to become and be a place of resort of thieves, prostitutes or disorderly persons. 
(9)  Fee. The annual license fee for an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or cabaret shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) each. 
(10)  Suspension and revocation. A license may be suspended or revoked as provided in Chapter 70 of this Code. 
Secs. 7.266-7.270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SKATING RINKS 

Sec. 7.271. - Skating rinks. 
    No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any place open to the public for ice skating or roller skating without first obtaining a license to operate such skating rink in the manner provided in Chapter 70 of this Code. No such licenses shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police and the fire chief. 
Secs. 7.272-7.275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOXING, WRESTLING, JUDO AND KARATE 

Sec. 7.276. - Exhibitions and matches. 
    No person shall conduct any exhibition or match of boxing, wrestling, judo, karate or similar martial art, or any entertainment in which such exhibition or match constitutes a part, without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner provided for in Chapter 70 of this Code. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police and the fire chief. This section shall not be applicable to exhibitions or matches conducted as a regular part of the athletic program of any educational institution or other public agency. 
Secs. 7.277-7.280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT RIDES 

Sec. 7.281. - Mechanical amusement rides. 
(1)  The term "mechanical amusement ride" shall mean any device or assembly designed to carry three (3) or more persons which is propelled by motive power, to amuse, entertain or thrill the persons occupying seats thereon in a manner similar to devices commonly associated with a carnival, fair, amusement park or the like. This term shall not be deemed to include coin-operated cars, ships, mechanical horses, airplanes, spacecraft and similar devices designed, installed and used for the purpose of providing amusement for not more than two (2) small children or infants at a time by providing a rocking, vibrating or oscillating ride when limited to the confines of a stationary platform or pedestal. 
(2)  No person shall engage in the business of operating any mechanical amusement ride without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted until each such ride shall have been inspected by the department of building and safety engineering and approved. No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of police. 
Secs. 7.282-7.285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ARCADES 

Sec. 7.286. - Definitions. 
    Certain words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed in this section: 
(1)  Mechanical and electrical amusement devices. The term "mechanical and electrical amusement device" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, mean all mechanical devices or machines which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc or any charge therefor, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include, but is not limited to, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical or electrical machines, and all games, operations or transacting similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated; it shall specifically include any machine which may, on the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc or any charge therefor, operate or be operated or used as a game, contest or amusement, and which consists solely of electronic play appearing on a video screen; it shall not include "vending machines" as defined in section 7.288(1) of this chapter nor to public utility machines such as telephones, newspaper vending machines and similar machines which provide a product or information or other tangible commodity and are not designed or operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement. 
(2)  Arcades. The term "arcade" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, mean any public place of amusement or public place of business located within a building and in which more than three (3) mechanical and electrical amusement devices are installed, whether intended as a principal use or accessory use. 
(3)  Owner. "Owner" means any person who owns, operates or conducts any place of establishment in which any mechanical and electrical amusement device may be operated; the term shall not apply to a person who owns or operates a mechanical and electrical amusement device solely for personal use within a residential dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-23-82) 
Sec. 7.287. - Licenses; rules and regulations. 
(1)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, distribute for the purpose of operation, own, operate or possess with the intent to operate any mechanical and electrical amusement device without having first procured a license and paid the requisite fees therefor as provided in this Code. It shall be further unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any place or establishment open to the public where any mechanical and electrical amusement device may be operated without first obtaining a license therefor and paying the required fees prescribed in this Code, or by city council. 
(2)  Application for license; fee term. 
(a)  An application for a license shall be made to the building official on a form provided, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. The application for license shall state, among other things: The number and type of machines or devices intended to be operated, the proposed locations for such machines or devices; the proposed business address; the full name of the business; and the full name, present addresses and date of birth of each and every owner of such business. 
(b)  The application for license shall be accompanied by the requisite license fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The application for license shall also be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business, all exits and the proposed location of each machine or device. 
(d)  No license shall be issued until such time as the chief of the fire department has determined that the proposed location of each machine or device will not interfere with the egress from the building in case of fire, and that all fire regulations have been satisfied. 
(e)  No license shall be issued until such time as the building official has determined that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each machine or device comply with the City Code, and that all building and zoning regulations or other regulations of the city have been satisfied. 
(f)  No license shall be issued until such time as the chief of police has determined that the applicant, or each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation, has not been convicted within the preceding two (2) years of the violation of any criminal statute of this state, or of any municipal ordinance, excepting traffic offenses, regulating, controlling or in any way relating to the construction, use or operation of any establishments included in this section, which evidences a flagrant disregard of the safety or welfare of either the patrons, employees or persons residing or doing business nearby. 
(g)  If, after the issuance of any license, the licensee desires to operate other mechanical and electrical amusement devices in addition to those licensed, the applicant shall submit an amended application, in a form similar to the original application, showing the additions, changes or modifications desired. Any drawings or other information filed with the original license application and not affected by the additions, changes or modifications requested may be incorporated by reference in the amended application. 
(h)  The term of any license granted in this chapter shall begin January 1 of the license year and shall terminate at midnight on December 31 of the year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the annual expiration date. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(3)  Right of issuance. The chief of the fire department and chief of police shall either approve or disapprove the application for license within fifteen (15) days of receipt by them, and forward such recommendation to the building official. Should an application be disapproved by any of the aforementioned city officials, the reason therefor shall be endorsed upon the application and the applicant shall be notified thereof. The applicant shall be entitled to request a hearing before the city council as provided in section 7.17 of Chapter 70 of this Code in the event of disapproval of an application. 
(4)  Exempt persons; fee. No license fee shall be required for any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all the provisions of this section and chapter. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to such exemption and the reasons therefor. 
(5)  Prohibitions and restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow: 
(a)  Any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to operate or play any mechanical and electrical amusement device unless such person under the age of sixteen (16) years is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  The operating or playing of any mechanical and electrical amusement device between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day. 
(c)  The operating or playing of any mechanical and electrical amusement device unless a person eighteen (18) years of age or older is in control of the premises. 
(6)  Display of license. The license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the place of business. 
(7)  Transferability of license. It shall be unlawful to transfer any license from the licensee to any other person. 
(8)  Suspension or revocation right reserved. Any mechanical and electrical amusement device or arcade license may be revoked as provided in section 7.17 of Chapter 70 of this Code. 
(9)  Density area requirements in arcades. No owner shall permit, suffer or allow any less than a minimum of one hundred (100) gross square feet of building area per mechanical and electrical amusement device within the premises of any arcade. 
(10)  Maintenance of device required. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly permit any mechanical and electrical amusement device to be offered to the public for operation in return for payment of a fee or consideration, unless such device is fully operable and in safe operating condition. 
(11)  Establishment of license fee. The city council shall from time to time by resolution establish and revise the fee that shall accompany the application for license required by this section. 
(12)  Enforcement officer. The primary responsibility for ensuring compliance by any licensee under this section shall be reposed upon the building official who shall have the continuing responsibility to ensure that all mechanical and electrical amusement devices and arcades contained within the city are in compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(13)  Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment, unless otherwise provided; it is specifically provided, however, that a mandatory minimum fee of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) be imposed by the sentencing court upon persons violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1085, §§ 1, 5, 2-23-82) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1085, enacted February 23, 1982, amended §§ 7.286 and 7.287 to read as herein set out. Section 3 of that ordinance provided as follows: 
"All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed; it is the express intent of this ordinance, however, that it be harmonized with the provisions of Ordinance No. 678, as amended, containing section 5.3(4) and section 5.7(12) of chapter 45, zoning, of title V, zoning and planning, of the Code of the City of Southfield in respect to the definitions contained therein." 
Section 5, which provided the penalty for violation and did not specifically amend the Code, was designated by the editor as § 7.287(13). 
ARTICLE VII. - VENDING MACHINES 

Sec. 7.288. - Definitions. 
    Certain terms as used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
(1)  Vending machine is a mechanical or electrical device which, upon the insertion of a coin or token, returns to the purchaser thereof the value of his money or token in merchandise, the value of which is five cents ($0.05) or more. 
(2)  Class I operator is any person, firm, corporation or partnership who contracts or permits any vending machine to be installed, used and/or operated in other than his own place of business. 
(3)  Class II operator is any person, firm, corporation or partnership who operates his own vending machines in his own place of business and derives all proceeds and profits from same. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.289. - License and fees. 
    No person, firm, corporation or partnership shall own or operate any vending machine as in section 7.288 defined without first obtaining a license therefor, and paying such fees as required pursuant to Chapter 71 of this Code. 
Sec. 7.290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MINIATURE GOLF COURSES AND DRIVING RANGES 

Sec. 7.291. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating any miniature golf course or driving range without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the director of the department of building and safety engineering. The director of building and safety engineering shall not grant any certification under the provisions of this section unless he shall have caused an inspection of the premises to have been made and has determined that no excessive danger or hazard to the public will result from the operation of the proposed business in the manner planned. Once the plans for the method of construction and operation of any such licensed business shall have been approved, the method of operation or construction shall not be materially changed except upon approval of the director of building and safety engineering. 
Secs. 7.292-7.295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ARCHERY RANGE 

Sec. 7.296. - License required. 
    No person shall operate an archery range without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the chief of police and submission of plans and proposed method of operation to the city clerk. The city clerk shall submit such plans and method of proposed operation to the city council. No license to operate an archery range shall be issued until the city council shall affirmatively find that operation pursuant to the proposed plans and method of operation will not cause an undue hazard to the public or adjacent property owners. No licensee shall make any material change in the approved plan or approved method of operation without obtaining permission from the city council. 
Secs. 7.297-7.300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 7.301. - Definition. 
    The term "public swimming pool" shall have the meaning as defined in regulations of the state department of health issued pursuant to regulations contained in the Michigan Administrative Code, sections 325.392 through 325.396 (1954 Michigan Administrative Code). 
Sec. 7.302. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a public swimming pool without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the health officer. 
Sec. 7.303. - Rules and regulations. 
    Users of any public swimming pool shall comply with "Rules for Users of Pool" as issued and promulgated by the state department of health; all pool personnel shall comply with the rules and regulations of the state department of health applicable to such personnel. The construction, operation, sanitation, lighting, baths, toilets, dressing rooms, towers, floats and emergency equipment shall conform to the "General Regulations" for the operation of public swimming pools as promulgated by the state health department. Any violation of any of such rules or regulations shall constitute a violation of this Code and be punishable as prescribed in Chapter 1 hereof. 
CHAPTER 82. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES AND TRADES 
ARTICLE I. - CHRISTMAS TREES 

Sec. 7.321. - Christmas tree sales. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling Christmas trees on any open lot in the city, without first obtaining a license in the manner provided in Chapter 70 from the city clerk and paying a license fee in the amount prescribed in Chapter 71. 
(2)  All applications for a license shall be accompanied by a cash deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus evidence of a Michigan sales tax license granted or applied for, plus evidence of lease or ownership of the licensed premises, and permission for the city to enter upon the premises and clean them if necessary under the provisions of subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Each licensee shall clean up the licensed premises and remove unsold trees, branches and debris on or before the succeeding January 2. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to abandon licensed premises without such cleaning and removal. If any licensee fails to do such cleaning and removing, the director of public service or persons designated by him shall enter upon the premises, do such cleaning and removing, and charge the cost thereof to the deposit and the remainder, if any, shall be refunded. Any licensee who performs his obligations, as required by this section, shall be refunded his deposit on the next succeeding January 15. 
(4)  Local charitable, benevolent or educational nonprofit organizations shall not be required to pay the license fee established for Christmas tree sale by Chapter 71 of this Code nor required to post cash deposit established by this section, but shall otherwise comply with this section. 
Secs. 7.322-7.325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTELS AND MOTELS 

Sec. 7.326. - Definitions. 
    The terms "hotel" and "motel" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Chapter 45 (Zoning) of this Code. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.327. - License required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain any hotel or motel without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police, the fire chief and the director of the department of building and safety engineering. 
Sec. 7.328. - Registration. 
    Every licensee shall provide and maintain a register or record in which shall be entered in ink the name of any person who is charged or pays for lodging or the rent of a room, the home address of such person or his last place of residence and the number of the room to which such person has been assigned. Such registration shall be completed at the time of the arrival of any such guests. No person shall enter any false information in such register, nor give any false information to any licensee or his employees, for the purpose of having the same entered in such register. Such register shall be maintained in such premises in plain view, and in a convenient place and shall be submitted upon the demand of any police officer of the city for examination. 
Secs. 7.329-7.335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN PARKING STATIONS 

Sec. 7.336. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter an "open parking station" shall mean any plot, piece or parcel of land used for the purpose of temporarily storing ten (10) or more motor vehicles, where the owner or person storing such vehicles is charged a fee, and which are open to the general public. The unit of measurement of capacity of stations shall be as specified in Chapter 45, Zoning, for off-street parking lots. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.337. - License required. 
    No person shall maintain or conduct an open parking station within the city without first having obtained a license therefor. 
Sec. 7.338. - Abandoned vehicles. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the chief of police the make and license number of any car that shall have remained more than forty-eight (48) hours on any open parking station of the licensee without having been reclaimed. Such report shall be made within three (3) hours after the expiration of the forty-eight-hour period. 
Sec. 7.339. - Parking of vehicles. 
    Persons operating open parking stations shall at all times leave within the boundaries of such stations as much space as is required for shifting vehicles, and shall not move vehicles into nor park vehicles in the streets adjacent to such open parking station. 
Sec. 7.340. - Consent of owner to use of vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to make any use for any purpose whatsoever of any motor vehicle parking in any open parking station, unless such use shall first be expressly authorized by the owner or person having control of such vehicles. 
Secs. 7.341-7.350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCE SERVICE 

Sec. 7.351. - License required. 
(1)  No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place in the city, unless he holds a current valid license therefor. An ambulance operated by an agency of the United States shall not be required to be licensed under this chapter. 
(2)  No ambulance shall be operated, and no individual shall drive, attend or permit it to be operated as such on the streets, alleys or any public way or place in the city unless it shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a currently valid license as an attendant-driver or attendant. 
(3)  Provided, however, that no such license shall be required for an ambulance, or for the driver, attendant or attendant-driver of an ambulance, which: 
(a)  Is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope; 
(b)  Is operated from a location or headquarters outside of the city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of the city to locations within the city or to transport patients who are picked up within the city to locations beyond the limits of the city but no such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city, unless the driver, attendant and attendant-driver and the person subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section in respect of such ambulance, hold currently valid licenses issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 7.352. - Standards of ambulance equipment; duties of health officer. 
(1)  Required equipment in each ambulance shall include equipment adequate in the judgment of the health officer for dressing wounds, splinting fractures, controlling hemorrhage and providing oxygen. 
(2)  The health officer is authorized and directed to certify to the chief of police standards for ambulance equipment to implement the standards provided herein as to required equipment in ambulances. In determining the adequacy of equipment, the health officer shall take into consideration the current list of minimal equipment for ambulances adopted by the American College of Surgeons or its duly authorized Committee on Trauma. 
No license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of police. In addition to the requirements for certification of Chapter 70, certification shall be withheld for failure to conform to standards certified to the chief of police by the health officer. 
The chief of police, or his representative, shall periodically inspect the mechanical condition of licensed ambulance for safety. No licensee shall fail to submit his vehicles for inspection on request of the chief of police nor fail to correct any defect in condition in accordance with the written direction of the chief of police or his representative. 
Secs. 7.353-7.370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LOCKSMITHS 

Sec. 7.371. - Definitions. 
    The term "locksmith" shall mean a person engaged in the business of selling or repairing locks or of opening locks for which the key or for which the key or combination has been lost, mislaid or is otherwise not available. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.372. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of locksmith without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police. No locksmith shall open any lock by any means whatever unless he shall keep a record of such transaction in a record kept available for police inspection at the licensee's premises, which record shall state the name and address of each person for whom locks were opened and a description of the premises, place, or thing or vehicle for which the lock was opened. 
Secs. 7.373-7.375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RENTAL AGENCIES-BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES 

Sec. 7.376. - Definitions. 
    The terms "bicycle," "motorcycle" and "motor-driven cycle" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Michigan Vehicle Code Act 200, Public Acts of Michigan, 1949, as amended. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.377. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of renting bicycles, motorcycles or motor-driven cycles without first obtaining a license therefor. Every licensee shall keep records clearly showing when each bicycle, motorcycle and motor-driven cycle was obtained and from whom obtained, which records shall be open for inspection by the police department at any time. Every bicycle, motorcycle and motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with all equipment required by this Code or the provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code. No bicycle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be rented until the same has been inspected and a tag or sticker issued for such vehicle by the police department. Every such vehicle kept for rental shall be subject to inspection at any reasonable time by any police officer of the city. If upon reinspection such vehicle is found not fit for operation or as not having required equipment, such vehicle shall not again be rented or offered for rent until made fit, reinspected and approved by the police department. No license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of police. 
Secs. 7.378-7.380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRY CLEANING AND DYEING 

Sec. 7.381. - Definition. 
    The term "dry cleaning and dyeing" shall have the meaning as defined in Act 327 of the Public Acts of 1947, the State of Michigan, as amended (CL 48 Sec. 29.201 et seq.) and shall include Class I, II, III and IV installations, as therein defined. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.382. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning or dry dyeing or operating any dry cleaning or dry dyeing plant without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of the fire department and of the director of building and safety engineering. The fire department shall conduct periodic inspections to determine that the provisions of state law are being complied with. 
Secs. 7.383-7.390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 7.391. - Use of snow removal equipment. 
    No person shall use any mechanically driven vehicle for the removal of snow from sidewalks or other pedestrian easements in the city which will, by virtue of its use for such purpose, damage or tend to damage any sidewalk or improved easement in the city. The use of mechanically driven vehicles for such purpose shall be lawful only where such mechanically driven vehicles do not cause damage herein prohibited. 
Sec. 7.392. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of snow removal by the use of mechanically driven vehicles without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued until the director of the department of building and safety engineering shall determine whether any of the equipment which the applicant proposes to use would be detrimental to or tend to damage streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city. If the director determines that the vehicle or equipment which the applicant proposes to use will not damage or tend to damage any street, alley or sidewalk the license may be granted upon payment of the fee and the filing of any bond or insurance which may be required in accordance with Chapter 71 of this Code. Any license issued hereunder shall permit the use of only the equipment described in the application for the license. No licensee shall use other equipment without first obtaining approval therefor based upon an additional application fully describing such equipment which shall be submitted to the director of the department of building and safety engineering for his approval the same as in the case of a new application. An additional fee for the additional equipment shall be paid by the licensee but no additional annual fee for operation of the business shall be payable solely because of the additional or substitution of equipment. 
Secs. 7.393-7.395. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LAWN CARE SERVICE 

Sec. 7.396. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the term "lawn care service" shall mean offering to the public a service of caring for or maintaining any lawn by cutting, trimming, fertilizing, rolling or otherwise maintaining or improving any lawn. It shall not include landscape services or tree care even though cutting, fertilizing, rolling or otherwise maintaining or improving a lawn may be incidental thereto. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.397. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a lawn care service without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the chief of police. Every applicant shall file his fingerprints in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. No license shall be required for the casual operation of a lawn care service on a temporary basis. 
Sec. 7.398. - Commercial pesticide application. 
    No person shall engage in the business of applying commercial economic poisons for control or extermination of lawn or garden pests without being first licensed by the Michigan Department of Agriculture pursuant to 1949 PA 297 (MCL 286.161 et seq.). 
Cross reference- Fumigation regulations, § 9.251 et seq. 
Secs. 7.399, 7.400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - GASOLINE STATIONS AND CAR WASH ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 7.401. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the operation of any gasoline station without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the chief of the fire department. Licensees shall conform in all respects to the requirements pertaining to gasoline stations of the National Fire Prevention Code, 1965 Edition, as promulgated by the American Insurance Association, New York City, New York. The use and storage of flammable liquids shall conform to the Flammable Liquids Regulations of the state fire marshal, adopted November 29, 1955, effective February 15, 1956. The fire department shall make periodic inspections of gasoline stations to determine compliance with such codes and regulations and the requirements of this Code. 
Sec. 7.402. - Car wash license. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a car wash pursuant to which all or part of such operations are conducted within a building, without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the director of the department of building and safety engineering. Persons holding licenses for gasoline stations may engage in the washing of motor vehicles on the licensed premises without obtaining an additional car wash license. 
Secs. 7.403-7.406. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ICE CREAM TRUCKS 

Sec. 7.407. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the term "ice cream truck" shall mean any truck or other vehicles used for the sale or delivery of ice cream, either on an established route or traveling from house to house. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.408. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating an ice cream truck without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued until such vehicle is inspected and approved by the county health department in order to protect the health and safety of the general public. 
Sec. 7.409. - Fees. 
    Before any such license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer such fees as prescribed in Chapter 71. 
Secs. 7.410-7.420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 7.421. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the term "garage sale" shall include the terms "basement sale," "attic sale" or other types of so-called residential sales of used tangible personal property such as clothing, household effects, tools, garden implements, toys, recreation equipment or other used or secondhand items customarily found in and about the home and advertised in a manner whereby the public at large is, or can be, aware of such sale. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 7.422. - Permit required. 
    Before a garage sale can be conducted the homeowner or occupant of the premises at which such sale shall be held shall obtain a permit from the city clerk. In addition to other information that may be required by the city clerk the permit shall contain the name of the applicant and the duration of the sale. The fee for such permit shall be the sum of one dollar ($1.00). No additional permit shall be issued for the conducting of a garage sale on the premises covered by the permit until at least six (6) months have expired from the date of expiration of the original permit. 
Sec. 7.423. - Duration of sale. 
    Each garage sale shall be limited to five (5) consecutive days of operation and shall not be conducted before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. of each day. 
Sec. 7.424. - Signs and display of merchandise. 
    At the time the application for a permit is granted the city clerk shall furnish the applicant with a garage sale sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area which shall be used to advertise the garage sale. Such sign shall contain the street address of the premises on which the sale is to be conducted, the permit number, and the expiration date of the permit. Such sign shall be placed at least ten (10) feet within property line of the premises. The applicant may, at the time of obtaining the permit, request an additional sign upon payment of the sum of two dollars ($2.00). Such additional sign shall be placed at a location other than the premises at which the garage sale is being held and shall also contain the words "Warning: Not to be placed in a public right-of-way or on private property without the owner's consent." It shall be the duty and responsibility of the permittee to remove such sign or signs immediately after the completion of the garage sale in accordance with the permit. Any other sign pertaining to the garage sale is prohibited. Outside display of merchandise to be sold is also prohibited. 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, § 8.31 et seq. 
Sec. 7.425. - Limitations on sales. 
    The garage sale shall be conducted only by the homeowner or occupant and no merchandise of any nature shall be brought in from any other source in connection with such sale. The limitations of this section shall not be applicable, however, when the permit is obtained and the sale conducted by a church, school, veterans organization, fraternal or religious society or other civic or charitable nonprofit organization. 
Sec. 7.426. - Nonapplicability. 
    Sections 7.422, 7.423 and 7.425 shall not apply to the homeowner or occupant who, during the normal course of housekeeping, advertises or otherwise offers for sale individual pieces of furniture or an appliance being replaced or no longer needed. 
Secs. 7.427-7.429. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TREE SERVICES 

Sec. 7.430. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the term "tree services" shall mean offering to the public the service of removing, transplanting or the trimming of trees as the term "trees" is defined in section 5.56 of Chapter 45, Zoning, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 7.431. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of providing tree services without first obtaining a license in the manner provided in Chapter 70 from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 7.432. - License fee; bond. 
    An application for a tree services license shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution of the city council. In connection with the license application a proposed licensee shall sign an acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of section 5.56 of Chapter 45, Zoning, of this Code and an agreement to comply with the terms and provisions of said section. No tree services license shall be granted unless the proposed licensee has also executed a bond in favor of the city that complies with the provisions of section 7.12 of this Code. The sum of the bond shall be established by resolution of the city council and conditioned for the faithful performance of this code and the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 8-12-91) 
CHAPTER 83. - MYOMASSOLOGISTS AND MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 7.501. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them: 
    Applicant means a person applying for a license under this chapter. 
    Employee means any and all persons employed by a massage establishment or any person who renders any service to a massage establishment or its customers on its premises and receives compensation for that service. 
    Instructor means a person who is a licensed myomassologist and teaches in a school of massage. 
    License means the document issued under this chapter that enables a person to operate a massage establishment. 
    Massage establishment or massage parlor means a building, place or establishment which is used primarily for the practice of body massage on the human body for compensation and for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or without the use of nonpowered mechanical or bathing devices. 
    Myomassologist means a person who offers his or her services for hire in the practice of massage and who is licensed by the State of Michigan as a massage therapist. 
    Myomassology or practice of massage means the scientific art of body massage, whether by hand or with a nonpowered mechanical or electrical apparatus, for the purpose of body massage or contouring; including the use of oil rubs, salt glows, hot and cold packs, and baths. 
    Owner means a person who conducts, operates, or owns a massage establishment. 
    Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, corporation firm or other form of business organization or group, or the individuals comprising such business organization or group. 
    School of massage means a school recognized by the state board of massage which requires for admission students with a tenth-grade education or its equivalent; which employs one (1) or more competent licensed myomassologists as instructors; and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, ethics, and practical massage, which courses of study and training are approved by the state. 
    Sexual area or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, or the breasts of a female. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.502. - Massage establishment license required. 
    No person shall operate, conduct, engage in, or carry on, or permit to be operated, conducted, engaged in, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a massage establishment or school of massage without a valid massage establishment license. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Cross reference- Licenses generally, § 7.1 et seq. 
Sec. 7.503. - Certification required for massage establishment license. 
(1)  No massage establishment license shall be granted without the certification and approval of the fire chief, and the director of building, housing and redevelopment, as prescribed in chapter 70. 
(2)  No massage establishment license shall be granted without the certification and approval of the chief of police. Certification shall be based on a finding that the applicant's character, moral integrity, and physical and mental condition is not inimical to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Such finding shall be based on all competent and pertinent information available to the chief of police. The chief of police shall deny certification if he finds that: 
(a)  The operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, will not comply with all applicable ordinances and statutes; or 
(b)  The applicant or any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the management or operation of the massage establishment has been convicted of: 
i.  A felony; or 
ii.  Any offense involving criminal sexual conduct; or 
iii.  Prostitution, pandering, solicitation for the purpose of prostitution; or 
iv.  Any crime involving theft, fraud or deceit. 
(3)  Upon refusal of any certification required herein the applicant shall have the right to a hearing and review as prescribed in chapter 70. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.504. - Massage establishment license. 
    This issuance, renewal, suspension or revocation of a massage establishment license shall be in the manner prescribed in chapter 70. Additionally, any applicant for a massage establishment license, including any partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any shareholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business. 
(2)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
(3)  The names of all myomassologists, including a copy of their current massage therapy license issued by the State of Michigan, and other employees and their residential addresses. 
(4)  The business, occupation, or employment and addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)  The massage establishment or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person has had a license suspended or revoked, and the reason therefor. 
(6)  All criminal convictions, forfeiture of bonds, and pleas of nolo contendere on all criminal charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(7)  The fingerprints and two (2) front face, color portrait photographs of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application. 
(8)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(9)  Written declaration, by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.505. - License fee; bond. 
    An application for a massage establishment license shall be accompanied by the requisite license fee as established by resolution of the city council. No massage establishment license shall be granted to any person unless the person has executed a bond to the city that complies with the provisions of section 7.12 of this Code. The sum of the bond shall be established by resolution of the city council and conditioned for the faithful performance of these sections, the City Charter, this Code, and other ordinances of the city and laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.506. - Inspections. 
    The department of building, housing and redevelopment, the fire department, and the police department may visit and enter a massage establishment for the purposes of inspection and determining that the massage establishment is complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.507. - Rules and regulations. 
    A massage establishment shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Service in massage establishments shall be limited to exercise, baths and massage and items related to the practice of massage. Medical treatment shall not be given to a patron. 
(2)  Only myomassologists with current State of Michigan massage therapy licenses shall conduct the practice of massage in a massage establishment 
(3)  All employees shall wear clean, nontransparent uniforms or outer garments covering his or her breasts, buttocks and genital areas. Sleeves shall not extend below the elbow. 
(4)  All robes, towels, blankets and linens furnished for the use of one (1) patron shall be thoroughly laundered before being offered to another. 
(5)  The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of employees, myomassologists and other patrons. 
(6)  No massage establishment shall be conducted in direct connection with living quarters. 
(7)  Bathing devices shall be thoroughly cleaned before the use of each patron. 
(8)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area of a massage establishment. 
(9)  Massage establishments shall meet all applicable building, fire and health requirements imposed by law, ordinance, rule or regulation enacted by the city, the county, or the state. 
(10)  Massage establishment licenses, and the licenses for all myomassologists on the premises, shall be prominently posted in the massage establishment for easy inspection. 
(11)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the practice of massage shall be provided and used between each massage. 
(12)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided as well as separate and segregated rooms for the practice of massage. The practice of massage shall not be conducted on male and female patrons in the same room or area of the establishment. 
    Violation of any of these rules and regulations is deemed to be "cause" as defined by section 7.18(4) of this Code for the purpose of suspending or revoking a massage establishment license pursuant to section 7.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.508. - Unlawful activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, employee or myomassologist to knowingly place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any other person in a massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.509. - Licenses required. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner of premises required to have a license pursuant to section 7.502 to employ as a myomassologist any person who does not have a current State of Michigan massage therapist license. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.510. - Hours of operation. 
    No massage establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.511. - Patronage by minors. 
    No massage of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years upon premises required to have a license pursuant to section 7.502 shall be permitted except upon written order of a licensed physician, osteopath, or physical therapist, said order being dated and in the possession of the myomassologist administering the massage. This section does not apply to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who are present during the massage. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 7.512, 7.513. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, adopted April 12, 2018, repealed §§ 7.512 and 7.513, which pertained to myomassologist permits and derived from Ord. No. 1214, § 1, adopted December 8, 1986. 
Sec. 7.514. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, family counselors and clergymen who are currently licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are currently registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly currently licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(5)  Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions, provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one (1) of the exempted professions defined in section 7.514(1) above. 
(6)  Any duly licensed establishment within which persons in professions identified in this section 7.514 practice their respective professions. 
(Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
CHAPTER 84. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 7.601. - Findings. 
    It is hereby determined that it is in the best interest of the city to enact an ordinance regulating organizations and persons soliciting in the city in order to promote and protect the public safety of those persons soliciting, as well as those persons in the city being solicited. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.602. - Definitions. 
(a)  Chief means the Southfield Chief of Police. 
(b)  Clerk means the Southfield City Clerk. 
(c)  Person means an individual or any firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. 
(d)  Solicitor means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence or residential building in the city, not having been invited by the owner or legal occupant thereof, for the purpose of offering or attempting to offer goods, wares, merchandise, services, items of personal property or real property, either for immediate or future delivery; or to request a contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. 
(e)  Solicitation includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under paragraph (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.603. - Permit requirements and exemptions. 
    No person shall engage in solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining a permit issued by the clerk; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section: 
(a)  Persons engaged in soliciting within three (3) miles from their residence for an educational, charitable, religious, or youth organization. 
(b)  Veterans exempt from local license requirements under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.604. - Permit application. 
    A permit application filed hereunder shall furnish the following information: 
(a)  Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's drivers license or other legally recognized form of identification; 
(b)  A brief description of the solicitation activity to be conducted; 
(c)  The hours and location for which the right to solicit is desired; 
(d)  The length of time the applicant intends to solicit; 
(e)  If employed, the name, address, and telephone number of the employer; or, if acting as an agent, the name, address, and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be; 
(f)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, and the date when and place where such offense occurred; 
(g)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, one (1) photograph being a photograph taken within one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date of filing of the application and the other photograph being from the applicant's drivers license, a copy of said driver's license to be attached to the applicant's application. The photograph, which is not from the applicant's drivers license, shall be at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. In the event that the applicant does not have a driver's license, then the applicant shall submit a second, separate photograph with his application, said photograph being at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; and 
(h)  A description and license number of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the solicitation activity. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.605. - Administrative fee. 
    An administrative, processing fee for a solicitor's permit shall be established by resolution of the city council, and said administrative processing fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.606. - Application review and permit issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the clerk shall forward it to the chief for review of the application as deemed necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  After such review, the chief shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and return the application to the clerk who shall, if the application is approved and upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required permit to the applicant. 
(c)  The permit shall show the name, address, and photograph of the permittee; the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered; the date of issuance; and the length of time that the permit shall be in effect. The permit shall also show the permit number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.607. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  Upon the chief's review of the application, the chief may refuse to approve an application for a permit under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The location and time of solicitation would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors or their customers. 
(2)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, any violent acts against persons or property, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation. 
(4)  The applicant has been denied a permit or had a permit revoked under this chapter within the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the chief that the reasons for such earlier denial or revocation no longer exist. 
(5)  Any other reason that relates to the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  The chief's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application; and the applicant shall be notified by the clerk that his or her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.608. - Permit expiration. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year issued, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.609. - Identification badges. 
    At the same time the permit is issued, the clerk shall issue to each permittee a badge, which shall be worn by the permittee in such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while the permittee is soliciting or peddling in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.610. - Permit exhibition. 
    Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.611. - Transfer prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit or badge issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.612. - Entry upon signed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation activities, with or without a permit, where the owner or legal occupant has posted, at the entry to the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors", "No Solicitation", or words of similar import, indicating that no solicitation is desired. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.613. - Hours of solicitation. 
    Solicitation activities shall only be permitted within the city between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.614. - Permit revocation. 
    Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the chief, after notice of hearing, for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting solicitation activities; 
(c)  Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit or this chapter; 
(d)  Conviction for any crime identified in subsection 7.607(a)(3); or 
(e)  Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace, or endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.615. - Notice and hearing. 
    Notice of a hearing before the chief for revocation or suspension of a permit issued under this chapter shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation or suspension and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be sent by first class mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 7.616. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the chief to disapprove, suspend, or revoke a permit applied for under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the notice of the action or decision has been sent by first class mail to the person's address as shown on the permit application form. 
(b)  An appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city council within ten (10) days of its receipt, and the city council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. 
(d)  A hearing shall be set not later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written statement. 
(e)  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the appellant at the address shown on the permit application at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. 
(f)  The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 11-13-00) 
CHAPTER 85. - SMOKING LOUNGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 7.701 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in this chapter. 
a.  Smoking lounge means an establishment, which, as one of its principal business purposes, promotes the smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances on its premises. The term "smoking lounge" includes, but, is not limited to: cigar lounges, hookah cafes, tobacco lounges, tobacco clubs, or tobacco bars. 
b.  Principal business purpose means: 
i.  The devotion of more than fifty (50) percent of its interior floor space for the promotion of smoking tobacco products or other legal substances at the establishment; or, 
ii.  The receipt of more than thirty-five (35) percent of its revenues from the smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances at the establishment; or, 
iii.  The devotion of more than thirty-five (35) percent of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of smoking tobacco products or other legal substances at the establishment. 
c.  Tobacco products mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, hookah tobacco, or non-cigarette, smoking tobacco. 
d.  Other legal substances include clove cigarettes, kreteks, herbal cigarettes, and any other legal substance that can be consumed by smoking. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.702. - Smoking lounge establishment license required. 
    No person shall operate a smoking lounge in the city without first obtaining a smoking lounge license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A smoking lounge license shall not be issued unless the applicant is approved by the state department of community health to operate a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar and possesses a valid exemption of the state smoking prohibition of section 12603, Public Act 368 of 1978, and presents a copy of such exemption along with the application as set forth in section 7.703 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.703. - Application for smoking lounge license. 
a.  An applicant shall submit to the city clerk a fully completed application, on a form that is prepared and furnished by the city clerk. 
b.  The application shall include at least the following information: 
i.  The full and complete name and current address of the applicant(s). 
1.  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be listed. 
2.  If the applicant is a privately-held corporation, the name and address of each corporate officer, member of board of directors, and stockholder shall be listed, and a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be attached to the application. 
3.  If the applicant is a publicly-held corporation, the name and address of each corporate officer, each member of the board of directors and each stockholder who owns ten (10) percent or more of the corporate stock shall be listed on the application. 
4.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name and address of each member, manager, and assignee of a membership interest shall be listed, and the articles of incorporation shall be attached to the application. 
ii.  The complete name, address, and telephone number of the proposed licensed business; 
iii.  Written statement as to the applicant's experience in operating similar businesses; 
iv.  A concise statement as to the individual applicant's past employment; 
v.  Any other information pertinent to the applicant and the operation of the proposed licensed business. 
c.  An applicant shall attach to the completed application a floor plan, drawn to scale, showing the interior of the proposed business, and uses of the proposed spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.704. - Licensing. 
    Smoking lounge licenses shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 70 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.705. - License fees. 
    The fee for a smoking lounge license shall be established by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.706. - Investigation. 
a.  After the city clerk has received a completed application, it shall be, at a minimum, forwarded to the following city departments for review and investigation: 
i.  Police; 
ii.  Fire; and, 
iii.  Building inspection. 
b.  During city business hours or at another mutually agreeable time, the applicant shall allow the representatives of the above referenced city departments onto the property and into the proposed licensed premises to complete an investigation. 
c.  If all of the above listed city departments approve the application, and it conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue a smoking lounge license to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.707. - Reasons for denial. 
a.  Requirements for applicants. A license may be denied as a result of one or more of the following factors: 
i.  If any of the individuals who are required to be identified on the application, as set forth in section 7.703 above, who have previously received a smoking lounge license, has had the license revoked for cause, as defined in chapter 70 of this Code. 
ii.  If any of the individuals who are required to be identified on the application, as set forth in section 7.703 above, have been convicted or found responsible for a violation of any federal, state, or local law involving moral turpitude, dishonesty, fraud, violence, criminal sexual conduct, controlled substances, the sale, distribution, or furnishing of tobacco, or the sale, distribution, or furnishing of alcoholic liquors. 
iii.  If the applicant proposes to hire a manager or agent to handle the business operations, and the proposed manager or agent does not possess the same qualifications as those required of the licensee as set forth herein. 
iv.  If an applicant does not own the premises for which a smoking lounge license is sought or does not have a lease or other right of exclusive possession of the premises proposed for the business for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.708. - Requirement for the proposed licensed premises. 
    A smoking lounge license shall not be issued if there are any violation(s) of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire prevention codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations, unless such violation can be remedied within a stated period of time as determined by the fire department and/or building department. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.709. - Display of smoking lounge license. 
    A smoking lounge license issued, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be prominently displayed near the entrance of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.710 - No transferability; change of ownership. 
a.  Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. 
b.  Each license issued under this chapter is separate and distinct, and no person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other than that which he/she holds. A separate license shall be issued for each specific smoking lounge business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.711. - Manager-Change of manager. 
    At least one (1) registered manager who has been identified on the application for a smoker's lounge license shall be on the premises at all times that the business is open. It shall be unlawful for any person not identified on the smoker's lounge license application to work as a manager of a smoking lounge business unless the proposed manager or operator has submitted a registration form with the individual's legal name and any aliases; home address; telephone numbers; date of birth; and driver's license number; and, is determined qualified to serve as a manager by the city clerk, using the criteria, as set forth in this chapter. All managers must be over the age of twenty-one (21) years old. The licensee shall be responsible for notifying the city of any proposed change in management and insuring that the proposed new manager has obtained the required approval before working or serving as a manager of the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.712. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for a smoking lounge business to be open for business or for the licensee, manager, or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons to enter into the licensed premises between midnight (12:00 a.m.) of each day until 10:00 a.m. the next day. All individuals, except employees of the smoking lounge business, shall be required to leave or be removed from the building by 12:30 a.m. Only a maximum of three (3) employees shall remain on the premises after 12:30 a.m.; and, each shall carry proof of employment at the licensed establishment, such as an identification badge. The manager and/or employees shall provide proof of such employment when requested to do so by a member of the police department or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.713. - Age restrictions. 
    No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless the individual is the age of eighteen (18) years of age or older. The manager and/or employees shall ensure that identifications of individuals on the premises have been checked to determine that every individual is over the age of eighteen (18) years of age or older before entry into the premises. The manager and/or employees shall secure exit doors to ensure that no one has or is attempting to gain secret entry into the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.714. - Parking restrictions. 
    The manager and/or employees shall require patrons to leave the parking lot of the smoking lounge business by 12:30 a.m. The manager and/or employees shall insure that patrons of the smoking lounge business are not parking in adjacent or neighboring parking lots or in residential areas that are not part of the parking area provided to the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.715. - Rules and regulations. 
a.  The following rules and regulations shall be adhered to by managers and employees of any smoker's lounge establishment: 
i.  Alcohol and liquor: No manager, employee, volunteer, or representative of the licensee shall serve or engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, including, but not limited to: any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, beverages, liquids, and compounds; nor shall persons obviously under the influence of any intoxicating drug or beverage be allowed to enter or remain upon the establishment premises. 
ii.  Consumption of alcohol: It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any smoking lounge business. The licensee's manager and/or employees shall immediately remove any person who opens or consumes alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
iii.  Controlled substances: It shall be unlawful to permit the use, sale, or presence of controlled substances (as defined under MCL 333.7212, et seq., of the Public Health Code, as amended, or a rule promulgated under that Act or Code), on the licensed premises. The manager and/or employees shall immediately remove any person possessing, distributing, selling, consuming, and/or using controlled substances on the licensed premises. 
iv.  There shall be no live entertainment in a licensed establishment; nor shall any products or services other than tobacco products be sold or offered for sale in the establishment, with the exception of packaged food products and bottled non-alcohol beverages, the sale of which constitutes less than five (5) percent of gross sales of the establishment. 
v.  It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that at least one (1) manager is on duty and on the premises at all times that persons are on the licensed premises; and, that, the manager is visible to any patron who is present on the premises. 
vi.  It is the duty of the licensee and managers of the premises to ensure that any doors to public areas on the premises remain unlocked during business hours. 
vii.  The manager and employees of the smoking lounge establishment shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the establishment either on the premises or within fifty (50) feet of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.716. - Compliance with laws. 
    The business licensee, the manager, and employees shall comply with all federal and state laws and the City Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
Sec. 7.717. - Right of entry. 
    The filing of an application for a smoker's lounge license shall constitute consent of the applicant and licensee and his/her or its agents, managers, and/or employees to permit the city's police department, building department, planning department, or any other department or agent of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed smoker's lounge establishment during the hours the establishment is conducting business and during any time that employees or managers are on the premises. The police department and the fire department shall be allowed unannounced access to the smoking lounge premises to inspect for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1621 , § 1, 3-30-14) 
CHAPTER 86. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY LICENSE 

Sec. 7.801. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating and promulgating licensing, regulatory and fee requirements for medical marihuana facilities where medical marihuana is provided to qualified patients by primary caregivers. The fundamental intent of this chapter is to facilitate a private and confidential qualified patient and primary caregiver relationship whereby the cultivation, distribution and use of marihuana is strictly for medical purposes. However, law enforcement officers are required to investigate and pursue prosecution with regard to the unlawful cultivation, distribution or consumption of marihuana. Accordingly, the licensure of a particular medical marihuana facility as the site of cultivation and distribution of marihuana, which need not undermine the privacy and confidentiality of the patient-caregiver relationship, is critical to law enforcement in order to identify and distinguish sites of lawful activity from sites of unlawful activity. Accordingly, this chapter permits authorization for lawful activity based on the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, P.A. 2008, Initiated Law 1 (MMMA). Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as allowing a person or persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow use, cultivation, growth, possession or control of marihuana not in strict accordance with the express authorizations of the MMMA and this chapter; and, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to undermine or provide immunity from federal law as it may be enforced by the federal or state government relative to the cultivation, distribution, or use of marihuana. Thus, the authorization of activity in chapter 45 and the approval of a license under this chapter shall not have the effect of superseding or nullifying federal law applicable to the cultivation, use, and possession of marihuana, and all applicants and grantees of licenses are on notice that they may be subject to prosecution and civil penalty, including forfeiture of property and revocation of license. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.802. - Definitions. 
(a)  City: The City of Southfield. 
(b)  Debilitating medical condition: Medical conditions defined as debilitating under the MMMA, as amended. 
(c)  Department: The Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(d)  Enclosed locked facility: An indoor closet, room or other comparable, stationary, and fully enclosed area, equipped with secured locks or other functioning security devices that permit access only by a registered primary caregiver or registered qualifying patient, as defined under the MMMA, as amended. 
(e)  Marihuana: That term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
(f)  Medical use: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition, as defined by the MMMA, as amended. 
(g)  Medical marihuana facility: Any licensed facility, building or structure used, maintained or occupied to provide the medical use of marihuana by qualifying patient(s) and a primary caregiver as provided and authorized by the MMMA, as amended, and in exchange for compensation for reimbursement of costs associated with assisting a registered qualifying patient in the medical use of marihuana. Any such compensation shall not constitute the sale of controlled substances. A medical marihuana facility is located on land that is owned, leased, or rented by either the registered qualifying patient or a person designated through the departmental registration process as the primary caregiver for the registered qualifying patient or patients for whom the marihuana plants are grown; and equipped with functioning locks or other security devices that restrict access to only the registered qualifying patient or the registered primary caregiver who owns, leases, or rents the property on which the structure is located. 
(h)  Primary caregiver: A person who is at least twenty-one (21) years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has not been convicted of any felony within the past ten (10) years and has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs or a felony that is an assaultive crime as defined in Subsection 9a of Chapter X of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, and who has been issued and possesses a registry identification card. 
(i)  Qualifying patient: A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined under the MMMA, as amended. 
(j)  Registry identification card: A document issued by the department that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver as defined under the MMMA, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.803. - License required. 
    No person or entity shall engage in the business or occupation of providing medical marihuana within the city without first obtaining a medical marihuana facility license issued by the city pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.804. - Application for license. 
    An application for a license under this chapter shall be submitted to the city clerk's office. An application shall: 
(a)  Provide the primary caregiver's identification number as appears on his/her registry identification card as issued by the State of Michigan. 
(b)  Include the address and legal description of the precise premises at which there shall be possession, cultivation, distribution or other assistance in the use of marihuana; 
(c)  Specify the name and address of the place where all unused portions of marihuana plants cultivated in connection with the use of marihuana or caregiver activity shall be disposed; 
(d)  Describe the enclosed, locked facility in which any and all cultivation of marihuana is proposed to occur, or where marihuana is stored, with such description including: location in building, precise measurement of the floor dimensions and height, and the security device(s) for the facility; 
(e)  Describe all locations in the premises where a caregiver or other person authorized under the MMMA shall render assistance to a qualifying patient; 
(f)  Specify the number of patients to be assisted, including the number of patients for whom marihuana is proposed to be cultivated, and the maximum number of plants to be grown or cultivated at any one (1) time; 
(g)  For safety and code inspection purposes, it shall describe and provide detailed specifications of all lights, equipment, and all other electrical, plumbing, and other means proposed to be used to facilitate the cultivation of marihuana plants; and 
(h)  Include the medical marihuana facility license fee. Such license fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.805. - Investigation. 
(a)  After the city clerk has received a completed application, it shall be, at a minimum, forwarded to the following city departments for review and investigation: 
i.  Police; 
ii.  Fire; and 
iii.  Building inspection. 
(b)  During normal business hours of the city, or at another mutually agreeable time, the applicant shall allow the representatives of the above-referenced city departments onto the property and into the proposed licensed premises to complete an investigation. 
(c)  If all of the above-listed city departments approve the application and the proposed licensed premises, and it conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue a medical marihuana facility license to the applicant. 
(d)  A medical marihuana facility license shall not be issued if there are any violation(s) of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire prevention codes, applicable zoning regulations, or other applicable statutory regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.806. - General certification, license requirements and conditions. 
(a)  A medical marihuana facility license shall not be issued or renewed for a medical marihuana facility proposed or located in any zoning district with the city, other than a light industrial district (I-L) and as more fully specified in chapter 45, article 19, of the City of Southfield Code. 
(b)  A medical marihuana facility license shall not be issued or renewed for a medical marihuana facility that does not comply with all provisions, requirements, limitations, qualifications or restrictions providing for protected medical use of marihuana authorized by the MMMA, as amended. 
(c)  A medical marihuana facility license shall not be issued or renewed for an existing or proposed medical marihuana facility that does not restrict and limit access to the facility areas where marihuana is kept, stored, cultivated, processed, used, exchanged, possessed, sold, or distributed to only qualifying patients and primary caregivers as allowed, limited, restricted or qualified under the MMMA, as amended. 
(d)  Issuance or renewal of a medical marihuana facility license constitutes an unconditional and irrevocable acceptance and agreement by the licensee and all persons and entities operating under a medical marihuana facility license or otherwise utilizing the facility to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city, including its agents, employees and officers and officials to the fullest extent permitted by law for any and all claims, damages, injuries or liabilities at law or equity in any way arising out of or related to any acts, omissions, activities or conditions in any way related to a licensed medical marihuana facility. 
(e)  A medical marihuana facility license shall be for a specific fixed location which shall be considered the licensed premises. 
(f)  A medical marihuana facility license shall not be required for the principal residence of a qualifying patient where marihuana is cultivated or used exclusively for such qualifying patient's personal consumption in accordance with the MMMA; however, a location other than a qualifying patient's principal residence where such qualifying patient cultivates or uses marihuana shall be subject to the licensure requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  No medical marihuana facility license shall be granted without the certification and approval of the chief of police as prescribed in chapter 70. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.807. - Operating requirements. 
    All medical marihuana facilities in the city shall be maintained, occupied and operated in compliance with all applicable provisions, limitations, qualifications, restrictions, and requirements providing for protected medical use of marihuana authorized by the MMMA, as amended, the provisions of the City of Southfield Code, and the following operation requirements: 
(a)  The licensed premises shall be maintained and operated in compliance with an approved security and lighting plan. 
(b)  The licensed premises shall operate in accordance with all electrical, plumbing, mechanical and building codes. 
(c)  Medical marihuana facilities shall cultivate and distribute marihuana for a medical use only as authorized and in the manner permitted by the MMMA, as amended. 
(d)  Medical marihuana facilities shall not cultivate, possess or distribute marihuana in excess of the quantities authorized and permitted under the MMMA, as amended. 
(e)  All sales, distribution, furnishing or exchange of marihuana for a medical use upon the licensed premises shall be made directly by and between person(s) protected for the medical use of marihuana under and in accordance with the MMMA, as amended. 
(f)  Medical marihuana shall not be possessed, handled, used or made accessible to any person(s) other than departmentally approved primary caregivers and qualifying patients as authorized by the MMMA, as amended. 
(g)  Any change of membership, ownership, shareholder or official status of a licensed entity shall be disclosed and identified by the licensee to the city subject to the confidentiality rules under the MMMA, as amended. 
(h)  Department registry identification numbers for all persons dispensing or otherwise engaging in the medical use of marihuana at or upon the licensed premises shall be promptly disclosed to the city subject to the confidentiality rules under the MMMA, as amended. 
(i)  The medical marihuana facility license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously posted on the premises. 
(j)  Any type of consumption of marihuana on the premises is prohibited. There shall be no outdoor, open use or display of marihuana on or at the premises. 
(k)  The hours a medical marihuana facility is permitted to operate and be open for business shall be only as follows: Monday-Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; and Sunday, 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for a medical marihuana facility to be open for business or for any employee or person working at the facility to allow anyone to enter into the premises except during the hours as set forth in this subsection 7.807(k). 
(l)  Entry into the premises by persons under the age of eighteen (18) is prohibited unless they are a qualifying patient and accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(m)  Money or compensation paid to the primary caregiver by qualifying patients shall be promptly deposited into a lock drop box situated on the premises. 
(n)  No signage shall be placed or permitted on the exterior of the premises which identifies or depicts the use, cultivation, growth, possession or distribution of marihuana within or on the premises. 
(o)  No food or drink of any kind shall be sold, transferred or distributed from the medical marihuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.808. - Inspections. 
    The police department, building department, fire department and the Oakland County Health Department may visit and enter a medical marihuana facility for the purposes of routine inspection and determining that the facility is complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.809. - Assignment of license prohibited. 
    The assignment of or attempt to assign any license issued pursuant to this chapter if unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a license shall render the license null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.810. - Renewal of license requirement. 
(a)  A medical marihuana facility license expires one (1) year after issuance or renewal. 
(b)  A medical marihuana facility license shall be renewed if: 
(1)  The licensee submits written request for renewal to the city prior to expiration and pays a renewal fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of council; 
(2)  The city clerk verifies that at or immediately prior to expiration, the information, conditions and representations contained in the approved application remain materially correct, true and accurate; 
(3)  An inspection of the medical marihuana facility premises at or immediately prior to expiration verifies compliance with all provisions of this Code and requirements, restrictions, limitations and qualifications providing for protected medical use of marihuana authorized under the MMMA, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.811. - Revocation, suspension. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter, chapter 45 of the zoning ordinance or of the MMMA, as amended, shall constitute cause to revoke or suspend a license pursuant to the procedures and provisions of chapter 70 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.812. - Prohibitions. 
    No person or entity shall distribute, sell, convey, exchange, possess, use or give away marihuana in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, chapter 45 of the zoning ordinance or as otherwise authorized and permitted by the MMMA. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Sec. 7.813. - Penalties, remedies. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and upon a finding of responsibility thereof shall be penalized as provided in section 1.703 of the City Code. Additionally, the city may seek enforcement and abatement of any violation of this chapter by instituting any legal or equitable action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 4-5-15) 
Title VIII - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities and services, tit. II; streets and sidewalks, tit. IV; zoning and planning, tit. V. 

CHAPTER 99. - SIGNS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1667, enacted February 9, 2017, deleted ch. 99, which consisted of §§ 8.31-8.66, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to be designated as ch. 99, §§ 8.31-8.65 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 99 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1231, enacted June 8, 1987, and Ord. No. 1493, enacted March 31, 2003; Ord. No. 1533, enacted February 27, 2006; Ord. No. 1594, enacted July 8, 2012; Ord. No. 1607 , enacted June 30, 2013; and Ord. No. 1647 , enacted November 1, 2015. 
Cross reference- Garage sale signs regulated, § 7.424. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE; PURPOSE 

Sec. 8.31. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the City of Southfield 2016 Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.32. - Findings and purpose. 
    It is hereby determined that proliferation of signs in the city is unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard, and reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct and warn the public. It is also determined that the appearance of the city is marred by proliferation of signs. It is also determined that proliferation of signs restricts light and air. It is also determined that proliferation of signs negatively affects property values. It is also determined that proliferation of signs results in an inappropriate use of land. The purpose of this chapter is to control the occurrence and size of signs in order to reduce the aforementioned negative effects. It is also determined that the regulations contained in this chapter are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve its purposes. It is also determined that restrictions in this chapter on the size of signs, their height and placement on real estate, are the minimum amount necessary to achieve its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8.33. - Definitions. 
(1)  Abandoned sign: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a valid business, service, lessor, owner, product or activity. 
(2)  Area of a sign: The surface area of a sign shall be measured and defined by the area of common geometric shapes which enclose the extreme limits of individual letters, words, symbols or message of the sign together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Combinations of common geometric shapes shall be limited to five (5) per sign. In those cases where signs are composed of other than common geometric shapes, the area shall be determined by straight lines drawn closest to the extremities encompassing the message. When a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back-to-back and at no point more than two (2) feet from one (1) another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one (1) face if the two (2) faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces are of unequal area. 
(3)  Awning sign: A shelter projecting from and supported by an exterior wall of a building, covered with fabric or vinyl on supporting framework, upon which a sign is directly applied. 
(4)  Banner sign: A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework. 
(5)  Building official: Director of the department of building and safety engineering. 
(6)  Bulletin board: A sign which displays the name of an institution, school, library, community center, fraternal lodge, golf course, religious institution, country club, park or other recreational facility, and which displays announcements. 
(7)  Changeable copy sign: Lettering, wording or symbols which may be altered manually to draw attention to any one (1) or more services, prices or products of the site on which the sign is located. 
(8)  Development: A development shall be considered one (1) or more uses within a building or buildings using common parking facilities. 
(9)  Directional sign: A sign, the sole purpose of which is to expedite the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to, from and within a development site. 
(10)  Electrical sign inspection tag: A tag obtained from the city building department which displays the date and approval of an electrical inspection. 
(11)  Electronic changeable copy sign: A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic information can be changed or altered on a fixed display surface composed of electronically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable segments. 
(12)  Festoon sign: A string of pennants, ribbons, streamers, pinwheels or any other similar material which is hung or strung for the purpose of drawing attention to a site or items on display. 
(13)  Flashing sign: A sign that is intermittently illuminated or reflects light intermittently from either an artificial source or from the sun. 
(14)  Frontage: The side of the building or tenant space with the main entrance which is no more than thirty (30) degrees askew from parallel to the public right-of-way. For a parcel, the portion of the parcel boundary between the front building line and the public right-of-way. 
(15)  Garden ground sign: A sign mounted directly to the ground with no exposed columns, uprights or braces and where the top of the sign measured from grade does not exceed a height of five (5) feet. Such sign shall be placed in the required landscaped area and located so as not to restrict the vision of pedestrians or vehicular traffic to, from or within the development. 
(16)  Ground support sign: A free standing sign supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights or braces, placed permanently in, or upon, the ground and not attached to any building and where the top of the sign measured from grade does not exceed a height of fifteen feet (15) unless expressly provided otherwise within this chapter. Said columns, uprights or braces must be enclosed within a covering which is a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign and must be made of a durable material such as masonry, metal or other material consistent with materials utilized in the façade of the building approved by the building department. Such sign shall be placed within a landscaped area approved by the planning department. 
(17)  Height (sign): The height of a sign shall be measured from the average ground level within five (5) feet of the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. 
(18)  High rise building: A building having occupied floors located more than fifty five (55) feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. This definition does not apply to communication or water towers or other accessory type structures customarily incidental to the primary use. 
(19)  Major thoroughfare: Any street with an existing or proposed right-of-way greater than sixty-six (66) feet (20.1168 meters). 
(20)  Master sign plan: A master plan of signage used in a development indicating the maximum square footage and locations of all wall signs, ground support signs, garden ground signs, and all other signs within the development. 
(21)  Moving sign: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals, or that gives the impression of motion, characteristics of running, blinking, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns, whether or not such illumination is reflected from an artificial source or from the sun. 
(22)  Nonconforming sign: Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this chapter and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter, or a sign for which a variance was granted that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(23)  Parapet wall: the section of a wall at the edge of a roof and extending beyond the height of the roof. 
(24)  Parasitic sign: A sign that is attached and subordinate to a lawful sign or sign structure. 
(25)  Plaza: A development of three (3) or more uses sharing one (1) parking lot and having common ingress and egress. 
(26)  Political sign: A sign relating to the election of a person to public office or relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body. 
(27)  Portable signs: A sign calling attention to special events, sales, services or new attractions through the use of a portable sign which may be internally lit, and/or have changeable copy and/or a bulletin board surface. These signs may be portable by virtue of being part of a trailer, attached to wheels, or of a lightweight nature being easily transportable. Such signs shall also include inflatable advertising balloons typically tethered to a building or to the ground and are kept inflated by mechanical means. 
(28)  Product price sign: A sign designed to advertise fuel prices for gasoline stations. A product price sign may be mechanically or remotely operated if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  If illuminated, the product price sign shall not be illuminated with exposed or a visible lighting source; 
(b)  Any mechanical parts shall be hidden from view behind opaque or translucent panels; 
(c)  The numerical digits shall not consist of an exposed light source; 
(d)  Changes in the numerical digits must be complete within ten (10) seconds and no more than two (2) changes shall occur in an hour; 
(e)  A product price sign shall be attached to a ground support sign only; 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything provided in this subsection (25)(a) through (e), a product price sign may be mechanically or remotely operated utilizing LED lighting if all of the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Changes must appear instantaneous as perceived by the human eye without any special effects and no more than one (1) change per minute. 
(ii)  No such sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: the square root of the product of the sign area and one hundred (100). 
Example using a 12-square-foot sign: 
Measurement distance = v(12 sq. ft. × 100) = 34.6 
Light measurement shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the sign message face, or the area of the sign emitting the brightest light. 
(iii)  No such sign shall be operated unless a mechanism able to automatically adjust the display's illuminative brightness according to ambient light conditions by means of a light detector/photo cell by which the sign's brightness shall be dimmed. 
(iv)  No such sign shall be operated unless a written certification from a sign manufacture or other approved testing agency that the light intensity has been preset to conform to the brightness and display standards established herein and that the preset levels are protected from end user manipulation by password protected software or other method. An annual inspection shall be performed by the sign inspector and certificate of compliance shall be issued. 
(v)  Said sign shall contain a default mechanism that will cause the sign to revert immediately to a black screen if the sign malfunctions. 
(vi)  Said sign shall be equipped with a non-glare panel covering the LED display or other equivalent method approved by the city to substantially reduce glare. 
(29)  Public sign: A sign, noncommercial in nature and erected in the public interest by, or on the order of, a public officer duly authorized by the city in the performance of his public duty such as official or legal notices, safety signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and other signs similar in character to the above and without regard to permits or zoning district. 
(30)  Real estate sign: A temporary sign, the intent of which is to make known that the lot or development upon which the sign is located is for sale, rent or lease. 
(31)  Rigid material: A non-flexible material such as plywood, Coroplast, Dibond, plastics, and other similar materials or flexible materials when mounted and affixed to a completely enclosed framing system. 
(32)  Roof sign: Any sign erected or mounted on the roof or supported by the roof and extending above the height of the building. 
(33)  Setback (sign): Setback of a sign shall be the shortest distance measured from the public right-of-way to any portion of the sign or its supporting structure. All signs shall have a minimum setback of two (2) feet from the property line, and shall conform to the requirements of section 8.36. 
(34)  Sign: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as to show an individual, firm, profession, business, product or message and visible to the general public. 
(35)  Temporary sign: A sign designed to announce a coming attraction, a new building or structure under construction, community and/or civic projects or other special events of a temporary nature. 
(36)  Temporary sign tag: A tag obtained from the city building department which clearly indicates the duration of time for which the sign permit is valid. 
(37)  Wall sign: A sign affixed directly to an exterior wall, provided that such sign does not extend more than fifteen (15) inches from the wall upon which it is placed and which does not project above the roof or parapet wall. Wall signs located on a parapet wall shall not extend higher than forty-two (42) inches above the building roofline. 

(38)  Wall sign elements: wall sign elements shall not be separated by more than the largest dimension of the largest letter or will be considered multiple wall signs. 

(39)  Wall/window sign (painted): Any sign which is applied with paint, film or similar substance which simulates paint on the exterior surface of a wall or interior or exterior surface of a window or glazing surface. 
(40)  Window sign: Any sign which is visible to the general public either on or against the interior or exterior surface or within thirty-six (36) inches of a window or glazing surface. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.34. - Appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals for the city, operating under its established rules of procedure, shall be considered the appeal board in connec tion with all appeals taken from the requirements of this chapter and with respect to administrative acts on the part of those charged with the enforcement of this chapter. The appeal board shall have the power to waive, alter or interpret the provisions of this chapter when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Due to extraordinary or exceptional conditions of the property on which the sign is proposed, and the strict application of the regulations would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, provided, such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter; and 
(2)  That the proposed sign is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and the regulations which apply to the zoning district; and 
(3)  That the proposed sign is in keeping with the character of the surrounding area and would not have an adverse or detrimental effect upon adjacent or surrounding properties; and 
(4)  That the proposed sign will not interfere with, or be objectionable from, the standpoint of traffic safety. 
    In granting a variance to the provisions of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposal as it may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board of appeals shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.35. - Conflicts with other code provisions. 
    Whenever any requirement of this chapter conflicts with any other Code provision in effect in the city, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.36. - Corner clearance. 
    In order to promote safe corner clearance for pedestrian and vehicular traffic no sign obstructing vision above a height of three (3) feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any two (2) street right-of-way lines,(existing or proposed) or at any driveway street intersection by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines or driveway at a distance along each line or driveway of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection, unless visual under clearance can be assured. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.37. - Enforcing officers. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official or an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.38. - Exemptions from requirements. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any legal address, official court or public notices, nor the flag, emblem or insignia of a government or governmental agency when displayed for official purposes, or corporate flag for the primary use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.39. - Fees. 
    The city council may, from time to time, prescribe a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged for the review of sign permits. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.40. - Inspection of installation of signage. 
    If it is found that any sign does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and the said rules and regulations, the person installing or responsible for installing said sign shall be notified in writing of such defect, misuse or violation and all such violations, defects or misuses of said sign shall be corrected within a reasonable length of time not to exceed ten (10) days. When such corrections have been made, that person shall notify the department in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time reinspection is desired. Any persons failing to make correction of a violation within the time specified herein shall be denied the right to receive any further permits to do sign work within the city until such corrections are made, and shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 8.41 penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.41. - Penalty. 
    Any firm, corporation or person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in chapter 15, section 1.703 of the Southfield City Code. Nothing in this section 8.41 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a firm, corporation or person of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.42. - Illuminations. 
    All lighting shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any sign that makes use of electricity shall, in addition to a sign permit require an electrical permit, and electrical inspection prior to the installation of said sign regardless of size. 
(2)  Illumination must be constant (not flashing or intermittent) and shall be shielded from adjacent properties and not create a hazard to vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Illumination devices designed to illuminate the exterior of a building shall be permitted in any zoning district; provided, however, there shall be no spillage of illumination or glare onto public or private roads and shall be so shielded or aimed that glare is prevented from spilling onto adjacent properties. 
(4)  Electrical signs must be identified and listed by an approved listing agency or must be identified with a city electrical sign inspection tag. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.43. - Michigan Building Code. 
    The Michigan Building Code as adopted in chapter 102 of this Code, shall govern the construction standards of all signs and outdoor display structures. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.44. - Permit required. 
    Signs authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be regulated by a sign permit issued by the building official or an authorized agent. 
    Exceptions: The following sings shall be permitted in all zoning districts without regard to permits, provided they meet the following restrictions, and the restrictions of the applicable zoning district. 
(1)  Temporary and or real estate signs, placed in the ground or upon a building and not being portable in nature, six (6) square feet or less in area which pertain to the sale, rental or lease of the property upon which such sign is located. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(2)  Political signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Political signs shall not be subject to the restrictions for permitted signs in each zoning district, unless a part of a wall sign, ground support sign, or garden ground sign permitted by this chapter. However, they shall not be installed more than sixty (60) days prior to the election and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after completion of the election. 
When a primary and general election cycle is separated by not more than a ninety (90) day period successful candidate's signs are permitted to remain in place during such ninety (90) day period, provided that such signs are removed thirty (30) days after the completion of the general election as stated therein. 
(3)  Signs containing exclusively noncommercial messages which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area. No parcel of land shall more than two (2) such signs. 
(4)  Directional signs less than six (6) square feet in area containing noncommercial messages. Such signs shall include handicapped signs, parking/exit/entrance signs, signs designed to expedite the flow or vehicular and pedestrian traffic to, from, and within a development and other signs of a similar nature, which may contain the name or logo of the establishment provided such name or logo does not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
(5)  Address numbers, hours of operation, open/closed indication, not less than three (3) inches and not more than twenty-four (24) inches in height and in such position as to be plainly visible from the street in accordance with chapter 116, fire prevention regulations, of this Code. 
(6)  Public signs as defined in article II, subsection 8.33(29). 
(7)  Freestanding athletic scoreboards not to exceed six hundred (600) square feet in total area and thirty (30) feet in height, displaying changing scores and related information, and may also display additional content, including the name(s) and logo(s) of any sponsor(s), subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Only one (1) athletic scoreboard is permitted per public or private athletic facility or venue; 
(b)  The face of the scoreboard, including any attached commercial areas and panels, must be oriented primarily to be viewed from the spectator area within the athletic facility or venue; 
(c)  Commercial messages shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of and shall only be permitted on the front face of the scoreboard; and 
(d)  Illumination of the scoreboard, including any flashing, motion, or movement of any messages, or any parts thereof shall only be permitted and functioning during an athletic event or other public or private athletic facility sponsored event and shall not exceed the brightness level as set forth in subsection 8.50A(1)(r) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17; Ord. No. 1690 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 8.45. - Permit expiration. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued is not completed within ninety (90) days of the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.46. - Prohibited sign types. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Abandoned sign. 
(2)  Festoon signs. 
(3)  Flashing signs. 
(4)  Moving signs. 
(5)  Wall/window (painted) sign. 
(6)  Parasitic signs. 
(7)  Portable signs. 
(8)  Roof signs. 
(9)  A sign which makes use of words such as "stop", "look", "danger", simulated traffic signals, or any other words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse drivers of vehicles traveling upon any highway, driveway or parking area. 
(10)  The parking of a vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or on public or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, if such vehicle has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device unless, the parking of the vehicle or trailer is incident to the loading, unloading or conveyance of persons, commodities, goods, or the provision of services. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.47. - Sign continuance. 
    Any sign conforming to ordinance 1607 on the date of enactment of this amendatory ordinance shall be deemed a lawful nonconforming sign and may be continued provided such sign: 
(1)  Shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  Shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
(3)  Shall not be structurally altered in any manner that will prolong the life of such sign. 
(4)  Shall not be expanded, modified, or relocated. 
(5)  Shall not be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the estimated replacement cost. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.48. - Sign maintenance. 
    Every sign shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times, so as not to subject persons or property to any risk of personal injury or property damage. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal parts and supports. Any sign which is illuminated must be maintained in proper working order and shall be fully illuminated when energized. Any sign that is not so maintained in good structural condition at all times shall be subject to the sanctions provided in section 8.41. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.49. - Sign elimination. 
    The building official may order the removal of any sign and supporting structures: 
(1)  Maintained in violation of this chapter. Such order shall be in writing to the owner of the sign; or to the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located; or to the owner or operator of the business to which the sign pertains; and shall allow seven (7) days for the removal of the sign or to ensure that it is brought into conformance with the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  Existing at the time of, or erected after, the adoption of this chapter if either by its location or structural characteristics it is deemed to be immediately hazardous to the safety of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.50 - Street encroachments. 
    No sign, except those established by the city, the county, the state or the federal government, shall be located in, project onto or overhang a public right-of-way, except as provided in section 9.382(f), chapter 122, of this Code. The city shall have the right to remove and dispose of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.50A. - Electronic changeable copy. 
    Findings and purpose. Documented studies show that there is a correlation between electronic changeable copy signage and the distraction of drivers. Distraction can lead to traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted not only by a changing message, but also by knowing that the sign has a changing message. Drivers may watch a sign waiting for the next change to occur. Additionally, drivers are more distracted by special effects used to change the message, such as fade-ins and fade-outs. Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing new technologies to easily update messages. Except as may be prohibited by state or federal law, sign owners should have the opportunity to use these technologies with certain restrictions. The restrictions are intended to minimize potential driver distraction and to minimize negative impact to residential districts where signs can adversely impact the residential character of the area. The city finds that electronic changeable copy signage should be allowed on garden ground and ground support signs permitted in a particular zoning district but with reasonable controls to minimize their proliferation and their potential threats to public safety. 
(1)  One (1) electronic changeable copy sign per development is permitted in all zoning districts permitting ground signage provided said sign meets the following requirements: 
(a)  No other ground support or garden group signage exists at the development; 
(b)  No product price sign exists at the development; 
(c)  No window signage exists at the development; 
(d)  Such sign must be of a single L.E.D. color (otherwise referred to as monochrome); provided, however, in residential districts only amber color monochrome L.E.D. shall be permitted; 
(e)  Such sign must be an integral part of a ground support or garden ground sign in all zoning districts permitting ground signage other than residential districts. In residential zoning districts such sign must be an integral part of a garden ground sign only; 
(f)  The electronic changeable copy portion of the sign shall be a maximum of seventy-five (75) percent of the total sign area in zoning districts other than residential, and a maximum of sixty (60) percent electronic changeable copy of the total sign area for signs located in residential districts. The remainder of the area of the sign must be the name of the business and/or address only; 
(g)  In non-residential zoning districts a ground support or garden ground sign utilizing an electronic changeable copy shall not exceed an area of one (1) square foot per two (2) square feet of lot frontage to a maximum square feet in area as permitted by the applicable zoning district within which the sign is situated. In residential zoning districts a garden ground sign utilizing an electronic changeable copy shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet in total area; 
(h)  Such sign shall have a minimum setback of five (5) feet from any property line for a sign which does not exceed five (5) feet in height; provided further that one (1) additional foot in height (not to exceed a total maximum sign height of fifteen (15) feet) may be permitted for each additional two (2) feet of setback beyond the minimum five (5) foot setback set forth herein; 
(i)  All electronic changeable copy signs shall be separated by a minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet. Provided, however, the one thousand (1,000) foot minimum separation shall not apply between signs separated by a freeway or other type of roadway divided by a median. The one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured from the center of the sign's structure, as located on the ground, to the center of any other sign's structure, as located on the ground; 
(j)  Such sign shall not be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the top fifty (50) intersections as defined by Semcog high frequency crash locations data for the most recent five (5) year period by Oakland County ranking; 
(k)  Such sign shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of the driving surface of a signalized intersection. The fifty (50) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on a sign to the nearest point of the driving surface of the signalized intersection; 
(l)  Such sign if located within any residential district must be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure and must be placed on a major thoroughfare or highest speed limit road available; 
(m)  The electronic changeable copy portion of the sign shall be turned off or have a static (non-changing) display between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in all zoning districts other than residential; provided, however, in the event the sign is attendant to a business or use which remains open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may continue to operate during such hours as the business or use remains open to the public. In residential districts the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign shall be turned off so as to display a completely black screen between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(n)  No electronic changeable copy message shall be displayed for a period of time less than fifteen (15) seconds; 
(o)  The transition or change sequence of any image or display of an electronic changeable copy sign shall appear instantaneous as perceived by the human eye without any special effects. Such sign shall not exhibit any characteristics of a moving or flashing sign as defined herein; 
(p)  Each electronic changeable copy message shall be complete in itself and shall not continue on a subsequent message; 
(q)  No such sign shall resemble or simulate any warning or danger signal, or any official traffic control device, sign, signal or light or have the brilliance or intensity that will interfere with any official traffic sign, device or signal; 
(r)  No such sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: the square root of the product of the sign area and one hundred (100). 
Example using a twelve (12) square foot sign: 
measurement distance = v(12 sq. ft. × 100) = 34.6 
Light measurement shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the sign message face, or the area of the sign emitting the brightest light. 
(s)  No such electronic changeable copy sign shall display an illuminative brightness of such intensity or brilliance that it impairs the vision or endangers the safety and welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle; 
(t)  Such sign shall not include any audio message; 
(u)  No such electronic changeable copy sign shall be permitted to operate unless it is equipped with: 
i.  A default mechanism that will cause the sign to revert immediately to a black screen if the sign or any component thereof malfunctions. 
ii.  A non-glare panel covering the electronic changeable copy display or other equivalent method approved by the city to substantially reduce glare. 
iii.  A mechanism able to automatically adjust the display's illuminative brightness according to ambient light conditions by means of a light detector/photo cell by which the sign's brightness shall be dimmed. 
iv.  A written certification from a sign manufacture or other approved testing agency that the light intensity has been preset to conform to the brightness and display standards established herein and that the preset levels are protected from end user manipulation by password protected software or other method; and 
(v)  The owner or controller of said electronic changeable copy sign must adjust the sign to meet these brightness standards in accordance with this chapter. The adjustment must be made immediately upon notice of non-compliance from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.50B. - Wall signage identifying high rise buildings. 
    The following requirements replace and are in lieu of wall signage allowances on high rise buildings in any zoning district contained in this chapter; 
(1)  Non residential uses or developments. 
(a)  The total area of all wall signs identifying tenants in a non-residential high rise building shall not exceed ten (10) percent of one (1) building frontage where the primary entrance exists. Wall signs within the ten (10) percent allowance as set forth herein may be placed on any side(s) of the high rise building. 
(2)  Residential uses or developments. Wall signage identifying the name of the residential use shall be permitted in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Each building may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage, provided, however, no development shall have more than one (1) sign visible from any direction. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed the following: 
(i)  For a building having occupied floors located more than fifty-five (55) feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access; the total area of such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(ii)  For each additional story of height above fifty-five (55) feet, and meeting the requirements of the above paragraph, an additional fifteen (15) square feet of sign area is permitted to a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet for any wall sign. 
(3)  All illuminated signage shall comply with the following provisions. 
(a)  No such sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: the square root of the product of the sign area and one hundred. 
example using a 12 square foot sign: 
measurement distance = v(12 sq. ft. x 100) = 34.6 
Light measurement shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the sign message face, or the area of the sign emitting the brightest light. 
(b)  No such wall sign shall display an illuminative brightness of such intensity or brilliance that it impairs the vision or endangers the safety and welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Such sign shall not be illuminated between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. for any building seven (7) stories or less. 
(4)  Existing roof top mechanical penthouse rooms with facades shall be permitted to be used as a wall surface for signage, no new structures shall be constructed above the existing roof line to facilitate the installation of signage. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 8.51. - General provisions. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, temporary and real estate signs in excess of six (6) square feet shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Banner signs. Banner signs used to identify special events such as grand openings, anniversary sales or special promotions shall be permitted subject to the following conditions. 
(a)  Banner signs shall be permitted only upon the presentation of a two hundred and fifty dollar ($250.00) cash deposit, a right to enter the property agreement and the issuance of a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The two hundred and fifty dollar ($250.00) cash deposit shall be refunded upon the removal of said sign. Failure to remove said sign upon expiration will cause the removal of said sign by the city with costs incurred in the removal being deducted from the cash deposit; if the deposit is not sufficient any remaining balance shall be invoiced to the permit holder. 
(b)  Banner signs may be permitted for a time period of not more than thirty (30) days every three (3) months, expressly subject to subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Banner signs shall be securely attached to the building to which it pertains so as to prevent the sign from being damaged or dislodged from its mounting surface by wind or vandalism. Banner signs shall be removed as soon as it becomes torn, faded, or otherwise unsightly as a result of exposure to the elements. 
(d)  The area of such banner shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less and shall be limited to one (1) per event. 
(2)  Temporary signs constructed of a rigid material 
(a)  Temporary and real estate signs constructed of a rigid material shall be permitted only upon presentation of a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) cash deposit and a right to enter the property agreement, (an agreement between the city and the owner of said property which permits the city, it's agents, employees and contractors to enter into and upon the premises of the owner which are the subject of said permit to enforce the terms of the permit and to do the actions necessary to insure the faithful performance of all the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit) expiring ninety (90) days after expiration of the temporary permit for the purpose of holding the city harmless and to ensure removal of the sign upon expiration of the permit's duration. The one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) cash deposit shall be refunded upon the removal of said sign. Failure to remove said sign upon expiration will cause the removal of said sign by the city with costs incurred in the removal being deducted from the cash deposit, if the deposit is not sufficient any remaining balance shall be invoiced to the permit holder. 
(b)  Temporary and real estate signs may be permitted for a time period not to exceed twelve (12) months from date of permit. An extension period of equal time may be granted by the building official when the sign is demonstrated to be safe and well-maintained. All temporary and real estate signs shall be identified with a temporary sign tag permanently affixed to said sign. 
(c)  Any temporary or real estate sign shall be attached to the building to which it pertains or shall have a setback equal to, or greater than, the height of the sign. 
(d)  No temporary or real estate sign shall exceed one (1) square foot in area per fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of land, with a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. In addition, no parcel of land shall have more than one (1) temporary or real estate sign per street frontage. 
(3)  Special event signage approved by city council. 
(a)  Signage of a unique nature which may be community based, city sponsored or for unique development or redevelopment activities consistent with the vision of the city's master plan. 
(b)  Such special event signage shall be part of an overall plan for the development/redevelopment activity or event and shall be expressly identified and delineated in its entirety at the time the development/redevelopment or event is presented to city council for approval, and shall be subject to such terms and conditions as city council shall deem appropriate or advisable to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-A-R-E) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.53. - Permitted signs. 
    In the single-family residential (R-A - R-E) districts, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Temporary sign announcing a housing development containing ten (10) or more units or other permitted developments provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development shall have one (1) temporary sign while the project is under construction, for a maximum of two (2) years. 
(b)  The temporary sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet or an area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(2)  Real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, and shall conform to section 8.44 (1) of this chapter. 
(3)  Subdivision entrance or complex entrance signs; provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Subdivision entrance or complex entrance signs; on private property which comply with the corner clearance provisions contained in section 8.36 shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area; 
(b)  Subdivision entrance or complex entrance signs proposed to be located on city or county right-of-way shall require the approval of the city council and/or the county road commission and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area. 
(4)  The following signs may be permitted on property whose primary use is considered a special exception under the terms of chapter 45, zoning, 
(a)  One (1) bulletin board per development with a maximum height of five (5) feet and thirty-five (35) square feet in area and shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from the front property line 
(b)  One (1) wall sign per development not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(5)  General provisions: 
(a)  No combination of signs (excluding real estate) permitted or special use may exceed fifty-two (52) square feet; 
(b)  No signs shall be placed closer than five (5) feet from any property line or driveway; 
(c)  No sign shall be allowed that constitutes a hazard to traffic or that will be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood or that is contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter and is in keeping with the nature of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE VI. - ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-T), MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-LOW RISE (RM), MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM RISE (RMM), MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-HIGH RISE (RMU) DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8.54. - Permitted signs. 
    In the attached single-family (R-T) and multiple-family residential (RM, RMM, RMU) districts the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Temporary signs announcing a housing development containing ten (10) or more units or other permitted developments provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development shall have one (1) temporary sign while the project is under construction, for a maximum of two (2) years. 
(b)  The temporary sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet or an area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(2)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less. 
(3)  Garden ground signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and twenty-five (25) square feet in area. 
(4)  Real estate signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall conform to section 8.44 (1) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICE-SERVICE (O-S) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.55. - Permitted signs. 
    In the office-service (O-S) district, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the building facade or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Garden ground signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The maximum height of such sign shall not exceed five (5) feet and an area of thirty-five (35) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE VIII. - EDUCATION-RESEARCH-OFFICE (ERO), EDUCATION-RESEARCH-OFFICE-LIMITED (ERO-M), TECHNICAL-EDUCATION RESEARCH (TR) TELEVISION-RADIO-OFFICE-STUDIO (TV-R) DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8.56. - Permitted signs. 
    The following signs shall be permitted in the Education-Research-Office (ERO-M, ERO), Technical-Education-Research (TR) and Television-Radio-Office-Studio (TV-R) districts: 
(1)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Garden ground signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The maximum height of such sign shall not exceed five (5) feet and an area of fifty (50) square feet 
(3)  Ground support signs, may replace garden ground signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The ground support sign shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet and shall not exceed an area of sixty (60) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE IX. - NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (B-1) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.57. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Neighborhood Business (B-l) district, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Wall signs shall be limited to one (1) per tenant. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of tenant frontage or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE X. - NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING (NS) AND PLANNED BUSINESS (B-2) DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8.58. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Neighborhood Shopping (NS) district and the planned Business (B-2) district the following signs are permitted, provided that prior to sign permits being issued, a master sign plan shall be submitted to the building official stating the size and location of all wall signs, ground support signs, garden ground signs, and any other requested sign: 
(1)  Ground support signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The ground support sign shall not exceed an area of eighty (80) square feet. 
(c)  The total sign area of all permitted ground support signs shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet. 
(d)  If a ground support sign identifies tenants of the development, it shall not identify more than three (3) tenants. 
(2)  Garden ground signs may replace ground support signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The garden ground sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and an area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
(c)  The total sign area of all permitted garden ground signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(d)  If a garden ground sign identifies tenants of the development, it shall not identify more than three (3) tenants. 
(3)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Wall signs shall be limited to one (1) per tenant. 
(b)  The total area of such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of tenant frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL BUSINESS (B-3) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.59. - Permitted signs, 
    In the General Business (B-3) district, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Wall signs, except for plazas, may only be placed on a building facade fronting a major thoroughfare. Provided, that with respect to a Plaza, wall signs may also be placed on individual tenant building space which faces the parking lot. 
(b)  Wall signs shall be limited to one (1) per tenant. 
(c)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of tenant frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Ground support signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The ground support sign shall not exceed an area of one (1) square foot per two (2) feet of lot frontage, or eighty (80) square feet, whichever is less. 
(c)  The total sign area of all permitted ground support signs shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet. 
(d)  If a ground support sign identifies tenants of the development, it shall not identify more than three (3) tenants. 
(3)  Garden ground signs may replace ground support signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The garden ground sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and an area of one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet per two (2) feet of lot frontage, or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
(c)  The total sign area of all permitted garden ground signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(d)  If a garden ground sign identifies tenants of the development, it shall not identify more than three (3) tenants. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.60. - Signage for special uses in B-3. 
    In the General Business (B-3) district all uses which are considered to be a use requiring special approval under the terms of chapter 45, zoning, section 5.169, shall be permitted signage as set forth in section 8.60; with the exception of gas stations, drive-in and/or fast food restaurants and automobile and truck agency sales and showrooms as outlined below: 
(1)  Gas stations (as defined in chapter 45) shall be permitted the following signs: 
(a)  Wall signs, including those signs attached to the service buildings or to the canopy fascia, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(ii)  The area of such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
(b)  Ground support or garden ground signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support or garden ground sign. 
(ii)  The ground support or garden ground sign shall not exceed an area of fifty (50) square feet. 
(c)  Product price sign, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) product price sign. 
(ii)  The total area of the product price sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet for two (2) product prices, or twenty (20) square feet for three or more product prices. 
(iii)  Such sign must be an integral part of the ground support sign or garden ground sign and have an under clearance of eight (8) feet, or be attached to the building or canopy fascia. 
(iv)  Customary lettering or data required by law may be permitted on a gasoline pump provided such lettering or data does not exceed a total area of three (3) square feet. 
(2)  Drive-in restaurants and fast food restaurants (as defined in chapter 45) shall be permitted the following signs: 
(a)  Wall signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(ii)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
(b)  Ground support sign provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign. 
(ii)  The ground support sign shall not exceed an area of fifty (50) square feet. 
(c)  A garden ground sign shall be permitted in place of the ground support sign provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have only one (1) garden ground sign. 
(ii)  The garden ground sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and an area of eighty (80) square feet. 
(d)  An auxiliary sign may be permitted for restaurants with drive-through service, provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  No "drive-through" restaurant shall have more than one (1) auxiliary sign. 
(ii)  The auxiliary sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and an area of thirty-five (35) square feet. 
(iii)  No auxiliary sign shall be visible from a public street. 
(3)  Automobile and truck agency sales and showrooms (as defined in chapter 45) shall be permitted the following signs: 
(a)  Wall signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each building within the development shall be limited to one wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage and with respect to buildings with no direct thoroughfare frontage, those buildings may be permitted a wall sign facing the common area in order to expedite vehicular traffic within the development. 
(ii)  The area of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(b)  Ground support signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Each development may have one (1) ground support sign identifying the main dealership of the development and shall not exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
(ii)  A second ground support sign identifying used car/truck sales may be permitted provided it does not exceed an area of thirty-six (36) square feet. 
(iii)  A third ground support sign identifying up to three (3) additional automotive product manufacturers, other than provided for in paragraph (b)(i) of this section, and typically referred to as a multi-dealership, may be permitted provided that each automotive product identity shall not exceed an area of thirty-six (36) square feet for a total combined area not exceeding one hundred and eight (108) square. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE XII. - INDUSTRIAL (I-L & I-1) DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8.61. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Industrial (I-L & I-l) districts the following signs are permitted: 
1.  Wall signs, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each tenant of a development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The total area of the sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of tenant frontage or exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Ground support sign or garden ground sign providing that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign or one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage except as provided in paragraph (3) below. 
(b)  The maximum height of the ground support sign or garden ground sign shall not exceed five (5) feet and shall have a minimum setback of five (5) feet from any property line, provided further that one (1) additional foot of height may be permitted for each additional two (2) feet of setback beyond the prescribed setback with a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum area of sixty (60) square feet. 
(c)  The total sign area of all permitted ground support or garden ground signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. 
3.  One (1) additional ground support sign may be permitted per parcel of land provided that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Such sign is set back a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any street right-of-way. 
(b)  Such sign does not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. 
(c)  such sign is located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other sign three hundred (300) square feet, or more, in area. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
Sec. 8.62. - Non-industrial uses-Transfer of requirements. 
    Where any structure or use is permitted in a zoning district other than an industrial zoning district, the sign controls for that structure or use shall be subject to the requirements and regulations as set forth in this chapter in the district in which the structure or use is first permitted based on the following hierarchy of zoning districts: 
1.  RA-RE Single Family Residential 
2.  RMH Mobile Home Park 
3.  R-T Attached Single-Family 
4.  RM Multiple Family-Low Rise 
5.  RMM Multiple Family-Mid Rise 
6.  RMU Multiple Family-High Rise 
7.  P Parking 
8.  O-S Office Service 
9.  B-1 Neighborhood Business 
10.  TV-R Television-Radio-Office-Studio 
11.  TR Technical Research 
12.  ERO-M Education, Research, Office-Limited 
13.  ERO Education, Research, Office 
14.  NS Neighborhood Shopping 
15.  B-2 planned Business 
16.  B-3 General Business 
17.  RS Regional Shopping 
18.  RC Regional Center 
19.  I-L Light Industrial 
20.  I-1 Industrial 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE XIII. - REGIONAL SHOPPING (RS) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.63. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Regional Shopping (RS) District the following signs are permitted provided that prior to sign permits being issued, a master sign plan shall be submitted to the Building Official stating the size and location of all wall signs, ground support signs and any other requested sign: 
1.  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage. 
(b)  The cumulative area of the wall signs of the individual tenants/occupants may not exceed the square footage permitted in paragraph (a) above. 
2.  Ground support signs provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The ground support signs shall not exceed an area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(c)  If a ground support sign identifies tenants of the regional shopping center it shall not identify more than three (3). 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE XIV. - REGIONAL CENTER (RC) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.64. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Regional Center (RC) District the following signs are permitted provided that prior to sign permits being issued, a master sign plan shall be submitted to the building official stating the size and location of all wall signs, ground support signs, garden ground signs and any other requested sign: 
1.  Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each building of a development may have only one (1) wall sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per linear foot of building frontage or exceed an area of two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. 
(c)  Secondary retail businesses or service establishments servicing the development and having direct exterior frontage and access from the common parking shall be permitted one (1) wall sign not to exceed one (1) square foot in area per linear foot of tenant frontage or exceed an area of fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Ground support signs, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development may have only one (1) ground support sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  Ground support signs shall have at least a fifteen (15) foot setback from the property line and shall not exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
3.  A garden ground sign may replace a ground support sign provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each development shall have only one (1) garden ground sign per major thoroughfare frontage. 
(b)  The garden ground sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and an area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(c)  The garden ground sign shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
ARTICLE XV. - VEHICULAR PARKING (P) DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.65. - Permitted signs. 
    In the Vehicular Parking (P) District ground support signs may be permitted at each entrance to the parking lot provided each such sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area, and shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1667 , § 1, 2-9-17) 
CHAPTER 100. - HOUSING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1655 , § 1, adopted March 20, 2016, repealed former ch. 100, §§ 8.141-8.144, and added a new ch. 100. Former ch. 100 pertained to the housing code and derived from Ord. No. 1198, adopted April 14, 1986. 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes, § 4.22. 
Cross reference- Responsibility of department of building and safety engineering, § 1.135; city housing commission, § 1.171 et seq.; general building regulations, § 8.201 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9.181 et seq. 

Sec. 8.141. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Southfield, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, as may hereafter be amended, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city of Southfield, State of Michigan, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the city city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as set forth in section 8.143 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1655 , § 1, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1671 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.142. - Code on file. 
    A complete printed copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, herein adopted, is available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1655 , § 1, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1671 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.143. - Revisions to code. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised as hereafter set forth. Subsequent section numbers used in this chapter shall refer to the like numbered sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in this chapter. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Title, is revised to read as follows: 
    These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the city of Southfield, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
(b)  Section 103.5 Fees, is revised to read as follows: 
    The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in Chapter 101, Permit, Inspection and Appeal Fees, of the City Code. 
(c)  Section 112.4 Failure to comply, is revised to read as follows: 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 15, municipal civil infractions, of the City Code. 
(d)  Section 302.4 Weeds, is revised to read as follows: 
    Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from noxious weeds and weeds in excess of twelve (12) inches in height, in accordance with Section 9.41 of the City Code, or grass in excess of eight (8) inches in height, except a "natural lawn" as defined and regulated pursuant to Section 9.50B of the City Code. Noxious weeds as defined in Section 9.41 of the City Code are prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
    Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of the notice identified in Section 9.50B (3) or (4), the department of public service shall have such remedies as set forth in Section 9.50B. 
(e)  Section 304.14 Insect screens, is revised to read as follows: 
    During the period from April 1 st to December 1 st , every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
    Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
(f)  Section 602.3 Heat supply, is revised to read as follows: 
    Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 st to May 15 th to maintain a minimum temperature of sixty eight (68) degrees F (20 degrees C) to all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above thirty (30) degrees F (-1 degrees C), a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees F (18 degrees C) shall be maintained. 
(g)  Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces, is revised to read as follows: 
    Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 st to May 15 th to maintain a minimum temperature of sixty five (65) degrees F (18 degrees C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. No. 1655 , § 1, 3-20-16; Ord. No. 1671 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.144. - Neighborhood enterprise zone-Inspection required 
(a)  Before the sale of a new facility or rehabilitated facility (each as defined within the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, P.A. 1992, No. 147 (the "Act"), or a unit situated therein, for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect, an inspection by the city shall be requested by the owner, as defined within the Act, and made to determine compliance with the requirements of Chapter 100. 
(b)  No sale of any new facility or rehabilitated facility, or any unit situated therein, for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect may be finalized until there is compliance with the requirements and provisions of Chapter 100, and a certificate of compliance attesting to such compliance is issued by the Building Official, or his/her designee. 
(c)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued only after the new facility or rehabilitated facility has been inspected and meets the requirements of Chapter 100. An inspection report shall be completed by the Building Official, or his/her designee, after the inspection is completed. The report shall note all violations found in the facility. Before a certificate of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and the required inspection fees paid pursuant to Chapter 101. 
(d)  After issuance, a certificate of compliance shall only be valid for one (1) sale of a new or rehabilitated facility, or unit situated therein. A new inspection and certificate of compliance shall be required each time a new or rehabilitated facility, or unit situated therein, is sold, for the duration of the neighborhood enterprise zone certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
CHAPTER 101. - PERMIT, REVIEW, INSPECTION AND APPEAL FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, adopted May, 29, 2016, deleted ch. 101, §§ 8.161-8.177 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 101. Former ch. 101 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1512, enacted May 16, 2005; and Ord. No. 1645, adopted October 4, 2015. 

Sec. 8.161. - Schedule established. 
    The fees hereinafter established are for the purpose of ensuring adequate inspections, plan examination and compliance with respect to the various codes and ordinances of the City of Southfield as administered by the department of building and safety engineering. These fees shall be paid to the Southfield Department of Building and Safety Engineering. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.162. - Fees for registrations; expiration. 
    The following fees shall be charged for the registration trades indicated. Fees shall be paid at the time of registration and shall be valid for the time period specified on the state license. In the case of no state licensing requirements, registration shall expire on the 31 st day of December. 
Builders license registration ..... $25.00 
Electrical contractor registration ..... 25.00 
Mechanical contractor registration ..... 15.00 
Plumber contractor registration ..... 15.00 
Fire suppression contractor registration ..... 25.00 
Fire alarm contractor registration ..... 25.00 
Sign specialty contractor registration ..... 25.00 
Sign erector license original or renewal ..... 35.00 
Excavator registration ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.163. - Zoning reviews, zoning permits, other fees. 
Application fee, non-refundable (Required for all permit and application types) ..... $40.00 
Residential zoning review fee ..... 25.00 
Residential zoning permits (includes one (1) inspection) ..... 60.00 
Fences, accessory structures (under 200 sq. ft.), sheds, generators, propane tanks 
Commercial zoning review fee ..... 100.00 
Commercial zoning permits (includes two (2) inspections) ..... 150.00 
Stationary vendor sales, tent/sidewalk sales, firework sales, stationary food trucks, Christmas tree sales lot, windshield repair, special events, parking lot repaving, dumpster/equipment enclosures, retaining walls less than four (4) feet in height and similar zoning permits. 
Special correspondence/special permits. 
After hours work permit ..... 100.00 
Permit extension fee (Permits over one (1) year old will not be renewed). ..... 40.00 
An inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) + the hourly rate of investigation time to the nearest one-half-hour will be charged for all work started without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.164. - Overtime inspection fees. 
    Anyone seeking inspection service during other than the normal working hours (Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. excluding city holidays) for the department of building and safety engineering shall pay overtime fees as prescribed: 
First hour or part thereof ..... $75.00 
Each additional hour or part thereof ..... 65.00 
Sunday or holiday per hour or part thereof ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.165. - General supervisory inspection. 
    In those cases where continuous inspections are requested such as, but not limited to: Continuous footings, camera of sewer systems, pressure testing of piping systems and similar inspections, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour for inspection service shall be paid. If such inspection service is necessary at times other than normal business hours, the fees shall be in accordance with section 8.164. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.166. - Cancellation and refunds. 
(1)  Upon written request, prior to commencement of any work, permits may be cancelled by the holder. The permit fee minus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be refunded. The application fee will be retained by the city to cover administrative expenses. 
(2)  In those cases where work has commenced and a request for a cancellation is received in favor of a permit to others, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for each inspection made and the amount of the refund shall be based on seventy (70) percent of the remainder of the permit fee. The application fee is non-refundable. 
(3)  Plan review fees are non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.167. - Building permit fees. 
CONSTRUCTION COST SCHEDULE 
    The International Code Council square foot construction cost table is to be used with the City of Southfield Building Permit and Plan Review Fee Schedules for computation of total cost of construction improvement. The building permit and plan review fees are based on the estimated construction value as calculated in accordance with the International Code Council's square foot construction code table (gross area × sq. ft. construction cost). The most current (BVD) building valuation data table in effect on July 1 of each year at the (ICC) International Code Council web site (www.iccsafe.org/) will be the table utilized for present and future calculations. ICC BVD outlines the base cost per square foot for any given use/group/type of construction combination. These figures are not intended to reflect actual cost of construction, but are used as a basis for determination of fees related to services rendered for projects. 
    Projects where it is not feasible to determine the construction value using the BVD table will have the construction value set by the director of building and safety engineering. The director's decision may be based on executed contracts, the BVD table, other similar projects or other engineer or architects estimates. The directors decision will be final. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
(1)  A building permit fee shall be paid for all new buildings, alterations, additions and accessory structures based on the construction cost evaluation of the building valuation data table and the following permit fee schedule: 
Minimum building permit fee (under $1,000.00) $60.00 Valuation $1,000.00 up to $10,000.00 $60.00 plus valuation over $1,000.00 multiplied by .016 Valuation over $10,000.00 up to $100,000.00 $204.00 plus valuation over $10,000.00 multiplied by .015 Valuation over $100,000.00 up to $1,000,000.00 $1,554.00 plus valuation over $100,000.00 multiplied by .0148 Valuation over $1,000,000.00 $14,874.00 plus valuation over $1,000,000.00 multiplied by .0076  
(2)  All interior demolitions (non-structural) ..... $150.00 
(3)  Temporary theatres, carnivals and exhibitions (site plan approval required) ..... 250.00 
(4)  Mobile home set-up ..... 100.00 
(5)  All trades are entitled to one (1) re-inspection to ensure corrections of any violations cited on an initial inspection. In no case shall the total number of inspections requested exceed the permit fee paid at fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection. Work not repaired at the time of re-inspection, or work not ready or available for inspection at the time the inspection is requested, will require an additional re-inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.168. - Plan review fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
Residential accessory structures (under 200 sq. ft.), sheds, windows, fences and generators (excluding roofs, gutters and siding). ..... 25.00 
Building plan review fee calculations: 
Residential accessory structures over 200 sq. ft., + 0.0018 × cost of construction ..... 50.00 
Residential additions, alterations and pools (excluding roofs, gutters and siding), + 0.0018 × cost of construction ..... 75.00 
New residential home, + 0.0018 × cost of construction ..... 150.00 
Commercial new and additions, + 0.0018 × cost of construction ..... 250.00 
Commercial alteration interior/exterior, + 0.0018 × cost of construction ..... 250.00 
All interior demolition (non-structural) ..... 100.00 
Additional reviews - plumbing, electrical, mechanical, accessibility or energy code: 
25 percent of base fee + 25 percent of calculated building plan review fee for each discipline. 
Special consideration may be given in computing plan review fees for buildings such as large warehouses or indoor recreational facilities. Such consideration may also be given to buildings with repetitive floor plans such as high-rise buildings. 
Structural or third party review surcharge: Actual cost incurred + ten (10) percent (estimated prepayment may be required). 
Projects where it is not feasible to determine the construction value using the building valuation data table will have the construction value set by the director of building and safety engineering. The director's decision may be based on executed contracts, the building valuation data table, other projects or other engineer or architects estimates. The directors decision will be final. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.169. - Plan review/permit addendum fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
(1)  Addendum permits will be issued to cover revisions to the original building plans. A minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. In the case of extensive changes, the fee will be based on ten dollars ($10.00) per page or fifty dollars ($50.00) whichever is greater plus, any additional fees relating to outside review services. 
(2)  Addendum/changes to the original building permit will be based on the additional value of construction. 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.170. - Moving and wrecking permit fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
Demolition permit costs will be determined by the structure(s) total square footage. Assessment records will be utilized to determine square footage. 
Minimum demolitions permit fee up to 1,000 sq. ft. (including all pools) ..... 250.00 
Each additional square foot up to 50,000 square feet, per square foot ..... 0.10 
Each additional square foot over 50,000 square feet, per square foot ..... 0.05 
A certificate of insurance, naming the City of Southfield as party assured, shall be furnished prior to the issuance of a building permit with the following minimums: 
Public liability insurance - personal injury or death: 
One person ..... 500,000.00 
One accident ..... 1,000,000.00 
Property damage: one accident ..... 300,000.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.171. - Certificate of occupancy or compliance fees. 
(1)  Residential ..... $50.00 
(2)  Multiple, commercial and industrial: 
(a)  Initial certificate/temporary or final, change in use or occupancy ..... 150.00 
(b)  Re-issuance of a temporary (extension if approved) ..... 40.00 
(c)  Copy of original C of O/compliance letter ..... 40.00 
(d)  Compliance for Bingham Farms permits ..... 50.00 
(3)  Site compliance/special inspections, per trade (includes two (2) inspections) ..... 100.00 
Additional inspections per trade ..... 50.00 
(4)  Code evaluation or code research per trade (hourly rate) ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.172. - Rental/vacant and apartment registration fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
(1)  Rental registration (chapter 103) includes two (2) inspections, (Registration remains in effect until a change in ownership) ..... 300.00 
Recertification of rental compliance (Every three (3) years, includes two (2) inspections) ..... 175.00 
Re-inspection fee (work not completed/not available for inspection) ..... 50.00 
(2)  Vacant registration (chapter 104) includes two (2) inspections ..... 300.00 
Recertification of vacant compliance (annually, includes two (2) inspections) ..... 175.00 
New owner affidavit (certified within the last six (6) months) ..... 20.00 
Re-inspection fee (work not completed/not available for inspection) ..... 50.00 
(3)  Apartment registration (chapter 105) annual registration ..... 125.00 
Change in ownership or information update ..... 75.00 
Failure to register within 30 days of notice (per month) ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.173. - Zoning, construction board of appeals and special use hearing fees. 
    Fees to cover cost of operation for the zoning board of appeals, construction board of appeals and special use hearings as established according to the following schedule: 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
(1)  Zoning board of appeals hearings: 
Residential occupancy appeals (single-family residence) ..... 400.00 
Residential move-in ..... 400.00 
Non-residential occupancy appeals (Including multiple dwellings and permitted special exceptions in residential districts) ..... 400.00 
Special meeting ..... 750.00 
Sign and miscellaneous appeals ..... 400.00 
(2)  Construction board of appeals ..... 750.00 
(3)  Special use hearings including, but not limited to: food trucks, fireworks tents, Christmas tree lots, stationary vendor sales ..... 300.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.174. - Electrical permit fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
Electrical permit fees shall be paid for all permits, including, but not limited to, apparatus and equipment installed in new buildings, alterations, additions, field inspection service and repairs, according to the following schedule. In no case shall less than fifty dollars ($50.00) be charged for any one (1) permit, and fees for additions to open permits under the same contractor's name shall not be charged less than fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(1)  Commercial electrical permit fees: 
Annual permits: (includes 2 status inspections) ..... 150.00 
Circuits: 
Furniture systems - each outlet ..... 6.00 
All new or extended ..... 6.00 
Generators KW: optional standby 
30 KW and under ..... 50.00 
Over 30 KW ..... 65.00 
Transfer switch ..... 50.00 
Emergency or legally required 
30 KW and under, per hour ..... 50.00 
Over 30 KW, per hour ..... 50.00 
Transfer Switch, per hour ..... 50.00 
HVAC: 
Furnace ..... 40.00 
Geothermal ..... 50.00 
Space heater ..... 20.00 
Low voltage: excluding data/telecom 
Per device ..... 7.00 
Miscellaneous: 
Dishwasher ..... 15.00 
Disposal ..... 15.00 
Door opener ..... 15.00 
Dryer ..... 15.00 
Electric air cleaner ..... 15.00 
Fixtures ..... 3.00 
Hand dryer ..... 15.00 
Humidifier ..... 15.00 
Hydro massage tub ..... 15.00 
Manufactured buildings ..... 50.00 
Ovens/ranges ..... 15.00 
Pools/spas ..... 45.00 
Power outlet ..... 14.00 
Retro-fit energy conservation (groups of 10) 
Specs/documentation required. ..... 6.00 
Solar PV system ..... 75.00 
Under-floor raceways each 100 feet ..... 30.00 
Water heater ..... 15.00 
Motors KV, HP, KW, KVA: 
1/4 to 10 ..... 20.00 
11 to 30 ..... 30.00 
31 to 50 ..... 35.00 
51 to 100 ..... 40.00 
Over 100 ..... 45.00 
Refrigeration A/C: 
Up to 5 ton ..... 25.00 
5 to 40 ton ..... 35.00 
Over 40 ton ..... 50.00 
Rough inspections: 
Up to 5,000 square feet ..... 25.00 
5,000 to 10,000 square feet ..... 50.00 
Over 10,000 square feet ..... 75.00 
Service (600 volts and under): 
100 to 400 amp ..... 40.00 
401 to 800 amp ..... 60.00 
Over 800 ..... 75.00 
Temporary ..... 50.00 
Service (Over 600 volts): 
Up to 100 amps ..... 40.00 
Over 100 amps ..... 60.00 
Feeders: each 100 feet or less ..... 30.00 
Signs: 
Circuit, each ..... 45.00 
Connect/reconnect, each ..... 45.00 
Outline lighting (neon) first 50 feet ..... 50.00 
Each additional 50 feet ..... 30.00 
Special inspections: 
Circus/carnival ..... 100.00 
Temporary displays ..... 50.00 
(2)  Fire alarm system fees: 
Fire alarm systems: 
Plan review (3 or more devices) ..... 150.00 
Alarm control panel, NAC panel, initiating device, auxiliary control device ..... 50.00 
Dialer ..... 25.00 
A/V device, communication device, each ..... 10.00 
Remote annunciators ..... 25.00 
System recertification: As-built plans required ..... 250.00 
Minimum 10 percent of devices to be tested, per device ..... 10.00 
Special fire suppression systems: 
(FM200, pre action, dry chemical, CO 2 , clean agent and similar systems) devices monitored by FACP/releasing panel, per device (Fire suppression permit and plan review required) ..... 10.00 
(3)  Residential electrical permit fees: 
Circuits: 
All new or extended ..... 6.00 
ARC fault protection ..... 12.00 
HVAC: 
Condenser, new or replacement ..... 20.00 
Furnace ..... 15.00 
Geothermal HVAC ..... 50.00 
Humidifier ..... 15.00 
Space heater ..... 20.00 
Whole house fan ..... 15.00 
Low voltage: 
Per device ..... 7.00 
Luminaires: ..... 5.00 
Retro-fit energy conservation (groups of 10). Specs/documentation required ..... 6.00 
Miscellaneous: 
Ceiling fans ..... 15.00 
Compactors ..... 15.00 
Detached garage ..... 50.00 
Dishwasher ..... 15.00 
Disposal ..... 15.00 
Door opener ..... 15.00 
Dryer ..... 15.00 
Electric air cleaner ..... 15.00 
Generators up to 30 KW ..... 50.00 
Manufactured homes ..... 60.00 
Ovens/ranges ..... 15.00 
Pools/spas/hydro massage tubs ..... 45.00 
Receptacle outlets (groups of 5) ..... 20.00 
Smoke alarm, hard wired ..... 10.00 
Solar PV system ..... 50.00 
Water heater ..... 15.00 
Well pump ..... 15.00 
Service: 
100 to 400 amp ..... 40.00 
Temporary ..... 50.00 
Sub-metering/IAC ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.175. - Plumbing permit fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
Plumbing permit fees shall be paid for all permits, including, but not limited to, apparatus and equipment installed in new buildings, alterations, additions, field inspection service and repairs, according to the following schedule. In no case shall less than fifty dollars ($50.00) be charged for any one permit, and fees for additions to open permits under the same contractor's name shall not be charged less than fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(1)  Commercial plumbing fees: 
Air admittance valve ..... $15.00 
Backflow preventer ..... 15.00 
Beverage dispenser ..... 15.00 
Coffee maker ..... 15.00 
Fire sprinkler ..... 35.00 
Lawn sprinkler ..... 50.00 
Miscellaneous ..... 15.00 
Source line protection ..... 35.00 
Basement waterproofing system ..... 50.00 
Bath ..... 15.00 
Building drain to sewer ..... 25.00 
Catch basin/manhole ..... 50.00 
Dishwasher ..... 15.00 
Disposal ..... 15.00 
Drinking fountain ..... 15.00 
Floor drain ..... 15.00 
Grease/oil interceptor ..... 30.00 
Hose bibb ..... 15.00 
Hot water supply boilers with separate storage tanks (over 52 gallons) ..... 35.00 
Humidifier ..... 15.00 
Ice maker (including backflow) ..... 15.00 
Inside drains (ground water) ..... 25.00 
Laundry tub ..... 15.00 
Lavatory ..... 15.00 
Medical/dental equipment ..... 15.00 
Medical gas piping, each system: ..... 40.00 
Gas pressure test ..... 35.00 
Outlet, each ..... 5.00 
Vacuum system piping: ..... 40.00 
Pressure test ..... 35.00 
Inlet, each ..... 5.00 
Miscellaneous fixtures ..... 15.00 
Mixing valve ..... 15.00 
New sewer service: ..... 125.00 
Over 4 inspections, each ..... 40.00 
New water service: ..... 125.00 
Over 4 inspections, each ..... 40.00 
Pools: 
In-ground with or without heater ..... 65.00 
Above ground heater ..... 35.00 
Roof conductors ..... 15.00 
Roof sump ..... 15.00 
Septic tank replacement ..... 20.00 
Service sink ..... 15.00 
Sewer repair ..... 50.00 
Shower pan: ..... 25.00 
When requested separately ..... 50.00 
Shower trap ..... 15.00 
Sink-Any type ..... 15.00 
Site storm sewer: ..... 125.00 
Over 4 inspections, each ..... 40.00 
Stacks/waste/soil/vent ..... 15.00 
Standpipe ..... 15.00 
Sump pump ..... 30.00 
Sump pump discharge ..... 30.00 
When requested separately ..... 50.00 
Underground (sanitary) ..... 25.00 
Urinals ..... 15.00 
Wastes, safe or special ..... 15.00 
Water closet ..... 15.00 
Water cooled A/C units ..... 35.00 
Water distribution systems: each floor or per dwelling unit on multiples 
1/2"-1" ..... 30.00 
11/4"-4" ..... 50.00 
Over 4" ..... 100.00 
Water heater ..... 50.00 
(2)  Residential plumbing fees: 
Air admittance valve ..... 15.00 
Backflow preventer ..... 15.00 
Basement waterproofing system ..... 50.00 
Bath ..... 15.00 
Building drain to sewer ..... 25.00 
Dishwasher ..... 15.00 
Disposal ..... 15.00 
Floor drain ..... 15.00 
Hose bibb ..... 15.00 
Humidifier ..... 15.00 
Ice maker (including backflow) ..... 15.00 
Inside drains (ground water) ..... 25.00 
Laundry tub ..... 15.00 
Lavatory ..... 15.00 
Lawn sprinkler supply/backflow ..... 50.00 
Miscellaneous fixtures ..... 15.00 
Mixing valve ..... 15.00 
Standpipe ..... 15.00 
New sewer service: ..... 55.00 
With septic bypass ..... 100.00 
Over 4 inspections, each ..... 40.00 
New water service: ..... 65.00 
Over 4 inspections, each ..... 40.00 
Well abandonment ..... 50.00 
Pools: 
In-ground with or without heater ..... 65.00 
Above ground heater ..... 35.00 
Roof conductors ..... 15.00 
Roof sump ..... 15.00 
Septic tank replacement ..... 20.00 
Sewer repair ..... 50.00 
Shower pan: ..... 25.00 
When requested separately ..... 50.00 
Shower trap ..... 15.00 
Sink-any type ..... 15.00 
Site storm drain ..... 50.00 
Stacks/waste/soil/vent ..... 15.00 
Sump pump: ..... 30.00 
Sump pump discharge ..... 30.00 
When requested separately ..... 50.00 
Underground (sanitary) ..... 25.00 
Water closet ..... 15.00 
Water distribution systems: 
1/2"-1" ..... 30.00 
11/4"-4" ..... 50.00 
Over 4" ..... 100.00 
Water heater ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.176. - Heating, cooling and burning equipment and apparatus fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
Heating and cooling permit fees shall be paid for all permits, including, but not limited to, apparatus and equipment installed in new buildings, alterations, additions, field inspection service and repairs, according to the following schedule. In no case shall less than fifty dollars ($50.00) be charged for any one (1) permit, and fees for additions to open permits under the same contractor's name shall not be charged less than fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(1)  Commercial mechanical fees: 
Chiller systems: 
Air cooled condenser ..... 50.00 
Chiller ..... 60.00 
Cooling tower ..... 50.00 
Water cooled condenser ..... 50.00 
Duct: 
Under 5,000 sq. ft. (per floor) ..... 45.00 
Over 5,000 sq. ft. (per floor) ..... 60.00 
Diffuser (relocate/replace), each ..... 5.00 
Fan coil/reheat box, each ..... 10.00 
Fire dampers, each ..... 10.00 
VAV box, each ..... 10.00 
Exhaust booth: 
Plan review (required) ..... 50.00 
Auto-body ..... 25.00 
Exhaust duct ..... 25.00 
Exhaust fan ..... 25.00 
Hood ..... 25.00 
Industrial labs, per hood ..... 10.00 
Make-up air equipment ..... 25.00 
Gas piping: 
Up to 5 openings includes pressure test ..... 60.00 
Each additional opening ..... 5.00 
Generator: includes pressure test ..... 75.00 
HVAC equipment: 
A/C only ..... 50.00 
Boiler ..... 50.00 
Computer room HVAC ..... 60.00 
Duct smoke detector, each ..... 20.00 
Economizer ..... 25.00 
Furnace only ..... 50.00 
Infrared spot heater, each ..... 20.00 
Mini-split heat pump ..... 50.00 
Radiant tube heater, each ..... 20.00 
RTU (roof top unit) ..... 60.00 
Kitchen: 
Plan review (required) ..... 50.00 
Capture test ..... 75.00 
Hood/duct work ..... 75.00 
Make-up exhaust fan (per system) ..... 75.00 
Kitchen equipment: 
Fryer ..... 15.00 
Grill ..... 15.00 
Stove ..... 15.00 
Broiler ..... 15.00 
Barbeque ..... 15.00 
All others ..... 15.00 
Process piping: 
Hydronic/steam ..... 60.00 
Pressure test ..... 50.00 
Refrigeration: 
Coolers/freezers ..... 50.00 
Evaporator coils ..... 50.00 
Pressure test ..... 50.00 
Solar piping ..... 60.00 
Water heater ..... 50.00 
(2)  Fire suppression system fees: 
Fire suppression systems: 
Plan review (3 or more devices) ..... 150.00 
Standpipe systems ..... 50.00 
Each hose connection/FDC ..... 10.00 
Fire or jockey pumps and connections, each ..... 100.00 
Special fire suppression systems: 
FM200, pre action, dry chemical, CO 2 , clean agent, deluge (Fire alarm permit and plan review required when tied to building fire alarm system) ..... 100.00 
Hood and duct fire suppression systems, each ..... 75.00 
Additional system at same location ..... 50.00 
Fire suppression systems, based on number of sprinkler heads/nozzles in system according to the following schedule (per floor): 
1-10 ..... $50.00 
11-20 ..... 75.00 
21-50 ..... 125.00 
51-100 ..... 150.00 
101-200 ..... 200.00 
200-300 ..... 275.00 
301-400 ..... 350.00 
401-500 ..... 425.00 
500+ heads ..... 575.00 
Re-inspection fee for systems not ready for inspection ..... 50.00 
System recertification (as-built plans required) ..... 250.00 
(3)  Residential mechanical fees: 
Air conditioning: 
A/C unit ..... 50.00 
Air handler replacement ..... 50.00 
Condenser replacement ..... 50.00 
Evaporator coil replacement ..... 50.00 
Mini-split heat pump ..... 50.00 
Heat pump with air handler ..... 50.00 
Boiler: 
Up to 2,000 square feet ..... 40.00 
Over 2,000 square feet ..... 60.00 
Baseboard radiant ..... 40.00 
In floor radiant pressure test ..... 40.00 
Fireplace: 
Gas vented ..... 40.00 
Insert ..... 40.00 
Log set ..... 40.00 
Outdoor ..... 40.00 
Wood ..... 40.00 
Gas piping: 
1-5 openings ..... 30.00 
Each additional opening ..... 5.00 
Underground includes 5 openings ..... 40.00 
Pressure test ..... 40.00 
Geothermal: Plans required 
Heat pump ..... 50.00 
Manifold test, underground pipe ..... 75.00 
Plan review ..... 50.00 
Heating equipment: 
Furnace ..... 40.00 
Duct work: 
Alteration ..... 45.00 
Duct pressure test verification ..... 25.00 
New residential ..... 60.00 
Zoned system, per zone ..... 10.00 
Kitchen hood: 
Exhaust air system ..... 40.00 
Exhaust with make up air ..... 60.00 
Recycle air system ..... 15.00 
Miscellaneous: 
Air to air heat exchanger ..... 50.00 
Air cleaner ..... 15.00 
Bath fans ..... 15.00 
Generator includes pressure test ..... 60.00 
Humidifier ..... 15.00 
Manufactured home ..... 60.00 
Pool heater ..... 40.00 
Solar piping ..... 60.00 
U.V. Light ..... 15.00 
Water heater ..... 50.00 
Venting: 
Chimney liner ..... 25.00 
Class B ..... 25.00 
Class C ..... 30.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.177. - Elevator fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
An elevator permit fee shall be paid for all elevators, dumbwaiters, manlifts or movable stairs, in accordance with the following schedule: 
Each elevator (passenger or freight) serving: 
One floor, minimum (For each additional floor to be served by the elevator, the fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) per floor with a maximum fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for anyone (1)elevator serving more than three floors) ..... 50.00 
Dumbwaiter, each ..... 20.00 
Manlift, each ..... 25.00 
Moving stairway, each ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
Sec. 8.178. - Sign fees. 
Application fee non-refundable ..... $40.00 
A sign permit fee shall be paid for all signs erected in the city in accordance with the following schedule of fees: 
(1)  Temporary signs and those real estate signs in excess of six square feet in area for a three-month period ..... 40.00 
Temporary signs in excess of 50 square feet for a three-month period ..... 60.00 
Temporary signs in excess of 100 square feet for a three-month period ..... 80.00 
(2)  Permanent wall signs, per square foot ..... 2.00 
(3)  Garden ground signs, per square foot ..... 2.00 
(4)  Ground support signs ..... 80.00 
(5)  Ground support signs in excess of 100 square feet ..... 250.00 
(6)  Banner sign ..... 50.00 
(7)  Minimum sign permit fee ..... 75.00 
(8)  Sign plan review non-refundable (Excluding banners, temporary, face changes and real estate signs) ..... 150.00 
(9)  Sign bond ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 1663 , § 1, 5-29-16) 
CHAPTER 102. - GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, adopted April 3, 2016, repealed ch. 102, §§ 8.201-8.204, 8.255-8.260, 8.401-8.404, 8.410-8.444 and 8.451-8.454 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 102. Former ch. 102, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1251, adopted June 25, 1988; Ord. No. 1252, adopted June 25, 1988; Ord. No. 1253, adopted June 25, 1988; Ord. No. 1254, adopted June 25, 1988; Ord. No. 1420, adopted December 15, 1998; Ord. No. 1421, adopted December 15, 1998; Ord. No. 1422, adopted December 15, 1998; Ord. No. 1423, adopted December 15, 1998; and Ord. No. 1626, adopted June 29, 2014. 
Cross reference- Responsibilities of department of building and safety engineering, § 1.135; sidewalk obstructions, §§ 4.26, 4.27; preservation of historic structures, § 5.601 et seq.; dance halls to comply with building code, § 7.227; fire prevention code, § 9.181 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes, § 4.22. 

Sec. 8.201. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to section 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1508b(6), the City of Southfield hereby elects to administer and enforce the 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Building Code. The City of Southfield shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. The City of Southfield Building Official or his designee registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.202. - Code on file. 
    A complete printed copy of the Michigan Building Code, and the Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes herein adopted, are available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.203. - Deposits/bonds. 
    At the time of the application for a permit there shall be deposited with the department of building and safety engineering a cash deposit in the following amount: 
A.  New construction other than single-family residential based on value of work: 
Construction value up to $250,000 ..... $1,000.00 
Greater than $250,000 up to $1,000,000 ..... 2,500.00 
Over $1,000,000 ..... 3,500.00 
B.  Commercial interior alterations based on value of work: 
Construction value up to $250,000 ..... 250.00 
Greater than $250.000 up to $1,000,000 ..... 500.00 
Over $1,000,000 ..... 1,000.00 
C.  Parking lot repaving, systems furniture, cellular colocation/replacement, commercial interior tenant demolition ..... 150.00 
D.  Special events, tents, fireworks, food trucks, sidewalk sales ..... 150.00 
E.  New single-family dwellings: ..... 500.00 
F.  Single-family additions, garage greater than 200 sq. ft. and alterations ..... 150.00 
G.  Residential accessory buildings, sheds, fences, generators and decks ..... 50.00 
H.  Above-ground swimming pools ..... 150.00 
I.  In-ground swimming pools ..... 500.00 
J.  Moving of buildings ..... 3,500.00 
K.  Demolitions (completion bond) (refer to Ordinance 1652, chapter 106, sec. 8.806) 
L.  Sign contractor/erector license deposit (surety bond acceptable) ..... 5,000.00 
M.  Work not listed or of a minor nature, bond fees shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.204. - Use of deposits/bonds. 
    Cash deposits as required pursuant to section 8.203 hereof shall be maintained as a security by the department of building and safety engineering to insure payment for plan examination, issuance of additional permits, reinspection fees, removal of building and related debris, payment for damage to public property, including the removal foreign materials deposited on roadways, sidewalks, and rights-of-way, and compliance with all building regulations under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.205. - Application of deposits/bonds. 
(a)  As used in this section "invalid permit" means any permit where the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced, or for a period in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that the permit is issued and/or where any defects or conditions in the work have been communicated by the building official or his designee to the permit holder or his designee and said defects and/or conditions have not been remedied within the one hundred eighty-day period. 
(b)  The department of building and safety engineering shall have the right to apply any amount deposited with the department of building and safety engineering pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, or so much thereof as may be necessary for the expense or administrative cost incurred by the city in connection with the failure of an applicant to abide by the provisions contained in this chapter. If such deposit is so used, a stop work order may be issued by said department to remain in effect until such time as the full amount of the deposit required by this chapter is restored. 
(c)  Deposits held by the department of building and safety engineering on invalid permits shall be forfeited to the City of Southfield for applicable fees and administrative expenses incurred by said department. 
(d)  The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not to exceed more than one hundred eighty (180) days each, provided that the request for extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit and establishes a reasonable basis for the request. 
(e)  Upon completion of the building or the work in accordance with all building regulations contained in this chapter and the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy or inspection approval, the deposit, or such portion thereof as is not applied for the purposes set forth in this chapter, shall be returned to the applicant. However, if any unpaid fees or administrative expenses of the department of building and safety engineering exceed the amount of the deposit, no approval or certificate of occupancy shall be issued, unless and until payment is made by the applicant to cover the amount of such fees or administrative expenses which exceed the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.206. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees for each building permit, inspection, and other applications shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 101 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.207. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  The construction board of appeals is hereby created pursuant to Section 14 of 1972 PA 230 (MCL 125.1514) for the purposes of hearing an appeal from an interested person relative to a denial by the department of building and safety engineering to grant an application for a building permit, or for any other decision rendered by the department of building and safety engineering pursuant to or related to this chapter. The construction board of appeals shall be comprised of five (5) members; the city council may also appoint an alternate member to serve upon and in the place of a member who is unable to attend a meeting. Members of the construction board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council. Members of the construction board of appeals shall be selected based upon their qualifications by experience or training to perform the duties as set forth in this chapter. Insofar as possible, membership on the construction board of appeals shall represent and include a licensed architect, a licensed professional engineer who is a structural specialist, a licensed professional engineer who is an electrical specialist, a licensed professional engineer who is a mechanical specialist (including both mechanical, ventilation, and plumbing), and a general contractor with a minimum six (6) years of experience in commercial and industrial construction. 
(b)  The terms of office of members of the construction board of appeals shall be three (3) years, except that initial members of the construction board of appeals shall be appointed for staggered terms with two (2) members appointed for three-year terms, two (2) members appointed for two-year terms, and one (1) member appointed for a one-year term. 
(c)  Members of the construction board of appeals shall serve without compensation and may be removed for cause by the city council. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  The construction board of appeals shall elect a chairperson, secretary, and treasurer at its first meeting every year. At least three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The construction board of appeals may adopt by-laws to outline the proper conduct and order of their meetings and the duties of the officers. 
(e)  The construction board of appeals shall hear appeals submitted in writing and shall render and file its decision with a statement of the reasons for the decision with the city's department of building and safety engineering not more than thirty (30) days after proper submission of the appeal. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Secs. 8.208-8.254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN MECHANICAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical code, § 4.22. 

Sec. 8.255. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to Section 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1508b(6), the City of Southfield hereby elects to administer and enforce the 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Mechanical Code. The City of Southfield shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. The City of Southfield Building Official or his designee registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.256. - Code on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Michigan Mechanical Code herein adopted are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.257. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees for each mechanical permit, inspection, and other applications for mechanical work shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 101 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Secs. 8.258-8.400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADOPTION OF NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE AND MICHIGAN ELECTRICAL CODE RULES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical code, § 4.22. 
Cross reference- Maintenance of installations in street, § 4.9. 

Sec. 8.401. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to Section 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1508b(6), the City of Southfield hereby elects to administer and enforce the 1972 PA 230, and the National Electrical Code, inclusive of the Michigan Electrical Code Rules, Part 8. The City of Southfield shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes, and all applicable laws and ordinances. The City of Southfield Building Official or his designee registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.402. - Code on file. 
    Complete copies of the Michigan Electrical Code herein adopted are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.403. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees for each electrical permit, inspection, and other applications for electrical work shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 101 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Secs. 8.404-8.450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN PLUMBING CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes, § 4.22. 
Cross reference- City water utility, § 2.31 et seq.; sewer service, § 2.101 et seq.; surface and ground drainage, § 2.131 et seq.; proper toilet and lavatory conveniences required in dance halls, § 7.226. 

Sec. 8.451. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to Section 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1508b(6), the City of Southfield hereby elects to administer and enforce the 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Plumbing Code. The City of Southfield shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. The City of Southfield Building Official or his designee registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.452. - Code on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Michigan Plumbing Code as herein adopted, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Sec. 8.453. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees for each plumbing permit, inspection, and other applications for plumbing work shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 101 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
Secs. 8.454-8.459. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTY 

Sec. 8.460. - Penalty. 
    Any firm, corporation, or person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 4-3-16) 
CHAPTER 103. - REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR RENTAL OR LEASED DWELLINGS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, adopted March 20, 2016, repealed former ch. 103, §§ 8.501-8.507, in its entirety and added a new ch. 103. Former ch. 103 pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1291, adopted October 23, 1989; and Ord. No. 1550, adopted July 30, 2007. 

Sec. 8.501. - Purpose, intent and findings. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to help protect the health, safety and welfare of city residents and citizens, to prevent blight and property deterioration in neighborhoods, and to promote and maintain healthy and sanitary conditions in all single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings located in the city, recognizing the importance of such to the persons who do or may reside therein or in the vicinity. The city also recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the maintenance of sanitary and safe single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings within the city which will provide for the maintenance of property values of nearby properties; and the reduction and elimination of blight and other negative factors affecting neighborhoods and the quality of life within the city. 
    The city finds that the nature of single-family, two-family, and townhouse rental dwellings versus multiple-family and non-residential rental buildings is unique because, in the city's experience: 
(1)  The maintenance of single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings are typically the obligation of a non-owning tenant or a non-occupying, off-site owner rather than an on-site manager or management company; 
(2)  Unlike non-residential rental buildings and apartment units, single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings are typically located in neighborhoods consisting of owner-occupied single-family dwelling units where the deterioration and non-maintenance of homes has a much more significant and direct negative impact on the quality of life, character, vitality, appearance, and value of properties in the surrounding neighborhood affecting residents on a broad and large scale basis within the city; 
(3)  Single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings are more often located in close proximity to other single-family residential structures and, therefore have a greater effect on the general health, safety, and welfare of the city's residents; and 
(4)  Accordingly, regulating single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings is the most effective way to reduce neighborhood and city blight with the resources available to the city. Thus, in order to address this unique situation and help to protect residents of neighborhoods surrounding single- and two-family rental dwellings, the city finds that a single- and two-family and townhouse rental dwelling registration and inspection program is warranted and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.502. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to one- and two-family and townhouse rental dwellings, including any accessory buildings or structures, and the land upon which such rental dwelling is located. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.503. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
1.  Certificate of rental compliance means a certificate issued by the city's building and safety engineering division, which certifies compliance with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code and with other codes and ordinances of the city. 
2.  Code official means a city building official, building inspector, the director of the department and other city employees designated and legally authorized by the director or the city administrator to administer and enforce this chapter. 
3.  Department shall mean the department of building and safety engineering or any successor department or division hereafter established. 
4.  Director shall mean the director of the department or his or her designee. 
5.  Dwelling means any building that contains either a one- or two-family dwelling as defined in chapter 45, title V, of the Code, or townhouse, including any accessory buildings or structures and the land upon which it is situated, that is intended for occupancy for living purposes. 
6.  Dwelling unit shall have the meaning as defined in chapter 45 of the Code. 
7.  Family shall have the meaning as defined in chapter 45 of the Code. 
8.  Fee schedule means the schedule of fees established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
9.  Occupants mean tenants, lessees, renters, and/or any persons residing in or occupying a rental dwelling who are not owners thereof. 
10.  Owner means the person or entity having a legal or equitable ownership interest in a one- or two-family rental dwelling which ownership interest is established by a written document that has been fully recorded at the county register of deeds office or is reflected on a property transfer affidavit filed with the city assessor. Owner does not include a person with a possessory interest pursuant to a lease with option to purchase, lease to purchase, or any similar possessory interest. 
11.  Rent or rented means a lease or other contractual arrangement whereby a person is to pay or provide monetary or other consideration to another person for the right or privilege to use and occupy a residential dwelling for any period of time. 
12.  Rental dwelling means a residential one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse that is not occupied as a residence by the owner and is rented or available to be rented; provided, however, rental dwelling shall exclude any structure or building the principal use of which is licensed and inspected by the State of Michigan and is preempted from regulation by the city pursuant to state or federal law. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, occupancy of any dwelling by any person other than the owner of record (with his or her family, as defined in chapter 45 of the City Code) shall be considered renting and shall require registration and inspection of the dwelling pursuant to this chapter. A homestead declaration filed on the property reflecting less than one hundred (100) percent shall be prima facie evidence that the owner does not occupy the dwelling. 
13.  Townhouse means an attached, privately owned single-family dwelling unit, which is a part of a building containing three (3) or more privately owned single-family dwelling units, in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on not less than two (2) sides. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.504. - Registry of owners and premises. 
    Owners of rental dwellings shall register such dwellings with the department as provided in this chapter before they are rented or offered for rent. An owner shall register the rental dwelling with the department in order to be entitled to collect rent from tenants and occupants residing or located in the rental dwelling. 
(1)  Registration shall be on a form provided by the department. Required information shall include the name, address and telephone number of the owner and any managing agent or entity. For each individual owner or agent a driver's license number or State of Michigan identification number must be provided. The department may require any additional information as may be relevant and necessary to the proper implementation and enforcement of this chapter. The form must be signed by all owners and agents. 
(2)  The registration fee shall be paid at the time of application for registration. In the event a rental dwelling is not registered within the timeframes set forth in this section 8.504, a late registration fee shall be assessed in the additional amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, per dwelling unit until the rental dwelling is registered and all fees paid. 
(3)  Once registration of the rental dwelling has been issued by the department, it shall remain in effect until a change of ownership and/or agency occurs with respect to the property. 
(4)  Any changes, at any time, in the information provided by an owner on a registration form must be submitted to the department in writing within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(5)  If an owner is a business entity, other than an individual, the names, address and telephone numbers of corporate officers, partners, members and managers as applicable to the form of the organization shall be listed. If such business entity has no substantial assets other than the rental dwelling to be registered and is controlled in whole or in part of by or more other business entities, then the name, address, driver's license numbers, and telephone numbers of those entities and their officers, partners, members and/or managers shall be listed. 
(6)  All rental dwellings existing at the effective date of this chapter shall be registered within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter and such registration shall remain effective until a change or ownership or change of agent occurs. 
(7)  Any existing non-rental dwelling that is converted to a rental dwelling after the effective date of this chapter shall be registered prior to the date on which the property is first occupied for rental purposes. 
(8)  All other rental dwellings shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as a rental dwelling. 
(9)  A new owner shall register a rental dwelling which has been sold, transferred or conveyed to such new owner within thirty (30) days after the date of the sale, transfer, or conveyance. Any existing certificate of rental compliance for the new owner's rental dwelling shall be transferred to the new owner and shall be valid until its expiration or revocation. 
(10)  After the registration of each rental dwelling, the code official or his or her designee may, in his or her discretion, place such dwelling on a schedule of inspections for certificates of rental compliance that allows the administrative burden of the department to be evenly spread from year to year. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.505. - Certificate of rental compliance required. 
    Persons shall not occupy, and owners shall not rent, offer for rent, or allow occupancy of rental dwellings unless a certificate of rental compliance has been applied for and issued by the department as provided in this chapter, except rental dwellings existing on the effective date of the ordinance establishing this chapter may continue to be rented and occupied after such effective date without a certificate of rental compliance provided the owner timely complies with the registration requirements under subsection 8.504(4), pays all applicable fees under section 8.512, complies with the requirements of section 8.509 for the scheduling and performance of all inspections necessary for issuance of a certificate of rental compliance, and timely undertakes all actions necessary to meet the requirements for and obtain a certificate of rental compliance under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.506. - Issuance of certificate of rental compliance. 
(a)  A certificate of rental compliance shall be applied for at the time the owner initially registers the dwelling as a rental dwelling, and subsequent thereto, shall be applied for not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of an existing certificate of rental compliance in accordance with subsection 8.507(b) hereof. A certificate of rental compliance shall be required for all rental dwellings and shall be issued only after: 
(1)  An inspection of the dwelling and the premises upon which it is located by the code official verifies that there are no violations of the inspection guidelines described in section 8.510 hereof, and the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be amended from time to time, and other applicable ordinances and codes upon which they are based; 
(2)  All registration, inspection and other fees have been paid and the dwelling has been registered and all registration information is current and correct as provided in section 8.504; and 
(3)  All property taxes, water and sewer bills, and any other city assessments or charges associated with the dwelling are current. 
(b)  In the event upon inspection the rental dwelling is determined not to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the owner shall be sent a written notice of the violations noted during the inspection. The owner shall correct such violations within the period stated within the written notice. When a certificate of rental compliance is withheld pending compliance and correction of violations, no rental dwelling that has not been occupied shall be so occupied, and a rental dwelling that has been or is occupied may be ordered vacated by the code official until re-inspection by the department and a certificate of rental compliance has been issued. 
(c)  A certificate of rental compliance is issued conditioned upon the requirement that the rental dwelling remain in a safe, habitable and fit condition for occupancy thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.507. - Term and revocation of certificate of rental compliance. 
(a)  Unless revoked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a certificate of rental compliance shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date it is issued. The code official may revoke a certificate of rental compliance if an inspection reveals violations of this chapter or upon a determination that the owner is not otherwise in compliance with any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner shall schedule an inspection of an existing certificate of rental compliance not later than thirty (30) days before the expiration thereof. Failure to schedule the inspection within such thirty (30) day period prior to expiration shall result in the immediate suspension of the existing certificate of rental compliance, the imposition of an additional late fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month per dwelling unit until the new certificate of rental compliance is issued, and the imposition of the penalties as set forth in section 8.514 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.508. - Inspection frequency. 
(a)  The frequency of regular inspections of rental dwellings under this chapter shall be at least one (1) such inspection every three (3) years. 
(b)  Rental dwellings shall be subject to inspection at any time there is a credible complaint or other indication of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.509. - Inspection procedures. 
    The owner shall schedule with the department the date and time of the inspection; and the department shall notify the owner of the fees that must be paid before the inspection. The owner shall be responsible for notifying each tenant or occupant of the rental dwelling of the date and time of the inspection. The owner or agent is required to provide the code official with access to the rental dwelling and accompany the code official during the performance of all inspections and in the event that the tenant or occupant is not present, the owner or agent must provide access to the inspector by unlocking the door of the tenant or occupant's dwelling unit, verifying that no occupant is present and securing the dwelling unit after the inspection is completed. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.510. - Inspection and maintenance guidelines. 
(a)  The director shall prepare and maintain a list of inspection guidelines to be used in making inspections relating to the enforcement of this chapter. The inspection guidelines shall be based on this chapter and applicable code and ordinance requirements and shall set forth the requirements and conditions and scope of repairs necessary for obtaining the issuance of a certificate of rental compliance. 
(b)  In all events, rental dwellings and the premises upon which they are located shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the criteria set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Regular inspections under this chapter shall be made of the exterior of the rental dwelling and the premises upon which it is located. The interior of the rental dwelling shall only be subject to inspection during the three-year certificate of rental compliance period if one (1) or more of the following conditions have been reported to the city or have been identified by an exterior inspection of the dwelling as possibly existing: 
(1)  The rental dwelling is, or is in or part of, a structure that is unsafe, unfit for human occupancy, unlawful, dangerous, or that includes unsafe equipment as defined and regulated under the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended from time to time; 
(2)  A violation of any maintenance standard in the International Property Maintenance Code that may allow rain, moisture, surface or roof drainage or animals to enter the exterior walls, structure or living space of the rental dwelling; 
(3)  The rental dwelling is, or is in part of, a structure that includes an unsafe condition pursuant to any other provision of this Code or any other code adopted by reference in this Code; or 
(4)  Multiple or recurring violations of the inspection and maintenance guidelines under this chapter have occurred with respect to the rental dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.511. - Transfer and termination of certificates of rental compliance. 
(a)  The department shall transfer a certificate of rental compliance to a new owner when the new owner provides the registration information required by subsection 8.504(1) and pays the transfer fee in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written notice and documentation of a sale, transfer or conveyance of a rental dwelling to a new owner that will occupy the premises with no portions rented, the department shall terminate any certificate of rental compliance and remove the dwelling unit from the city's registry of rental dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.512. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be expressly provided in section 8.513 hereof, the owner of the rental dwelling shall be responsible for payment of registration, inspection, certificate of rental compliance and other fees involved in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, which fees shall be set forth in the fee schedule. 
(b)  An inspection fee shall include the initial inspection plus one (1) follow-up inspection to determine whether the violations noted in the initial inspection have been corrected. Additional re-inspections necessitated for correction of violations shall be assessed additional re-inspection fees as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.513. - Collection of fees. 
(a)  All required fees shall be paid at the time of submitting application materials and before commencement of scheduled inspections, unless otherwise authorized by the code official. 
(b)  In the event of complaints from a tenant regarding conditions affecting the rental dwelling that have not been addressed by the owner, the department shall have the right to require an inspection of the rental dwelling between regular inspection periods, provided that the tenant shall be responsible for payment of a special inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(c)  If for any reason, fees that are due and payable under this chapter are not paid, a statement of the fees shall be mailed to the owner, or if applicable, the tenant, and shall be paid within fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
Sec. 8.514. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to the relief provided for municipal civil infractions under chapter 15 of the Code. 
(b)  In addition, any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city, in addition to other remedies, may cause to be instituted any appropriate action or proceeding to vacate the premises and/or prevent, abate or restrain the nuisance violation. 
(Ord. No. 1656 , § 1, 3-20-16) 
CHAPTER 104. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 8.601. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to help protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens by preventing blight, protecting property values and neighborhood integrity, avoiding the creation and maintenance of nuisances and ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance of dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings. Further, it is important for the city to be able to contact owners of vacant properties for property maintenance, fire safety and police purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.602. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
(a)  Building means a structure with a roof supported by columns or walls to serve as a shelter or enclosure. 
(b)  City means the city of Southfield, Michigan, a municipal corporation. 
(c)  Director means the Director of the Building and Safety Engineering Department, or his/her designee. 
(d)  Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk, and/or debris, broken or boarded up windows, abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials, the absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupation, current owner's interest in the property has been foreclosed, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents or governmental employees that the property is vacant. 
(e)  Foreclosure or foreclosed means the process by which a mortgage is enforced against a parcel of real property through sale or offering for sale to satisfy the debt of the borrower, or the process by which the property is foreclosed by the Oakland County Treasurer pursuant to the Michigan General Tax Act for delinquent property taxes. 
(f)  Mortgage means a recorded lien or interest in real property to secure payment of a loan. 
(g)  Mortgagee means a person, firm, or corporation holding a mortgage on a property 
(h)  Mortgagor means a borrower under a mortgage, who grants a lien or interest in property to a mortgagee as security for the payment of a debt. 
(i)  Owner means an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation, company, fiduciary, or other person or legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
(j)  Structure means anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on or attachment to the ground and includes buildings. 
(k)  Vacant , or vacant property means an improved lot or parcel of real property with at least one (1) building or structure that: 1) is not currently occupied if a residential structure, or not currently being used for commercial operations if a commercial structure; or 2) shows evidence of vacancy and the owner fails to provide satisfactory evidence to the city substantiating that the building or structure is occupied if a residential structure, or is being used for commercial operations if a commercial structure, after notice thereby by the city, within a period of ten (10) days after the date of the notice. The failure of the owner to timely provide evidence to the city as set forth herein substantiating that the property is occupied if a residential structure or is being used for commercial operations if a commercial structure shall be and constitute prima facie proof that the property is a vacant property. Provided, however, a building or structure which remains furnished, utilities connected or in use, and the property maintained while the owner is absent, shall not be considered vacant. Also, vacant property shall not include any property, building, or structure owned by the city or the Southfield Non-Profit Housing Corporation, or any entity created or established by either the city or the Southfield Non-Profit Housing Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.603 - Registration of vacant property. 
(a)  An owner of a vacant property in the city shall be responsible for registering that property with the department of building and safety engineering by complying with the affidavit and registration and inspection fee requirements in this chapter within the times set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  A vacant property shall be registered within ten (10) days of the vacancy or within ten (10) days of the date of the city's notice deeming the property vacant pursuant to section 8.602 (j) hereof where the owner has not timely submitted satisfactory evidence to the city substantiating that the property is occupied if a residential structure or is being used for commercial operations if a commercial structure. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.604 - Registration affidavit. 
    Owners who are required to register their properties pursuant to this chapter shall do so by submitting a copy of a driver's license and an affidavit containing the information specified in this section. The affidavit may be provided by an authorized agent for an owner. The affidavit shall include the following: 
(a)  The name of the owner of the property; 
(b)  A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be acknowledged as received by the owner. If certified/return receipt requested is sent to the address provided by the owner pursuant hereto and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed" or if ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to properly comply with this section 8.604(b). 
(c)  The name of an individual or legal entity responsible for the care and control of the property. Such individual may be the owner, if the owner is an individual, or may be someone other than the owner provided that the owner has contracted with such person or entity to act as his agent for purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  A current address, telephone number, facsimile number, and email address where communications may be sent that will be acknowledged as received by the individual responsible for the care and control of the property. If certified/return receipt requested mail is sent to the address provided pursuant to this section 8.604(d) and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed", or if ordinary mail sent to the address provided pursuant to this section 8.604(d) is returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to properly comply with the requirements of this section 8.604(d). 
(e)  The owner's covenant that the director, or his designee, will be permitted to inspect the property, including any building or structure situated thereon, in accordance with this chapter, and at such other reasonable times, upon reasonable notice, as determined necessary by the director. 
(f)  An explanation as to the reason for the vacancy of the property. 
    Once a vacant property has been properly registered by the owner, such registration shall be valid and effective for a period not to exceed three hundred sixty-five (365) days, and shall be renewed annually thereafter until the property has become occupied and a certificate of compliance has been issued pursuant to section 8.609 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.605. - Registration, inspection and other fees. 
    All fees applicable to this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Southfield city council, which fees shall include a registration fee, an inspection fee, a re-inspection fee, and such other related fees established by resolution of the city council. There shall also be a fee for the filing of a new owner's affidavit. For properties that are not registered within the required time, an additional fee for the added cost of the city's expenses in having to determine ownership, which may include, but is not limited to, title searches, shall be assessed and immediately payable. The payment of all fees required under this chapter is secured by a lien against the property and if not paid within thirty (30) days after the bill for such fee(s) is rendered, such fee(s) shall be collected as provided in section 1.13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.606. - Requirement to keep information current. 
    If at any time the information contained in the registration affidavit required pursuant to section 8.604 of this chapter is no longer valid, the owner has ten (10) days to file a new affidavit containing valid, current information. There shall be no fee to update an existing registered owner's current information. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.607. - Initial and semi-annual inspections. 
(a)  Vacant or unoccupied buildings or structures, including the surrounding real property, required to be registered in accordance with this chapter shall be subject to an initial safety and maintenance inspection by the director, or his designee, upon registration. The owner shall pay the inspection fees pursuant to section 8.605 hereunder. The owner shall demonstrate, within the course of such inspection, that all building or structure water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC, plumbing systems, exterior finishes and walls, concrete surfaces, accessory buildings, roofing, structural systems, foundation, drainage systems, gutters, doors, windows, parking areas, signage, driveway apron(s), service walk(s), sidewalk(s), and other public areas on the property, are sound, operational, or properly disconnected. In the event such inspection reveals any violations, the owner shall, within ten (10) days, apply for any necessary permits, and shall, within thirty (30) days, or such additional period as permitted by the director, complete all repairs required resulting from such inspection. Following the initial inspection, in order to ensure that vacant buildings and structures are safe, secured, and well-maintained, all vacant or unoccupied buildings or structures, including the surrounding real property, shall be subject to inspections by the director, or his designee, not less than twice annually, until the building or structure is lawfully occupied in accordance with section 8.609 hereof. Any violations of the city code or this chapter which are detected upon any of the semi-annual inspections by the director, or his designee, shall be fully repaired and remedied within thirty (30) days of notice to the owner, or such additional time as permitted by the director. 
(b)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on a property located within the city, shall perform an inspection, to the extent permitted by law or under the mortgage, of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor, within five (5) days after either the filing of a complaint for foreclosure (if foreclosure is by judicial action) or publishing a notice of foreclosure (if foreclosure is by advertisement). Upon such inspection by the mortgagee, if the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed vacant and the mortgagee shall register the property in accordance with this chapter and be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.608. - Maintenance and security requirements. 
    An owner of a vacant property shall comply with all of the following maintenance and security requirements: 
(a)  Property shall be kept free from weeds, grass more than eight (8) inches high, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, signage, containers, equipment, construction materials or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b)  Property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings. 
(c)  All visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and properly maintained. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, trees, shrubs, hedges, or similar plantings. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, cutting, pruning, and mowing of required landscaping and removal of all trimmings. 
(d)  Pools, spas, and other water features shall be covered with an industry approved safety cover and shall also comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of applicable building and existing structures/property maintenance codes and ordinances. 
(e)  Property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and any other opening of such size that may allow a child or other person to access the interior of the property and/or structures. Broken windows must be repaired or replaced with like glazing materials within fourteen (14) days, except as otherwise provided in the existing structures code. Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited except as a temporary measure not to exceed fourteen (14) days. 
(f)  Electrical power and natural gas shall be provided to all vacant or unoccupied building(s) or structure(s) to power all mechanical equipment to maintain a minimum ambient interior temperature of not less than forty-five (45) degrees F during the months of September through April of each calendar year and to power a sump pump. A minimum of a seven (7) watt night light shall be placed in the interior of any vacant residential building or structure on a timer, set so as to turn on at dusk and off at dawn, on both the first and second levels, so as to be visible from the exterior of the residential building or structure. All vacant or unoccupied residential buildings or structures shall have the water shut off at the street and shall have the building properly winterized so as to prevent the bursting of water pipes, unless the building or structure is served by a heating system which requires the use of water. 
(g)  Property shall be maintained in compliance with all other applicable code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.609. - Re-occupancy. 
    A vacant property and any building or structure situated thereon shall not be occupied until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the director within thirty (30) days immediately prior to occupancy, and all violations have been corrected in accordance with the applicable requirements of chapters 100 and 102, as amended from time to time, administered and enforced by the department of building and safety engineering, and other applicable provisions of this Code. All mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and structural systems shall be certified by a licensed contractor or a licensed engineer as being in good operation and repair, if specifically requested by the director. In addition, a certificate of compliance shall not be issued until all outstanding costs, assessments, and/or liens owed to the city have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
Sec. 8.610. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Violations of this article are municipal civil infractions, subjecting persons found responsible for violations to the fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth in chapter 15, section 1.700 et. seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1569 , § 1, 8-9-09; Ord. No. 1672 , § 1, 3-16-17) 
CHAPTER 105. - REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1651 , § 1, adopted February 28, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 104, §§ 8.601-8.603. To avoid duplication of chapter and section numbers with the previous chapter and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 105, §§ 8.701-8.703. Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, adopted April 26, 2018, changed the title of chapter 105 as setout herein. 

Sec. 8.701. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to implement registration and inspection requirements for owners of multiple family residential dwellings in order to facilitate the application and enforcement of city health, building and safety codes and ordinances, as well as state laws regulating or affecting the operation of multiple family residential dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1628 , § 1, 9-7-14; Ord. No. 1651 , § 1, 2-28-16; Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.702. - Definitions. 
(1)  Applicable codes shall mean the current fire prevention, building, property maintenance, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes adopted by the city, and other city ordinances. 
(2)  Code official shall mean a city building official, building inspector, the director of the department, and other persons designated and legally authorized by the director, the city administrator, and/or the city council to administer and enforce this chapter. 
(3)  Common areas shall mean those areas within or on the multiple family residential dwelling premises, including, without limitation, the roof, exterior structures and appurtenances, lobbies, mechanical rooms, and common hallways, stairwells, laundry facilities, basements, fitness areas, multi-purpose rooms, restrooms, and the like. 
(4)  Department shall mean the department of building and safety engineering or any successor department hereafter established. 
(5)  Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(6)  Lease, when used herein as a noun, shall mean a written or unwritten agreement or contract that sets forth the terms and conditions, rights and obligations of each party with respect to a residential dwelling, dwelling unit, building, premises, or structure that is not occupied by the owner. 
(7)  Manager shall mean the person or entity appointed or hired by the owner to be responsible for the daily operation of a multiple family residential dwelling. 
(8)  Multiple family residential dwelling or premises shall mean a multi-family residential rental property under common ownership containing three (3) or more separate living units designed, built, rented, leased, let out or hired out to be occupied, or that are occupied, as residences, but excludes a condominium project as established pursuant to PA 59 of 1978, MCL 559.101 et seq., where occupants own a fee interest in their respective units, and also excludes multiple family residential dwellings which are subject to inspection by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or the Federal Housing Administration upon proof of inspection and compliance being provided to the city. 
(9)  Owner shall mean the person(s) or entities who/which holds title to a multiple family residential dwelling. 
(10)  Resident agent shall mean the person identified by the owner of a multiple family residential dwelling in the registration filed pursuant to this chapter authorized to receive any legal process and/or notice required or provided for in this chapter on behalf of an owner. 
(Ord. No. 1628 , § 1, 9-7-14; Ord. No. 1651 , § 1, 2-28-16; Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.703. - Registration of multiple family residential dwellings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a multiple family residential dwelling in the city without first registering the ownership of such property with the department as required by this chapter. 
(1)  Registration shall be on forms provided by the city and shall consist of the following information: 
(a)  The name of the owner and, if the owner is a corporation, whether foreign or domestic, the registered agent of the owner and the residential or business address of the owner and registered agent, which address information shall include the street name and number, office or suite number if a business address, the city, state, and zip code, and the telephone number of the owner; 
(b)  The nature and extent of the owner's interest in the property. If there is only one (1) owner, the extent of the owner's interest is one hundred (100) percent; 
(c)  The name and business or residence address, including street name and number, city, state, and zip code, of the current manager or management company of the multiple family residential dwelling and, if the manager is other than an individual, the name, title, business address, including street name and number, city, state, and zip code, of the individual to be contacted for any purpose under this chapter relating to the multiple family residential dwelling; 
(d)  The name and business or residential address (including city, state and zip code) and phone number of any contractor or entity responsible for equipment and/or maintenance for designated areas within the premises, such as laundry facilities; and 
(e)  The number and means of identification of all dwelling units within the multiple family residential dwelling. 
(2)  The use of a public or private post office box or other similar address shall not be sufficient for the purposes of complying with this chapter. 
(3)  Any change of ownership of a multiple family residential dwelling, including, but not limited to, the sale of the property or any ownership interest therein, shall require the purchaser or transferee to update the information required under subsection (1) of this section, and to file such updated information with the department within thirty (30) days of the effective date of such ownership change. This same requirement shall apply to any change relating to the owner's registered agent and/or manager or management company. 
(4)  The owner of a multiple family residential dwelling existing on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives shall comply with the provisions of this chapter not later than the thirtieth day following the enactment hereof. The owner of a newly constructed multiple family residential dwelling shall comply with the provisions of this chapter not later than the thirtieth day following issuance of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
(5)  The fee for registration shall be in such amount as the city council shall establish from time to time by resolution. 
(6)  Registration in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be good for the period of one (1) year. 
(7)  It is a violation of this chapter for an owner to provide inaccurate information on the rental application or fail to provide information on the rental application required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1628 , § 1, 9-7-14; Ord. No. 1651 , § 1, 2-28-16; Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.704. - Inspections required. 
(1)  All multiple family residential dwellings shall be scheduled for an initial compliance inspection within ninety (90) days of a property owner first submitting the registration information as set forth in section 8.703 hereof. The inspection shall consist of all common areas within the multiple family residential dwelling and premises, as well as a random sampling of dwelling units as determined by the department in accordance with section 8.705 hereof, to assure compliance with applicable codes. 
(2)  In the event the initial inspection reveals applicable code violation(s), the code official shall provide a written notice of the noted code violation(s) to the property owner and the manager, who shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to correct said code violation(s). More time may be granted by the code official upon request in those situations in which the property owner or manager can demonstrate a justifiable need and the additional time, if granted, will not result in conditions deteriorating further. Less time may also be specified in the notice for correction of code violation(s) in situations involving life or health threatening circumstances. In situations where the violation(s) revealed within the course of an initial inspection reflect a hazard to health and safety, those premises or units which have been or are occupied for dwelling purposes may be ordered vacated by the code official until reinspection and proof of elimination of the condition(s) constituting the hazard to health and safety. If any violation(s) remains uncorrected following the allotted repair time as set forth in the notice, the code official shall issue a violation citation as set forth in section 8.708 hereof. 
(3)  Upon an initial inspection or reinspection(s) revealing that the premises and all dwelling units selected for inspection are in compliance with applicable codes, the department shall issue a certificate of compliance. The certificate of compliance shall be valid for one (1) year except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The certificate of compliance is expressly issued conditioned upon the premises, and all dwelling units situated therein, remaining in a safe, healthful and fit condition for occupancy. If a subsequent inspection(s) reveals condition(s) that reflect a hazard or danger to health or safety, the certificate of compliance shall be immediately suspended or revoked as to the affected area(s) and/or dwelling unit(s), and those premises which have been or are occupied for dwelling purposes may be ordered vacated by the code official until reinspection and proof of elimination of the condition(s) constituting the hazard or danger to health and safety. Upon reinspection and proof of compliance with applicable codes, a certificate of compliance will be reissued. 
(Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.705. - Periodic inspections, intervals, basis. 
(1)  The code official, or his/her authorized representatives or employees, shall inspect, on a periodic basis, multiple family residential dwellings regulated by this chapter. All multiple family residential dwellings shall be subject to an annual inspection, subject to subsection (5) hereof. 
(2)  The department shall prepare an inspection schedule for existing multiple family residential dwellings. Selection of dwelling units for inspection shall be based on a random methodology adopted by the department from time to time, and shall include not less than twenty (20) percent of all dwelling units within each multiple family residential dwelling in the city, subject to the exceptions set forth in section 8.705(5) hereof. 
(3)  Upon inspection of twenty (20) percent of dwelling units within a multiple family residential dwelling as set forth herein, in the event that more than fifty (50) percent of such dwelling units fail the inspection, the department may require that additional dwellings units in such number as the department shall determine (up to one hundred (100) percent of the dwelling units within the premises) shall be inspected by the department. 
(4)  If the most recent inspection of the premises including not less than eighty (80) percent of the dwelling units selected for inspection reveals no violations of applicable codes, the certificate of compliance issued by the department upon such inspection shall be valid for a period of three (3) years and no routine periodic inspections as set forth in section 8.705(2) shall be required during such three (3) year period, provided that any violations existing in the remaining twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units inspected are corrected within the time established by the code official. Provided, however, any inspections initiated pursuant to subsection 5(a), (b), or (e) as set forth hereafter shall remain in effect. If any subsequent inspection(s) reveals condition(s) that reflect a hazard or danger to health or safety the certificate of compliance shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the code official as to the affected area(s) and/or dwelling unit(s), and those premises which have been or are occupied for dwelling purposes may be ordered vacated by the code official until reinspection and proof of elimination of the condition(s) constituting the hazard or danger to health and safety. 
(5)  Provided, however, the department shall have the right to conduct inspections of multiple family residential dwellings and dwelling units situated therein on a different basis or more frequently than as set forth in section 8.705(2) hereof under the following circumstances: 
(a)  Upon a request by a tenant to inspect a unit or the premises; 
(b)  Upon a request by the property owner or manager to inspect a unit(s) or the premises; 
(c)  Upon receipt of information that the multiple family residential dwelling is not registered with the city pursuant to section 8.703 hereof; 
(d)  Upon a recurrent violation basis, under circumstances where the premises have had a high incidence of recurrent or uncorrected violation(s) of applicable codes; 
(e)  Upon receipt of information or knowledge of a threat to life, serious injury or to the public health in connection with the occupancy of a unit or structure, or other emergency including, without limitation, fire, flood, air contamination, infestation, explosion, utility failure, or the like. 
(6)  Except in circumstances involving an imminent threat to life or public health, at least fifteen (15) days prior to an inspection or inspections, the department shall send in writing a notification to the property owner and the manager including the date, time and the unit or units to be inspected. The property owner or manager may request a change in the inspection appointment no less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled inspection; a new inspection appointment shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days from the original appointment. In circumstances involving an imminent threat to life or public health, the department shall notify the property owner and the manager of the inspection with such advance notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(7)  Inspections of the premises and all dwelling units to be inspected shall be scheduled, to the extent practical, on a single day. If the department determines it will require more than one (1) day to conduct the inspections based upon the number of dwelling units to be inspected, the inspections shall occur on multiple, consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.706 - Inspection procedures. 
(1)  The code official shall require the property owner or manager of the premises regulated by this chapter to do one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Notify the tenant(s) of the code official's request to inspect the selected dwelling units, and make a good faith effort to obtain the tenant's consent for the inspection. If the property owner or manager obtains the tenant's consent, the property owner or manager shall arrange with the department for an inspection. For multiple tenants within a dwelling unit notifying at least one (1) of the tenants and requesting and obtaining consent of at least one (1) of the tenants satisfies the notice and consent requirements hereof. 
(b)  Provide the code official with access to the common areas, and to each dwelling unit scheduled to be inspected if: 
i)  The lease authorizes an enforcing agency inspector to enter the dwelling unit for inspection; 
ii)  The tenant has consented to an inspection (if the tenant is not present during the inspection, the code official may rely on the property owner's or manager's representation to the code official that the tenant has consented to the inspection of the dwelling unit); 
iii)  The dwelling unit to be inspected is vacant; or 
iv)  The code official serves an administrative warrant ordering the owner to provide access. 
(2)  A tenant within a multiple family residential dwelling shall provide access to his/her dwelling unit to the code official if: 
i)  The lease authorizes an enforcing agency inspector to enter the dwelling unit for inspection; 
ii)  The tenant has made a complaint to the department; 
iii)  The tenant gives consent; or 
iv)  The code official serves an administrative warrant ordering the tenant to provide access. 
(3)  In a non-emergency situation, where the owner or tenant demands a warrant for inspection of the premises or a dwelling unit, the city shall obtain an administrative warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The city shall prepare the warrant, stating the address or identification number of the structure to be inspected, the nature of the inspection, and the reasons for the inspection. It shall be appropriate and sufficient to set forth the basis of the inspection (e.g. complaint, recurrent violation(s), periodic random basis, etc.) established in section 8.705, in other applicable acts or in rules or regulations. The warrant shall also state that it is issued pursuant to this chapter, and that it is for the purposes set forth in this chapter and other acts which require that inspections be conducted. 
(4)  The code official shall prepare and maintain a list of inspection guidelines to be used in making inspections relative to the enforcement of this chapter. The inspection guidelines shall be based on this chapter and applicable code requirements. A copy of the inspection guidelines shall be available to all property owners, managers, and tenants prior to a scheduled inspection upon request therefor. The inspection guidelines shall not, in any way, limit the scope of provisions contained in applicable codes or enforcement rights of the city, and are provided solely as a courtesy. 
(5)  If, upon inspection of the common areas and/or any dwelling unit within the premises, the code official finds any violation(s) of the applicable codes, the property owner and the manager shall be sent a written notice of the violation(s) noted during the inspection. The property owner shall correct such violation(s) within thirty (30) days or such other time period stated within the written notice. More time may be granted by the code official upon request in those situations in which the property owner or manager can demonstrate a justifiable need and the additional time, if granted, will not result in conditions deteriorating further. Less time may also be specified in the notice for correction of code violation(s) in situations involving life or health threatening circumstances. In situations where the violation(s) revealed within the course of an inspection reflect a hazard to health and safety, those premises or units which have been or are occupied for dwelling purposes may be ordered vacated by the code official until reinspection and proof of elimination of the condition(s) constituting the hazard to health and safety. If any violation remains uncorrected following the allotted repair time as set forth in the notice, the code official shall issue a violation citation as set forth in section 8.708 hereof. 
(6)  Upon an inspection or reinspection(s) revealing that the premises and all dwelling units selected for inspection are in compliance with applicable codes, the department shall issue a certificate of compliance. The certificate of compliance shall be valid for one (1) year except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The certificate of compliance is expressly issued conditioned upon the premises, and all dwelling units situated therein, remaining in a safe, healthful and fit condition for occupancy. If a subsequent inspection(s) reveals condition(s) that reflect a hazard to health and safety, the certificate of compliance shall be immediately suspended as to the affected area(s) and/or dwelling unit(s), and those premises which have been or are occupied for dwelling purposes may be ordered vacated by the code official until reinspection and proof of elimination of the condition(s) constituting the hazard to health and safety. Upon reinspection and proof of compliance with applicable codes, a certificate of compliance will be reissued. 
(Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.707. - Fees. 
    The owner of a multiple family residential dwelling shall be responsible for payment of registration, inspection, and other fees involved in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, which fees shall be as set forth within the fee schedule established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
Sec. 8.708. - Violation and penalties. 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the relief provided for municipal civil infractions under chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(2)  In addition, any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  The city, in addition to other remedies as set forth herein, may cause to be instituted any appropriate action or proceeding to vacate the premises or any dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of applicable codes, and/or to prevent, abate or restrain the nuisance violation. 
(Ord. No. 1692 , § 1, 4-26-18) 
CHAPTER 106. - DEMOLITION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.801. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to ensure that all demolitions of any structure or building within the City of Southfield are performed in a manner that provides the highest level of public health and safety for its residents and property owners and, further, that the overall welfare of the community as a whole is served. The city does further determine that any and all materials resulting from or in connection with the demolition must be completely removed from the property and properly disposed of in accordance with all local, state, and federal requirements and that the property must be vegetated following completion of demolition in order to avoid the future erosion of soil and to control runoff to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.802. - Permit application. 
    All demolition(s) require a permit from the city building department. The application for permit shall include: 
(1)  A complete application on the City of Southfield's form, and shall include a site plan of the building or structure to be demolished; 
(2)  Unaltered copy of the demolition contract signed by the property owner and the person/entity performing the demolition work (evidencing that the property owner has authorized the demolition of the structure(s) on the property); 
(3)  Proof of electric service disconnect; 
(4)  Proof of gas service disconnect; 
(5)  Proof of telephone service disconnect; 
(6)  Proof of cable television/internet disconnect; 
(7)  Soil erosion permit pursuant to chapter 49 of the City Code; 
(8)  Proof of water service disconnect. Disconnection and capping thereof shall be performed by a licensed plumber who has secured all necessary permits, and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city; 
(9)  Proof of sewer service disconnect. Disconnection shall be performed by a licensed plumber who has secured all necessary permits, and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city; 
(10)  Proof of right-of-way permit from the City of Southfield and the State of Michigan Department of Transportation, if applicable; 
(11)  MDEQ asbestos survey, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ten-day notice; 
(12)  Payment of all permit fee(s); 
(13)  Submission of all bonds as required by this chapter; and 
(14)  If demolition is intended to be undertaken by implosion, the provisions of section 8.810 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.803. - Demolition work. 
    Unless directed otherwise by the city in writing, the demolition of all structures and buildings within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Notice. The city and adjoining property owners shall be provided with a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice prior to commencement of the demolition of any structure. 
(b)  Structural parts of buildings. 
(1)  No wall or part thereof shall be permitted to fall outwardly from any building except through chutes or by other controlled means or methods, which will ensure safety and minimize dust, noise, and other nuisance. 
(2)  Subject to site restrictions, outside chimneys or outside portions of chimneys shall be razed in advance of general demolition of each building. Any portion of a chimney inside a building shall be razed as soon as it becomes unsupported by reason of removal of other parts of the building. 
(3)  Any part of a building, whether structural, collateral, or accessory, which has become unstable through removal of other parts, shall be removed as soon as practicable and no such unstable part shall be left freestanding or inadequately braced against all reasonably possible causes of collapse at the end of any working day. 
(c)  Basements and foundation walls. All basement floors, footings, and foundations shall be completely removed from the site unless specifically stated in the special provisions of the approved demolition permit. The basement area is to be inspected and approved by the city before backfilling is started. No basement excavation shall remain open and exposed for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Failure to have the basement area inspected and approved by the city prior to backfilling will result in re-excavation of the basement area. 
(d)  Concrete slabs. All concrete slabs, asphalt, surface obstructions, masonry slabs, and appurtenances shall be removed. 
(e)  Retaining walls. All retaining walls or curbs shall be removed unless otherwise indicated in the approved demolition permit. Where such retaining walls or curbs are removed, the embankment shall be graded to a slope of not greater than 3:1 horizontal:vertical or as directed by the city. 
(f)  Partially buried objects. All piping, posts, reinforcing bars, anchor bolts, railings, and all other partly buried objects protruding from the ground shall be removed. The remaining void shall be filled with soil and compacted in accordance with this chapter; no objects are permitted to be buried. 
(g)  Vegetation. All dead trees, trees or other vegetation identified for removal, stumps, brush, and weeds, whether standing or fallen, unless specifically stated otherwise by the city shall be removed. All trees and bushes not to be removed as part of the demolition operations shall be adequately protected from damage or injury. 
(h)  Fences. Fences, guardrails, bumpers, signs, clotheslines, and similar facilities shall be completely removed from the site; however, fences on the apparent boundary between a parcel upon which the demolition is intended and an improved noncontract parcel shall not be removed unless specifically stated in the special provisions. All posts for support shall be pulled out or dug up so as to be entirely removed. 
(i)  Fuel tanks. Fuel tanks, above or below ground, shall be carefully removed and disposed of in a safe manner in accordance with the state fire marshal's regulations and those of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. Fuel tanks, above or below the ground, or tanks which have been used for storage of gasoline, kerosene, benzene, oils or similar volatile materials shall be pumped out or emptied in a safe manner, and then shall be flushed out immediately with water, carbon dioxide, or nitrogen gas until they are gas free when checked with an "explosimeter" or another equally efficient instrument, before the work of removal is begun. Inspection of the "explosimeter" results shall be undertaken by competent personnel of the person or entity performing the demolition work and shall be done in the presence of designated city personnel. The time, place and manner of disposal will be as set forth in the demolition schedule. 
(j)  Outdoor toilets and septic tanks. Outdoor toilets and septic tanks shall be pumped out by a licensed hauling company. The outdoor toilet or septic tank shall be demolished and removed from the site. The excavation or pit shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with this chapter. Adequate quantities of lime shall be added to the backfill material. Septic tanks shall be broken up and removed from the site and the excavation filled in accordance with the requirements of the City of Southfield. 
(k)  Cisterns and meter pits. Cisterns and meter pits shall be demolished, removed, and properly disposed of and the excavations resulting therefrom shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with this chapter. 
(l)  Well plugging and abandonment. All wells shall be plugged and abandoned in accordance with the State of Michigan and the County of Oakland Regulations. The abandoned water well plugging record shall be filed with the city upon completion of the well abandonment. 
(m)  Appliances. Appliances and other items that may contain refrigerants, or freon, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, dehumidifiers, and portable or central air conditioners, shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
(n)  Mercury containing materials. Any mercury containing materials including fluorescent, high pressure sodium, mercury vapor, and metal halide light bulbs, and thermostats containing a liquid filled capsule and PCB containing materials include capacitors, ballasts, and transformers where the component is contained within a metal jacket and does not have a specific, legible label stating no PCBs are present, shall be completely removed and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. 
(o)  The property upon which the demolition occurs shall be backfilled, graded, and restored in accordance with section 8.809 hereof. 
(p)  All demolition work shall be undertaken and completed in accordance with the approved plans, technical specifications, and any special provisions included in the approved demolition permit document. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.804. - Protection of the public and properties. 
(a)  Littering streets. 
(1)  All demolition debris, litter, dirt, and/or mud resulting from or in connection with the execution of the demolition work shall be promptly removed from any street, alley, or right-of-way. If it is not so removed, the city shall have the right to undertake the removal thereof, and the cost incurred by the city in cleaning up any such debris, litter, dirt and/or mud shall be charged to the person or entity performing the demolition work and be deducted from the demolition completion bond. 
(2)  Littering of the property and any adjacent properties shall not be permitted and shall be promptly collected and removed as it is generated. 
(3)  All waste materials shall be promptly removed from the site. 
(b)  Street closure. 
(1)  If it should become necessary to close any street, road, and/or traffic lanes, applicable permits shall be obtained from the City of Southfield (Public Works Department), the Oakland County Road Commission, or Michigan Department of Transportation, depending on which entity has jurisdiction of the roadway or lanes to be closed, and adequate barricades and warning signs as required by such entity shall be installed and maintained. 
(c)  Protection of the public property. 
(1)  Sidewalks. The person or entity performing the demolition work shall be responsible for any damage or injury to any public sidewalk, street, water or sewer facilities, fire hydrants, street lights, traffic signals, power poles, telephone poles, fire alarm boxes, wire cables, underground utilities, or other appurtenances or other public property of any kind, resulting from or in connection with the execution of the demolition work. Failure to repair the public property after notice will result in the city undertaking to have the work completed and the cost thereof will be deducted from the demolition completion bond. 
(2)  Pedestrian access. Appropriate warning signs, barricades, temporary fencing around all excavation and demolition areas, and temporary pedestrian sidewalks to maintain alternate pedestrian access for sidewalks around the demolition site, shall be installed as directed by the city, and shall be maintained in place until all demolition work has been completed in accordance with this chapter. The temporary fencing around the demolition and excavation areas shall be at least four (4) feet in height, consistently restrictive from top to grade, and without horizontal openings wider than two inches. The safety fence shall remain in place until the demolished materials are removed from the site and all holes or excavated areas are properly backfilled and graded pursuant to section 8.809 hereof. 
(d)  Demolition Hours. 
(1)  Demolition and related activities shall only be undertaken during such hours as permitted pursuant to section 9.11 of the City Code. All construction equipment used in conjunction with the demolition work shall be in good repair and adequately muffled. 
(e)  Dust control. All applicable air pollution control requirements of the City of Southfield, the County of Oakland, the State of Michigan, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency shall be observed and appropriate reasonable precautions to minimize atmospheric pollution shall be undertaken as may be required by the aforementioned governmental entities or their designated representatives. Such reasonable precautions shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The use of water or chemicals for control of dust in the demolition of buildings or structures and the grading of excavated areas. If using a hydrant for dust control, a permit is required and must be obtained from the City of Southfield Water Department. 
(2)  Open bed trucks transporting materials likely to give rise to airborne dust shall be covered at all times when in motion. 
(f)  Requirements for the reduction of fire hazards. 
(1)  Removal of material. Before demolition of any part of any building, all volatile or flammable materials, such as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, cleaning fluids, paints, thinners, and similar substances, shall be removed from the property. 
(2)  Fire extinguishing equipment. The correct type and class of fire extinguisher shall be kept on site. When a cutting torch or other equipment that might cause a fire is being used, a fire extinguisher shall be placed close at hand for instant use. 
(3)  Fires. No fires of any kind shall be permitted on or in the demolition work area. 
(4)  Hydrants. No material, obstructions or debris shall be placed or allowed to accumulate within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant. All fire hydrants shall be accessible at all times. 
(5)  Debris. Debris shall not be allowed to accumulate on roofs, floors, or in areas outside of and around any structure being demolished. 
(6)  Telephone service. Access to and use of, during working hours, one (1) or more telephones, land lines or cell phones in the vicinity of the work site for the purposes of making calls in case of fire or other emergencies shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.805. - Special conditions bond; maintenance and guarantee bonds. 
(a)  It is understood that sites and properties may have environmental or other special concerns that would affect the ability to remove one hundred (100) percent of the impervious surfaces at the time of demolition of the structure. A redevelopment soon after demolition could have a site plan approved in advance of the demolition or be speculative. A subsurface contamination issue could cause a site to need to keep all or part of the impervious surfaces(s) for an extended period until remediation could be accomplished. In cases involving environmental related issues, if an owner wishes to only partially remove the hard surfaces from a site, the owner/applicant, at time of application, must provide the city with, at minimum, the results of ASTM (E1527 and E1903) Phase 1 and Phase 2 environmental assessments which have been filed and disclosed to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality showing that the property or portion of a property is contaminated as described in PA 451 of 1994, the Natural REsources and Environmental Protection Act. 
    A special conditions bond shall be placed by the owner of the property when special conditions exist that would require that all or part of the structure or its appurtenances not be completely removed as part of the demolition. These conditions shall be part of the approved demolition permit. A bond covering one hundred twenty (120) percent of the cost of the demolition that is not intended to be immediately undertaken shall be posted with the city to assure that if the redevelopment does not occur, or a site plan is not approved, or other identified special condition does not occur, that the City of Southfield is entitled to use the special conditions bond to complete the demolition if necessary. If a cash bond is held by the city and later returned, such bond shall be returned without interest. 
(b)  A maintenance and guarantee bond shall be placed by the owner of the property for installed seed or sod areas for a period of one (1) year from final inspection and approval to assure that all planting areas have established vegetation both for compliance with the zoning ordinance and state law. If a cash bond is held by the city and later returned, such bond shall be returned without interest. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.806. - Demolition completion bond. 
(a)  A demolition completion bond is required before any permit is issued for demolition. This bond is in addition to any bonds required for special conditions, maintenance and guarantee, and soil erosion. The bond is to assure that all of the requirements found in this chapter are adhered to. If the person or entity fails to follow the requirements of this chapter, the building official may declare an emergency, and after posting the unsafe condition for twenty-four (24) hours may use the bond money to assure compliance with this chapter. Demolitions that are contracted by the city are exempt from the bond requirements. The first twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) of demolition completion bonds shall be posted in cash with the city; after twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in cash has been posted for demolition completion bonds exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) (as calculated below), the balance may be posted using an insurance surety bond. In addition to the compliance measures stated above, the City of Southfield may also use the cash portion of the bond to pay any necessary legal or administrative expenses associated with gaining compliance with the surety company. Unused bonds shall be returned without interest after final inspection. 
(b)  The demolition completion bond amount shall be calculated and charged as follows: 
(1)  One- and two-family residential demolition bond: ..... $500.00 
(2)  Multi-family residential, commercial, industrial demolition bond, minimum ..... 5,000.00 
5,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus $0.10 per square foot ..... 5,000.00 
100,001 to 250,000 square feet, plus $0.05 per square foot ..... 10,000.00 
250,001 to 1,000,000 square feet, plus $0.02 per square foot ..... 12,500.00 
Over 1,000,001 square feet, plus $0.01 per square foot ..... 20,000.00 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.807. - Salvage of demolition materials. 
    No salvage will be permitted on privately owned property unless authorized by the property owner in writing or as directed by the courts. Salvaged material shall be removed immediately from the premises, right-of-way, streets, or alleys. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.808. - Disposal of demolition debris and solid waste. 
(a)  Debris. All materials, rubbish, and trash shall be removed from the demolition area leaving the basements and demolition area free of debris. Any cost incurred by the city in cleaning up such materials and debris left behind shall be deducted from the demolition completion bond. 
(b)  Tires. The contractor shall assure no tires have been abandoned on site. 
(c)  Disposal of demolition debris and solid waste. All debris and solid waste shall be delivered by the contractor to an approved disposal facility licensed in accordance with state and/or local regulations, laws, and zoning. 
(d)  Asbestos abatement. The handling of asbestos material is subject to all applicable state and federal mandates. The person or firm performing the demolition is responsible for compliance with all applicable regulations regarding the handling and disposal of asbestos. Asbestos shall be removed by a licensed abatement contractor in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(e)  Demolition of structures with transite siding. Transite sidings shall be properly handled, and all demolition debris from these structures shall be disposed of in accordance with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.809. - Backfill, grading, and cleanup. 
(a)  Backfill. When site conditions permit, as determined by the building official or the city's designated engineer, on-site soil may be used as backfill material. The top nine (9) to twelve (12) inches of topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled on site for use as final topsoil and grading material. If adequate topsoil is not available on site, the contractor shall bring in enough topsoil from off site to place a minimum four-inch cover on the entire site. Excess excavation materials shall be removed from the site. Topsoil material shall not be permitted as deep fill material. Any borrow or fill material shall be approved by the building official or the city's designated engineer, during the placing of the material. All fill material shall be of equal quality to the soil adjacent to the excavation and free of rubble or organic matter. All depressions on the property shall be filled, compacted to ninety-five (95) percent capacity, and graded to a uniform slope with adequate drainage. 
(b)  Compaction. All excavations shall be backfilled in accordance with subsection 8.809(a) and compacted to ninety five (95) percent capacity. 
(c)  Grading and restoration. The site shall be graded to conform to all surrounding areas and shall be finished to have a uniform surface that shall not permit ponding of water. The demolition site shall be restored. Restoration shall include appropriate smoothing to its original condition and include seeding with mulch of the area. Seeding shall conform to the current edition of the urban standard specifications for public improvements except as may be modified by this Code. The seed shall be applied at one hundred twenty-two (122) percent of the specified rate for the type of mixture specified. Sod must be used in place of seed and mulch on all right-of-way areas. On demolition sites where seeding will be delayed because of the allowable seeding dates, the contractor shall complete fine grading and shaping of the site to leave the site in a neat and presentable condition subject to the soil erosion permit and approval of the city's applicable regulations. 
(d)  Final cleanup. Before final approval of the demolition permit, all unused material and rubbish shall be removed and all adjacent property and right-of-way impacted by the demolition shall be left in a neat and presentable condition. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Sec. 8.810. - Implosion requirements. 
    If demolition is intended to be undertaken by implosion of all or any portion of a structure and/or its appurtenances, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  The demolition permit application shall include a project overview which shall expressly identify and describe the following, and which project overview shall be subject to the review and approval of the city: 
(1)  Project time line starting twenty-four (24) hours prior to the implosion through the post implosion re-opening of roads and securing of properties; 
(2)  Sequence of intended activities; 
(3)  Name and contact information of the person(s) who will be the overall coordinator for the project; 
(4)  Traffic control plan, including all specific road and/or lane closures; 
(5)  Fencing plan; 
(6)  Crowd control plan; 
(7)  Weather projections and alternate plans due to weather related issues; 
(8)  Quality control and safety measures. These measures shall include loading of explosives, initiation of explosive charge, protection of adjacent private and public properties, who will be allowed to access the site, etc. 
(9)  Identify all third party consultants, including seismic consultant, sound monitoring consultant, safety consultant, etc. 
(10)  Seismic and air monitoring plan, including a site map showing the location/placement of all seismic and air monitoring devices, pre and post event summary, etc. 
(11)  Licensing and permit information, identifying all applicable licenses held by any firm/entity performing any implosion related services, and all permits required by appropriate governmental agencies. 
(12)  Adjacent properties plan, identifying all such adjacent or affected properties and what notification has or will be made with such properties regarding the intended implosion. 
(13)  Local utilities plan, including notification to all affected utilities (gas, power, telephone, water, sanitation, cable, etc.), review of intended activities and safety checks for both pre and just prior to implosion, and utility termination and disconnection letters where applicable. 
(14)  Written evidence of the following insurance coverage shall be provided, and shall name the City of Southfield, and its officials, employees, and agents, as additional named insured, and other governmental agencies shall be included as additional named insured as warranted: 
(i)  Commercial general liability including coverage for: 
(a)  Premises/operations. 
(b)  Products/completed operations. 
(c)  Independent contractors. 
(d)  Personal injury. 
(e)  Contractual liability. 
(ii)  Limits of liability: 
Each occurrence: ..... $2,000,000 
Personal injury: ..... 2,000,000 
General aggregate: ..... 2,000,000 
Product/completed operations: ..... 2,000,000 
Minimum excess/umbrella liability 
Each occurrence ..... 25,000,000 
General aggregate ..... 25,000,000 
(b)  On the day of implosion, the following protocol shall be followed: 
(1)  All perimeter safety fencing shall have been installed; 
(2)  A blast zone, a safety zone, and an extended zone shall be established and enforced; 
(3)  Adequate law enforcement, fire department, and/or private security shall be situated at/near the property, and site radios will be provided to assure appropriate communication through the time of implosion; 
(4)  Countdown will be as indicated on the time line submitted, including a two-hour to implosion check, a one-hour to implosion check, one-half-hour to implosion check, a twenty-minute to implosion check, and a ten-minute to implosion check. There will be a thirty-second countdown prior to implosion. 
(5)  Provisions shall be made to halt the countdown in the event any participant in the implosion process deems it necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1652 , § 1, 2-28-16) 
Title IX - POLICE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police department, § 1.101 et seq.; business and trades, tit. VII; traffic, tit. X. 

CHAPTER 111. - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9.1. - Nuisance defined and prohibited. 
    Whatever injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency, interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.2. - Abatement. 
    Any action taken by the city to abate any nuisance shall not affect the right of the city to institute proceedings against the person committing, creating or maintaining any nuisance for violation of this Code, nor affect the imposition of the penalty prescribed for such violation. As an additional remedy, upon application by the city to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. 
Sec. 9.3. - Nuisances per se. 
    The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant water so as to provide a breeding place for mosquitos or otherwise to endanger the public health or safety; 
(2)  The throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is in the opinion of the health officer dangerous or detrimental to public health, or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, firm or corporation of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluids, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other offensive article or substance whatever; 
(3)  The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by, or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul or nauseous liquid or water, creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any steam, vapor or gas; 
(4)  The emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(5)  The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person; 
(6)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code, or statutes of the state; 
(7)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of thirty (30) days or longer, and which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the public; 
(8)  All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to attract the public; 
(9)  The owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor vehicles which are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall, or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. Provided, however, that under circumstances determined by the city administrator to be in the public interest, he may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the city for any extraordinary maintenance expenses incurred by the city in connection with such violation; 
(Ord. No. 1138, § 2, 4-23-84; Ord. No. 1458, § 2, 11-13-00) 
Cross reference- Burying garbage likely to attract rats or other animals, prohibited, § 2.9; discharge of polluted waters prohibited, § 2.103; safety requirements for street excavations, § 4.31 et seq.; soil removal and landfill excavations regulated, § 5.261; interference with surface water drainage during soil stripping operations prohibited, § 5.262; restoring proper drainage to landfill sites required, § 5.263; peddlers generally, § 7.51 et seq.; transient merchants generally, § 7.71 et seq.; regulation of controlled substances, § 9.391 et seq. 
Secs. 9.4-9.9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Peddlers creating noise to attract attention prohibited, § 7.59; auctioneers not to create excessive noise, § 7.184; permitting noise or music to emit from dance halls prohibited, § 7.228; harboring noisy dogs, § 9.69. 

Sec. 9.10. - Excessive noise declared nuisance. 
    All loud or unusual noises or sounds and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
Sec. 9.11. - Specific offenses. 
    Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person; 
(2)  Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit be first obtained from the city department of building and safety engineering; 
(3)  Sound amplifiers. Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose except one which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech; 
(b)  Operations are permitted for four (4) hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four (4) hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.; 
(c)  Sound-amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour except when such truck is stopped or impeded by traffic; 
(d)  Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools or churches; 
(e)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound-amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility; 
(f)  No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification; 
(g)  The restrictions hereinabove contained in subparagraphs (a) to (f) inclusive shall not apply to the use of church bells and school bells; 
(4)  Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom; 
(5)  Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers; 
(6)  Blowers. The discharge into the open air of air from any noise-creating blower or power fan unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise; 
(7)  Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner; 
(8)  Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horns or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; 
(9)  Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity; 
(10)  Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any school, place of worship or office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity; 
(11)  Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(12)  Motor vehicles-Sound systems. The operating or permitting the operation of a radio, tape player, disc player or other sound system, machine or device in or on a moving or parked motor vehicle so as to produce sound that is louder than is necessary for hearing by the person or persons who are in the motor vehicle or which offends the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 1, 4-11-77; Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 8-27-90) 
Sec. 9.12. - Exceptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of section 9.11 shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state, during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
Secs. 9.13-9.20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKE CONTROL 

Sec. 9.21. - Dense smoke prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind, nor shall any person owning any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind permit the same to be operated, in a manner so as to emit dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof; provided, that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period of twenty (20) minutes in any one (1) hour, once in every twenty-four (24) hours, when a new fire is being kindled, shall not constitute a violation of this chapter; and, provided further, that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period aggregating eight (8) minutes in any one (1) hour and not exceeding two (2) minutes of continuous emission, shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 9.22. - Smoke measurements. 
    For the purpose of defining the term "dense smoke" which shall constitute a prohibited density hereunder, the standards established by the "Ringelmann Smoke Chart," 1955 Edition, are hereby adopted, as published by the Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines (IC 7718) with its accompanying publication written by Ralph Rudolph Kudlich and revised by L.R. Durdick, as published by Bureau of Mines, Publication-Distribution Section, 4800 Forbes Street, Pittsburgh 13, Pennsylvania, in accordance with Department of Interior Public Notice Number 84932. Smoke of a density equal to or greater than the density described as a number two (2) on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be considered and held to be "dense smoke" as the term is used in this chapter. 
Secs. 9.23, 9.24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 

Sec. 9.25. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person shall have in his possession, either inside or outside of any building, structure or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other similar airtight container of any kind which has a snap latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the snap latch or other locking device, or the doors, from such icebox, refrigerator or other similar container. 
Secs. 9.26-9.40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOXIOUS WEEDS 

Sec. 9.41. - Noxious weeds. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Department shall be the Department of Public Service of the City of Southfield. 
(b)  Director shall be the Director of the Department of Public Service of the City of Southfield, or his agent. 
(c)  Noxious weeds shall include Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscata), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (convolvulos arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior l.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), all weeds of any variety which are found growing or standing in excess of twelve (12) inches in height measured from the surface of the ground, and any other plant which by resolution of the city council is declared a common nuisance. 
(2)  The owner of land on which noxious weeds are found growing shall destroy the weeds before they reach a seed-bearing stage and shall prevent their regrowth, or shall prevent them from becoming a detriment to public health. 
(3)  The director may notify by certified mail with return receipt requested, the owner, agent, or occupant of any land on which noxious weeds are found growing. The notice shall describe methods of treating and eradicating the noxious weeds and a summary of the provisions of this section. Failure of the director to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for or debt created under this section. If the owner, agent, or occupant refuses to destroy the noxious weeds or cause them to be destroyed, the directors shall enter upon the land and destroy the noxious weeds or cause them to be destroyed. Any expense incurred in the destruction shall be paid by the owner or owners of the land, and the city, shall have a lien against the land for the amount of the expense, which lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by section 1.13 of this Code. 
(4)  Instead of the notice required by subsection (3), the city may publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city during the month of March that weeds not cut by May 1 of that year may be cut by the city and the owner of the property charged with the cost under the provisions of subsection (3). The publication shall also contain all other information required of the notice provided for in subsection (3). The city may cut weeds as many times as is necessary and charge the cost to the property owner. 
(5)  In the event that the owner, agent, or occupant of any subdivided land in any subdivision in which buildings have been erected on sixty (60) percent of the lots included in that subdivision, or the owners, agents, or occupants of lots along all improved streets in common usage, for a depth of one hundred sixty-five (165) feet or the depth of the lots, whichever is the lesser, has failed, after ten (10) days' notice as provided in this section, to destroy the weeds or cause them to be destroyed, then any official, inspector, or other agent authorized by the governing body of the city may enter upon the subdivided land or lots and destroy by cutting, with or without mechanical equipment which will not damage the property or the adjacent sidewalk, any noxious weeds. Any expense incurred in the destruction shall be paid by the owner or owners of the subdivided land. The city shall have a lien upon the subdivided land or lots for the amount of the expense, the lien to be enforced in manner prescribed by section 1.13 of this Code. 
(6)  Power to enter upon lands; exception. Express power is hereby granted to the director of public service or his agents to enter upon lands and destroy noxious weeds. Nothing in this section shall apply to weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crop such as wheat, oats, barley or rye, or to railroad property, or to land owned by any instrumentality of government. 
(7)  The director of public service is hereby charged with the enforcement of this section. The director may designate one (1) or more agents to act as director for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 1, 4-10-89) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7; official notice to abate nuisances, § 1.14; general penalty for violation of Code, § 1.15. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC NUDITY 

Sec. 9.42. - Findings. 
    It is hereby determined that it is necessary to prohibit nudity in public places within the boundaries of the city to protect public morals and societal order and to help prevent prostitution, sexual assault, and associated crimes as recognized by the United States Supreme Court in the case of Barnes v Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and Erie v Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000). 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 9-11-00) 
Sec. 9.43. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Nudity" means the showing, in a public place, of any individual's genitals, pubic area or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola, except that a woman's breast feeding of a baby shall not constitute nudity, irrespective of whether or not the nipple or areola is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(b)  "Public place" means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal, or similar organizations. "Public place" shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctor's offices, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein; nor shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the state, or a state-accredited public or private college, junior college, or university. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 9-11-00) 
Sec. 9.44. - Public nudity prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear in a state of nudity in a public place within the city. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any theatrical production performed in a theater by a professional or amateur theatrical or musical company which has serious, artistic merit. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 9-11-00) 
ARTICLE VII. - OBSCENE MOVIES 

Sec. 9.45. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of section 9.46, the word "obscene" is defined as whether material considered as a whole, its predominant appeal is to prurient, shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, excretion, sadism or masochism; it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in describing or representing such matters; that the material is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters; it is utterly without redeeming social value. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.46. - Unlawful to exhibit obscene movies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motion picture theater in the city, and for any employee, ticket seller, ticket taker, usher, motion picture machine operator and any other person connected with or employed by any such person, to knowingly exhibit, or to show or exhibit or to aid or assist in the exhibition of any obscene motion picture, slide or exhibit in the city. 
Sec. 9.47. - Nuisance per se. 
    Violation of section 9.46 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, as well as punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1.15. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALARM SYSTEMS AND DEVICES 

Sec. 9.48. - Operating and permit requirements for alarm systems and devices. 
(1)  Purpose, general powers, and duties. The city council determines that there exists an unjustified increase in the amount of public safety resources expended in responding to false alarms for emergency assistance, that can be avoided, provided that alarm devices incorporate appropriate design techniques, necessary features, be properly installed, regularly maintained, and properly utilized. In order to reduce the burden imposed upon the general public caused by false alarms, the police department shall establish a program for: 
(a)  Informing the public of methods to minimize false alarms; 
(b)  Issuing permits for alarm systems; 
(c)  Developing policy and criteria for identifying those false alarms that are avoidable through the application of proper system design, installation, maintenance, training, application, use, and equipment features. 
(d)  Creating, maintaining and analyzing records and data necessary for determining whether a particular alarm response was to a "false alarm" and if so, whether the false alarm was attributable to an avoidable deficiency in design, application, use, or other similar cause; 
(e)  Determining whether a particular false alarm was caused by one or more avoidable deficiency; suspending or revoking alarm permits for installations that are determined to be the source of excessive false alarms caused by one or more avoidable deficiency; providing information to the public that will alleviate, or cure, avoidable deficiencies in alarms, alarm systems, and their application and operation. 
    All citizens of the city shall abide by this section, all regulations promulgated under the authority of this section, and co-operate fully with the police department for the realization of these objectives. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(a)  "Alarm system" means any assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device, except for an alarm system on a motor vehicle, that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon police services of the city. 
(b)  "Alarm user" includes the owner of the land or premises within which an alarm system is installed; the tenant, occupant, or person having possession or control of any premises in which an alarm system is installed; and, any person having actual or constructive possession of an alarm system, when such alarm system signals an emergency. 
(c)  "Chief" means the chief of police of the City of Southfield, acting personally or through a duly authorized representative. 
(d)  "Emergency" means a hazard, condition, or situation calling for immediate action or urgent attention and to which municipal public safety personnel are customarily expected to respond on an immediate or high priority basis. 
(e)  "False alarm" means a signal given by an alarm system when no emergency is found by the public safety personnel that respond to the alarm. 
(f)  "Public safety personnel" includes city police officers, dispatchers, firemen and other employees of the City of Southfield who provide emergency services to persons and/or to property within the city. 
(g)  "Supervisor" shall mean the police crime prevention bureau section supervisor, or the incumbent of any successor position. 
(3)  Automatic dialing prohibited. No person shall install or use a device or combination of devices which will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other means, initiate the automatic intrastate calling, dialing, or connection to any telephone number assigned to the city police department, the city public safety department, or the 911 emergency number which connects or assigns the call to the department or its dispatchers. 
(4)  Automatic shut-off required. All alarm systems hereafter installed which emit a signal audible beyond the boundaries of the property protected must have an automatic shut-off feature, which silences the audible portion of the alarm not more than fifteen (15) minutes after being tripped. All persons shall terminate the use of existing alarm systems which lack this automatic shut-off feature within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this section [July 1, 1991]. 
(5)  Permit required. All alarm systems installed, maintained or used within the city, shall require an alarm permit as provided herein. 
(6)  Time to obtain permit. Permits must be obtained for alarm systems in existence on the effective date of this section [July 1, 1991] within sixty (60) days thereafter. In all other cases, a permit must be obtained before the system is installed and used. It is unlawful to cause or allow an alarm system requiring a permit to be used unless there is then a current, valid permit in force for that system. 
(7)  Responsibility of supervisor. The supervisor has primary responsibility for the administration of this section. By way of example and not limitation, the supervisor shall promulgate procedures, regulations, and guidelines; establish a system for notifying an alarm user each time public safety personnel respond to a false alarm; develop a program that provides each alarm user an opportunity to submit a written or oral explanation for each false alarm; provide a system for recording and keeping records of alarm permits, activation or sounding of alarms, false alarms, and "at fault" alarms; and establish procedures for appealing any final decision of the supervisor to the chief of police. 
(8)  Applications; contents. Applications for permits shall be filed with the Southfield police department on forms provided and furnished by the city. The alarm user shall provide the following: 
(a)  The alarm user's name, address and telephone number; 
(b)  The street address of the property at which the alarm system is maintained; 
(c)  At the alarm user's option, the name, address and telephone number of the alarm company which installed and/or monitors the alarm system, if any; 
(d)  An affirmation, in writing and signed by the alarm user, which states that the alarm system is equipped with a functional automatic shut-off device, as required by subsection (4) of this section. 
(9)  Fee for permit. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a permit fee shall be paid to the city in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The fee charges shall be periodically reviewed and adjusted, but the revenues generated by them shall not exceed the city's direct and indirect costs of processing, issuing, and administering this section. 
(10)  Issuance of permit. The supervisor shall act upon each application within a reasonable time and shall issue a permit when it determines that the application and proposed alarm system conform to the requirements of this section, the other provisions of the Southfield City Code, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(11)  Expiration of permit. Every alarm permit shall expire three (3) years from the date of issue except that renewal permits shall expire three (3) years from the expiration date of the prior permit. 
(12)  Amendment of permit. An individual having been issued an alarm permit shall promptly notify the supervisor, in writing, whenever the information contained in the application for permit is no longer accurate. 
(13)  Revocation or suspension of permit. The supervisor may, in the exercise of sound discretion, revoke, or suspend for any period of time, an alarm permit when it determines that any of the following grounds exist: 
(a)  The permit was improperly issued; 
(b)  Nonpayment of any fee required under the provisions of this section; 
(c)  The alarm system has been the source of excessive "at fault" alarms; 
(d)  The alarm system has not been maintained and utilized in conformity with the provisions of this section or regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(14)  Due care in operation required. Every alarm user shall exercise due care to install, maintain and use every alarm system so as to avoid its signalling false alarms. Every alarm user shall diligently instruct, supervise, and control those having access to the alarm system and the alarmed premises, and shall take all reasonable steps to prevent the system from signalling false alarms. 
(15)  Excessive alarms. Alarm systems which signal more than three (3) "at fault" alarms in any twelve (12) consecutive month period are deemed to be abusive of public safety personnel, are declared to be a public nuisance, and are deemed an "excessive" number of at fault false alarms for purposes of section (13) of this section. 
(16)  Explanation for false alarm. The supervisor shall notify each alarm user each time public safety personnel respond to a "false alarm", and offer the alarm user the opportunity to submit a written explanation for the actuation of the alarm. Should the alarm user, after such notice, fail to provide a written explanation to the supervisor within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of such notification, the alarm will be deemed an "at fault" false alarm. 
(17)  Determination of "at fault" false alarm; "due care." The supervisor shall conduct an investigation concerning the explanation for the false alarm submitted by an alarm user according to (16) above. The supervisor shall, after investigation, make one of the following determinations: 
(a)  If the alarm was activated because of an emergency situation, the false alarm is excused. 
(b)  If the alarm was activated because of a situation that was not an emergency, and the false alarm was avoidable if due care had been exercised, the false alarm is an "at fault" alarm. 
(c)  If the alarm was activated because of a situation that was not an emergency, and the false alarm was not avoidable by the exercise of due care, the false alarm is excused. 
    The city council shall from time to time, by resolution, establish guidelines which the supervisor shall apply in determining whether an alarm was activated because of an emergency, and whether due care was exercised by the alarm user. 
(18)  Fee charged for responding to at fault alarms. Every alarm user shall pay to the city a fee for responding to the third and subsequent "at fault" false alarms signaled by that person's alarm system within any twelve (12) consecutive month period. The schedule of false alarm fees shall be periodically set by resolution of city council, but the fee shall not exceed the city's direct and indirect costs of responding to "at fault" false alarms, administering the system of recording and classifying the alarms, and collecting and accounting for the user fees charged. Such fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days of written notice, shall be a debt in favor of the city, and the obligation of the alarm user. 
(19)  Corrective action. The supervisor may initiate a corrective action in the event excessive "at fault" false alarms are signaled by any alarm system. Such corrective actions may include one or more of the remedies enumerated in this section, institution of ordinance violation proceedings, imposition and collection of user fees by billing and/or prosecution of civil actions, and the institution of civil proceedings for court-ordered abatement of nuisances. All of these remedies shall be cumulative. 
(20)  Appeal of supervisors decisions. All administrative actions and decisions of the supervisor under this section may be appealed to the Southfield police chief, upon filing a request in writing, with the supervisor, within ten (10) days of the supervisor's decision. The chief of police is hereby vested with all power and authority of the supervisor under this section, and may affirm, reverse, or modify any such decision of the supervisor. 
(21)  Presumption as to "alarm user". For purposes of prosecuting violations of the penal provisions of this section, and for purposes of collecting the fees incurred because of excessive "at fault" false alarms, "alarm user" is presumed to be that person whose name appears on the most recent assessment roll approved by the board of review, as updated, associated with the real or personal property protected by the alarm system. 
(22)  Fees assessed to real property. Fees for responding to "at fault" false alarms may be collected through the procedures prescribed at section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1319, § 1, 4-22-91) 
ARTICLE IX. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

Sec. 9.49. - Hazardous materials. 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Emergency action shall mean all of the activities conducted by or on behalf of the city to abate, control, capture, or dispose of hazardous materials. 
(b)  Hazardous materials shall mean explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, ecologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, or any other hazardous materials defined under the Fire Prevention Code, MCL 29.1 et seq. and the Hazardous Waste Management Act, MCL 299.501 et seq., or any other substance or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or his or her authorized representative, constitutes a danger or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Hazardous materials incident shall mean a fire, explosion, spill, leak, accident, or related occurrence involving the transportation, storage, handling, sale, use, processing, disposal, or other dissemination of hazardous materials. 
(d)  Person shall mean an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability corporation, or any other legal entity. 
(e)  Recoverable expenses shall mean those expenses that are reasonable, necessary, and allocable to an emergency action. "Recoverable expenses" shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed, and expended specifically for the purpose of the emergency action. 
2.  Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically to the emergency action. 
3.  Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency action (such as protective equipment or clothing, scientific, and technical equipment). 
4.  Replacement costs for equipment owned by the city that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the equipment was a total loss and the loss occurred during the emergency action (such as self-contained breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the response.) 
5.  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response. 
6.  Special technical services specifically required for the response (such as costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or specialists not otherwise provided for by the city). 
7.  Other special services specifically required for the emergency action. 
8.  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action. 
9.  Costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials. 
10.  Costs associated with the services, supplies, and equipment procured for a specific evaluation. 
11.  Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities. 
12.  Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency action, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Authorization to respond to hazardous materials incident. The city is hereby authorized to undertake emergency action on any property within the city in response to a hazardous materials incident. 
(3)  Liability. Any and all persons causing, contributing to, or responsible for a hazardous materials incident which results in an emergency action shall be liable to the city for the recoverable expenses attributable to the emergency action. 
(4)  Collection of recoverable expenses. The city may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of recoverable expenses against any and all persons causing, contributing to, or responsible for emergency action, or the recoverable expenses attributable to a particular parcel of property may be collected through the procedures prescribed at section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 1, 6-14-99) 
ARTICLE X. - DANGEROUS TREES 

Sec. 9.50. - Dangerous trees. 
    Owners of trees on private property shall maintain or treat such trees so that they do not become a danger to the public or to adjoining property. It shall be the responsibility of such owners to remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or any dead, diseased, or dangerous limbs which threaten the safety of the public or are a hazard to adjoining property. Any owner of property failing to maintain or remove trees or limbs in conformity with this section shall be notified in writing by the city; which notice shall specify the time period within which such maintenance or removal shall be performed. In determining whether the condition of a tree or limb threatens the safety of the public or is a hazard to adjoining property, the city shall utilize the International Society of Arboriculture Guide to Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas. Failure to comply with the requirements contained in the notice shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1559, § 1, 8-31-08; Ord. No. 1566, § 1, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 9.50A. - Bushes and shrubbery. 
    All bushes, shrubs, hedges and landscape materials situated within the front yard of a single family residential dwelling shall be maintained and trimmed so as not to provide any visual barrier or hazard to the front entranceway of the dwelling and to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the front entranceway and any front windows of the dwelling when viewed from the street upon which the residence fronts. Any dead or diseased bushes, shrubs, and other plantings in the front yard of a single family residential dwelling shall be promptly removed. 
    A violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties, as provided in chapter 15, section 1.703 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1604 , § 1, 3-31-13) 
Sec. 9.50B. - Regulation of natural lawns. 
    Findings: The city finds that the installation and maintenance of managed natural lawns is beneficial to the city's environment in that managed natural lawns improve stormwater retention, increase water quality and biodiversity, reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide a habitat for birds, butterflies and other beneficial insects and species, so long as the managed natural lawn meets certain requirements and conditions to assure that it does not become a nuisance to surrounding properties. 
(a)  Natural lawns defined. Natural lawn, as used in this section, shall include common species of plants and wild flowers native to the Great Lakes region which are designed and purposely cultivated and may exceed eight (8) inches in height from the ground. Specifically excluded in natural lawns are the noxious grasses and weeds identified in section 9.41 of this chapter 111. "Natural lawn" shall also not include a turf-grass lawn left unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural state. Turf-grass lawn means a lawn comprised mostly of grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas (such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends) intended to be maintained at a height of no more than eight (8) inches. The growth of a natural lawn in excess of eight (8) inches in height from the ground surface shall be prohibited unless a natural lawn management plan is approved and a permit is issued by the city as set forth in this section. Natural lawns shall not contain litter or debris, and shall not attract or harbor rodents or other vermin. 
(b)  Natural lawn management plan defined. 
(1)  "Natural lawn management plan," as used in this section, shall mean a written plan relating to the management and maintenance of a lawn which contains a legal description of lawn upon which the planted grass and/or native flowers, shrubs, plants, etc., will exceed eight (8) inches in length, a statement of intent and purpose for the lawn, a detailed description of the vegetational types, plants and plant succession involved, and the specific management and maintenance techniques to be employed. 
(2)  (i)  Property owners who wish to plant and cultivate a natural lawn must submit their written plan and related information to the planning department. Natural lawn management plans shall only indicate the planting and cultivating of natural lawns on property legally owned by the property owner. 
(ii)  Applicants are strictly prohibited from developing a natural lawn on any city-owned property, including street rights-of-way, without the prior written approval of the city's public works director based upon the director's determination that a natural lawn would promote improved storm surface drainage. This shall include at a minimum property located between the sidewalk and the street or a strip not less than ten (10) feet adjacent to the street where there is no sidewalk whether the area is under public or private ownership. 
(3)  In addition, natural lawns shall not be permitted within five (5) feet of the abutting property owner's property unless waived in writing by the abutting property owner on the side so affected. Such waiver is to be affixed to the lawn management plan. Such waiver may be revoked, in writing, by the abutting property owner at a later time. 
(4)  Any subsequent property owner who abuts an approved natural lawn may revoke the waiver thereby requiring the owner of the natural lawn to remove the natural lawn that is located in the five-foot section abutting the neighboring property owner. Such revocation shall be put in writing and presented to the planning department by the subsequent abutting property owner. Upon receiving the written request to revoke the original waiver, the planning department shall contact the owner of the approved natural lawn and direct the owner to remove the natural lawn located in the five-foot section abutting the neighboring property owner. The planning department shall revise the approved natural Lawn management permit accordingly. The owner of the approved natural lawn shall be required to remove the five-foot section abutting the neighboring property owner within twenty (20) days of receipt of the written notification from the planning department, provided the notification is received sometime between May 1 and November 1. Property owners who receive notification from the planning department between November 1 and April 30 shall be required to remove the five-foot section abutting the neighboring property owner no later than May 15, following receipt of the notification. 
(c)  Application process. 
(1)  Property owners interested in applying for permission to establish a natural lawn shall file an application with the planning department. The completed application shall include a natural lawn management plan. Upon submitting a completed application, a seventy-five-dollar, non-refundable filing fee will be assessed by the city, which may be an amount that may be modified by resolution of the city council from time to time. Upon receiving payment, copies of the completed application shall be mailed by the planning department to each of the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor, who are owners of the property situated wholly or in part within three hundred feet (300) of the boundaries of the properties for which the application is made. The notice shall state the date and time on which the planning department shall make a determination on the natural lawn application (which date shall be not less than fifteen (15) days from the date of notification) and shall specify that neighboring property owners shall have until such date and time to submit written objections or comments to the planning department regarding the application. Neighboring property owners shall be defined as all those property owners who are located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed natural lawn site. 
(2)  Following review of any comments received from neighboring property owners and review of the property owner's application to determine whether it is in full compliance with the natural lawn management plan requirements as set forth herein, the planning department shall either approve or deny the application for a natural lawn management plan permit. If approved, such permit shall be valid for two (2) years. Permit renewals shall follow the procedures in this section. 
(d)  Application for appeal. The property owner may appeal the planning department's decision to deny the natural lawn permit request to the city administrator or his/her designee. All applications for appeal shall be submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days of the notice of denial of the natural lawn management plan. The decision rendered by the city administrator or his/her designee shall be final and binding. 
(e)  Safety precautions for natural grass areas. 
(1)  When, in the opinion of the fire chief, the presence of a natural lawn may constitute a fire or safety hazard due to weather and/or other conditions, the fire chief may order the cutting of natural lawns to a safe condition. As a condition of receiving approval of the natural lawn permit, the property owner shall be required to cut the natural lawn within the three (3) days upon receiving written direction from the fire chief. 
(2)  Natural lawns shall not be removed through the process of burning. 
(3)  Revocation of an approved natural lawn management plan permit. 
The director of planning shall have the authority to revoke an approved natural lawn management plan permit if the owner fails to maintain the natural lawn or comply with the provisions set forth in this section. Notice of intent to revoke an approved natural lawn management plan Permit shall be appealable to the city administrator or his/her designee. All applications for appeal shall be submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the written notice of intent to revoke the approved natural lawn management plan. Failure to file an application for appeal within the fifteen (15) calendar days shall result in the revoking of the natural lawn management plan permit. The decision rendered by the city administrator or his/her designee shall be final and binding. 
(f)  Public nuisance defined - abatement after notice. 
(1)  The growth of a natural lawn, as defined in this section, shall be considered a public nuisance unless a natural lawn management plan has been filed and approved and a permit is issued by the planning department as set forth in this section. Violators shall be served with a notice of public nuisance by certified mail to the last-known mailing address of the property owner. 
(2)  If the person so served with a notice of public nuisance does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days, the city may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by such property owner pursuant to section 1.13 of the City Code. 
(g)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person who does not abate the nuisance within the required time period or who otherwise violates the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1609 , § 1, 8-18-13; Ord. No. 1633 , § 1, 11-23-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1609 , § 1, published August 18, 2013, amended the Code by adding new provisions to be designated as § 9.50A. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new provisions have been designated as § 9.50B at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 9.50C. - Window coverings. 
    Findings: The city finds that the presence of sheets, newspaper, blankets, and other materials not intended or designed for use as window coverings on windows within residential structures causes a blighting effect on residential neighborhoods. In order to protect and preserve residential property values and neighborhood integrity, sheets, newspaper, blankets, and other materials not specifically intended or designed for use as window coverings shall not be permitted except as temporary window coverings as provided herein. 
(1)  Sheets, newspaper, blankets, and other materials not specifically intended or designed for use as window coverings shall not be permitted on any window within a residential structure within the city; provided, however, sheets, newspaper, blankets and other materials may be temporarily used as window coverings on a window within a residential structure commencing with and upon the date an individual legally acquires title to or possession of the residential structure, whichever first occurs, and continuing for a period of ninety (90) days thereafter. 
(2)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1682 , § 1, 10-12-17) 
CHAPTER 112. - HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1217, § 1, enacted December 8, 1986, amended ch. 112 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former ch. 112, §§ 9.51-9.55, concerning similar subject matter, was derived from the 1976 codification. 

Sec. 9.51. - Regulated. 
    In order to protect the people of Southfield against the nuisances incident to the distribution of commercial and noncommercial handbills, as herein defined, with the resulting detriment to the public interest, health, and safety, the distribution of commercial and noncommercial handbills shall be regulated according to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, phrases, and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature, which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing, or which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishments, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales, or which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged, or a collection taken, for the purpose of private gain or profit, or which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private, pecuniary benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Noncommercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Private property shall mean and include any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used wholly or in part for private purposes, and shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, parking lot, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such property, house, building, or other structure. 
    Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.53. - Distribution of commercial or noncommercial handbills in public places restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place within the city, and it shall also be unlawful for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; except it shall be lawful to hand out, without charge, handbills in a public place to those persons who voluntarily accept them. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.54. - Distribution of commercial handbills on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial handbill upon any private property when requested by someone therein not to do so, or if there is placed in a conspicuous place a notice bearing the words "No Handbills," or "No Advertisements," or "No Solicitation," or any other similar notice which indicates that the occupants therein do not desire having such commercial handbills left upon the premises. It shall not be unlawful to distribute handbills on private property by hand to individuals willing to accept them, or to distribute from private property after having received written approval to do so by the owner or agent of the owner of the private property. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.55. - Distribution of noncommercial handbills upon private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, cast, scatter, throw, or place any noncommercial handbill in or upon private property, not bearing notice as contained within section 9.54, unless such handbill is placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be used. It shall be lawful to distribute handbills by hand to individuals willing to accept them on private property or to distribute on private property after having received written approval to do so by the owner or agent of the owner of the private property. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.56. - Hours of distribution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, or scatter any handbill as defined by this chapter, before the hour of eight o'clock in the morning (8:00 a.m.), prevailing time, or after sunset. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.57. - Placing on motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any handbill in or upon any motor vehicle, whether the same be upon the public streets, public and private parking lots, or upon private property. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing of any handbill to the owner or occupant of any motor vehicle, when such owner or occupant is in the motor vehicle and is willing to accept the same. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.58. - Abandoned premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any handbill in or upon any premises which is abandoned or which is obviously unoccupied or uninhabited. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.59. - Registration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, or to engage, cause or permit another to distribute, either a commercial or a noncommercial handbill, without first making a written registration with the city clerk. Such registration shall be made upon a form provided for such purpose by the city clerk. Such forms shall contain, among other information which may be required, the name, business address, and telephone number of the person causing or permitting the handbill to be distributed, along with a copy of the particular handbill to be distributed, and the proposed dates of distribution. There shall be no charge for such registration. The filing of nominating petitions to run for elected office shall serve as sufficient registration under this chapter for candidates and their campaign workers. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Sec. 9.60. - Responsibility. 
    In addition to the person actually distributing the handbill found in violation of this chapter, any person registered under the provisions set forth in section 9.59 who is responsible for the handbills distributed, may be held responsible for violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether done so directly by the person registered, their agent or employee. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 12-8-86) 
CHAPTER 113. - ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83 amended ch. 113 to read as herein set out in §§ 9.61-9.80. Former ch. 113 contained similar subject matter and was derived from the 1976 codification. 

Sec. 9.61. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the City of Southfield Animal Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.62. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to enact an animal control ordinance, as authorized by 1919 PA 339 section 30, as amended, being MCL 289.290, and 1909 PA 279, as amended, being MCL 117.1 et seq., to provide for the regulation, control, care and humane treatment of animals within the city exclusive of the licensing of dog kennels which shall be governed by 1919 PA 339; to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community through the proper control and care of animals by their owners and others; and to provide for the enforcement of these provisions and create penalties for violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.63. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Adequate care means the provision of sufficient water, food, shelter, sanitary conditions, and veterinary medical attention in order to maintain an animal in a state of good health. 
(2)  Animal means any vertebrate animal other than human beings. 
(3)  Animal control officer means an animal warden, a peace officer, or any other person designated by the city to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Animal warden means the person or persons employed by the city for the purpose of enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(5)  Cat means an animal of the species Felix catus . 
(6)  Dangerous animal means either of the following: 
(a)  A dog or another animal that bites or attacks a person, or a dog or another animal that bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another animal while such animal is on the property or under the control of its owner. 
Under this subsection, a dangerous animal does not include: 
(i)  An animal that bites or attacks a person who is knowingly trespassing on the property of the animal's owner; or 
(ii)  An animal that bites or attacks a person who knowingly provokes or torments the animals; or 
(iii)  An animal that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is designed to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault. 
(b)  Any wild or exotic animal which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature of disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to persons or property. 
(7)  Dog means an animal of the species Canis familiaris . 
(8)  Dog handler means a peace officer who successfully completed training in the handling of a police dog pursuant to a policy of the law enforcement agency that employs that peace officer. 
(9)  Kennel means any establishment wherein or whereon three (3) or more dogs are confined and kept for sale, boarding, breeding or training purposes for remuneration. 
(10)  Livestock means those species of animals used for human food and fiber or those species of animals used for service to humans. Livestock does not include dogs and cats. 
(11)  Neglect means to fail to sufficiently and properly care for an animal to the extent that the animal's health is jeopardized. 
(12)  Owner means a person having a right of property ownership in an animal, who keeps or harbors the animal or has the animal in his or her care of custody, or who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by the person. 
(13)  Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative, association, or other legal entity. 
(14)  Police dog means a dog used by a law enforcement agency that is trained for law enforcement work and subject to the control of a dog handler. 
(15)  Sanitary conditions means space free from health hazards including excessive animal wastes, overcrowding of animals, or other conditions that endanger the animal's health. 
(16)  Shelter means adequate protection from the elements suitable for the age and species of the animal and weather conditions to maintain the animal in a state of good health. 
(17)  Six (6) months old means a dog or cat with permanent upper canine teeth visibly present unless the owner can document the exact age of the dog or cat. 
(18)  State of good health means freedom from disease and illness, and in a condition of proper body weight and temperature for the age and species of the animal. 
(19)  Water means potable water that is suitable for the age and species of the animal, made regularly available. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.64. - Cruelty to animals. 
    A person who willfully, maliciously and without just cause or excuse kills, tortures, mutilates, maims, or disfigures an animal or who willfully and maliciously and without just cause or excuse administers poison to an animal, or exposes an animal to any poisonous substance, other than a substance that is used for therapeutic veterinary medical purposes, with the intent that the substance be taken or swallowed by the animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part of a sentence for a violation of this section, the court may order the defendant to pay for the costs of the care, housing, and veterinary medical care for the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.65. - Cruelty to poultry. 
    Whoever molests, injures, kills or captures any wild bird, or disturbs the nest of any wild bird, unless otherwise permitted by law, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by both. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 1383, adopted Sept. 18, 1995, repealed § 9.66 in its entirety. Former § 9.66 pertained to permitting dogs to stray and derived from Ord. No. 1095, § 1, adopted May 10, 1983. 
Sec. 9.67. - Cruelly working, transporting, abandoning animals. 
    An owner, possessor, or person having the charge or custody of an animal shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to provide an animal with adequate care. 
(2)  Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to be cruelly driven, worked, or beaten. 
(3)  Carry or cause to be carried in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any live animal having the feet or legs tied together, other than animal being transported for medical care, or a horse whose feet are hobbled to protect the horse during transport or in any other cruel and inhumane manner. 
(4)  Carry or cause to be carried a live animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise without providing a secure space, rack, car, crate, or cage, in which livestock may stand, and in which all other animals may stand, turn around, and lie down during transportation. 
(5)  Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place, without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling, or walking, shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate the animal. 
(6)  Willfully or negligently allow any animal, including one who is aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or nonambulatory to suffer unnecessary neglect, torture, or pain. 
    A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part of a sentence for a violation of this section, a defendant may be ordered by the court to pay for the costs of the care, housing, and veterinary medical care for the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.68. - Sanitary requirements. 
    Every person lawfully keeping any animal shall maintain the premises in which it is kept in a sanitary condition and free of insects, vermin or obnoxious odors and to that end shall in any structure housing a horse: 
(1)  Construct a ten-inch clay floor; 
(2)  Keep manure in a container or trailer not less than one hundred seventy-five (175) feet from any dwelling except that of the owner and dispose thereof at least once each week; 
(3)  Treat both the floor and manure accumulation daily with hydrated lime or such other chemical as well prevent odor. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.69. - Harboring a barking dog. 
    It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any dog which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, causes an annoyance to the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Cross reference- Noise control, § 9.10 et seq. 
Sec. 9.70. - Harboring a dangerous animal. 
    It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any of the following: 
(1)  A fierce or vicious dog; 
(2)  An animal that has rabies or an animal that has been bitten by an animal known to have been afflicted with rabies; 
(3)  A dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.71. - Impoundment of animals. 
    An animal control officer may impound any of the following: 
(1)  A dog or cat that is not under reasonable control; 
(2)  An unlicensed dog or cat; 
(3)  An animal displaying symptoms of rabies or which has been bitten by another animal displaying symptoms of rabies; 
(4)  A dog that has attacked or bitten a person; 
(5)  Any dangerous animal; 
(6)  Any animal which is determined to be in a condition in violation of section 9.64 or 9.67 of this chapter. 
    Whoever refuses to surrender any animal in his or her possession upon the demand of an animal control officer who is lawfully impounding such animal is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.72. - Failing to report rabid animal. 
    Whoever owns or harbors any animal which is bitten by another animal showing symptoms of rabies who fails to report the incident to the police department or the animal warden shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.73. - Failing to produce a license. 
    It shall be unlawful to own or harbor a dog or cat more than six (6) months of age and fail to produce a valid license upon the request of any person authorized to enforce this chapter . 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.74. - Failing to keep license or collar on dog or cat. 
    It shall be unlawful to own or harbor a dog or cat more than six (6) months of age and fail to affix a valid license to a substantial collar, except with regard to cats, a breakaway collar shall be permissible, which shall at all times be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.75. - Goats and swine prohibited. 
A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in section B hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep live goats or swine on any premises within the city except in slaughterhouses or yards adjacent thereto. 
B.  Provided, however, not more than one (1) pot bellied pig shall be permitted within a residential dwelling unit within the city as a pet subject to the requirements and restrictions hereafter set forth. "Pot bellied pig" shall mean a domesticated Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian or other domesticated pig, not exceeding one hundred (100) pounds in weight and twenty-five (25) inches in height measured at the shoulder, kept as a pet for personal enjoyment and human companionship and harbored inside of the residential dwelling unit. 
(1)  A pot bellied pig shall be spayed or neutered by the age of four (4) months, and shall be vaccinated for rabies, leptospirosis, erysipelas and brucellosis by the age of four (4) months and once each year thereafter, unless a difference vaccination period is authorized in writing by a licensed veterinarian within the State of Michigan and evidence thereof is provided to the city. 
(2)  A pot bellied pig shall be registered with and licensed by the city on an annual basis. The registration shall consist of the following requirements: 
(a)  Name and address of the owner of the pot bellied pig 
(b)  Identify the color, age and sex of the pot bellied pig; 
(c)  Submit documentation signed by a licensed veterinarian indicating that upon reaching the age of four (4) months, the pot bellied pig has been neutered or spayed, and has received current vaccinations for rabies, leptospirosis, erysipelas, and brucellosis. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, possessing or having the management in care, in whole or in part, of any pot bellied pig to permit it to leave the premises of the owner or keeper thereof, unless it is securely tied or led by a line or leash of a length of not more than six (6) feet in control of the owner or person having the management in care thereof. It shall further be unlawful for the owner of a pot bellied pig to damage property of others or cause bodily injury. 
(4)  Pot bellied pigs shall be kept indoors at all times other than for evacuation of waste materials or during exercise periods. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10; Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 10-12-17) 
Sec. 9.76. - Keeping other animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal or fowl within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of any dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner, or to permit any animal or any fowl owned by him or in his possession or control, to run at large in any street, alley or public place, or upon the premises of another without the express permission of the owner or occupant thereof, except such animals as are commonly housed in a human dwelling as household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.77. - Employment standards. 
    The minimum employment standards relative to the recruitment, selection and appointment of animal wardens shall be those established by 1972 PA 349, being MCL 287. 289c. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 1383, adopted Sept. 18, 1995, repealed § 9.78 in its entirety. Former § 9.78 pertained to exposing poisonous substances to animals and derived from Ord. No. 1095, § 1, adopted May 10, 1983. 
Sec. 9.79. - Issuance of kennel licenses. 
    The licensing of dog kennels shall be as provided in 1972 PA 349, as amended, being MCL 287.270. No person shall operate a kennel without a valid kennel license. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.80. - Dog kennels. 
(1)  Any person who keeps or operates a kennel shall have each dog confined therein licenses as required by sections 9.62, 9.73, and 9.74 of this chapter, or in lieu thereof, a kennel license entitling him to keep or operate a kennel issued by the county treasurer as provided by Public Act 349 of 1972, as it may be hereafter amended [MCL 287.270]. 
(2)  The licensee of a kennel shall, at all times, keep one (1) of the kennel tags issued pursuant to Public Act 349 of 1972, as it may be hereafter amended, attached to a collar on each dog four (4) months old or over kept by him under a kennel license. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel. This section does not prohibit the taking of dogs having a kennel license outside the limits of the kennel temporarily and in leash, nor does it prohibit the taking of such dogs out of the kennel temporarily for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trial or show [MCL 287.271]. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.81. - Number of dogs and cats permitted; exceptions. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to own, harbor, possess, or keep more than three (3) dogs or six (6) cats, six (6) months old or older, upon a person's premises. For purposes of this section, where more than one (1) owner or person shall reside at any one (1) address or premises, it shall be unlawful for such owners or persons to have more than three (3) dogs or six (6) cats at any such address or premises. 
2.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to kennels operating in conformance with section 9.79 of this chapter. 
3.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to cats licensed, pursuant to section 9.83 of this chapter, on the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1213, § 1, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10; Ord. No. 1580 , § 1, 6-3-12) 
Sec. 9.82. - Permitting dogs or cats to stray. 
    An owner, or other person having possession, care, custody, or control of a dog or cat, shall keep such animal under reasonable control or confined to his or her property. For purposes of this section, reasonable control means that the animal is attached to a leash that is continuously held by a person who is reasonably able to and does restrain and prohibit the animal from being out of that person's physical control. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 2, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1354, § 1, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10; Ord. No. 1577 , § 1, 8-15-10) 
Sec. 9.83. - Issuance of dog and cat licenses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or possess a dog or cat six (6) months of age or more without having obtained a valid license for it. 
(2)  All applications for a dog or cat license shall be filed with the police department on such forms as may be provided by the department. The applicant shall give his or her full name, address, and phone number as well as the name, age, sex, color and breed of the animal. 
(3)  An application for a dog or cat license must be accompanied by a certificate of vaccination for rabies signed by an accredited veterinarian, stating the date of vaccination and the expiration of immunity. 
(4)  The fees to be charged and collected for the issuance of a dog or cat license shall be as determined by city council by resolution. 
(5)  The police department shall issue a dog or cat license to an applicant who files an application in accordance with this section and upon payment of a license fee. The license shall be a metal tag which bears a serial number, the year for which it was issued, together with the words, "City of Southfield." A license issued under this section shall be valid for one (1) year or three (3) years and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 2, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.84. - Neighborhood sanitation. 
    Any person owning, harboring, keeping, possessing or in charge of a dog or cat shall immediately collect and dispose of in a sanitary manner all excrement or droppings left by such dog or cat on any public property and on any private property not owned or lawfully occupied by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1374, § 1, 1-30-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.85. - Police dogs. 
    No person shall intentionally cause physical harm to a police dog, nor shall a person intentionally harass or interfere with a police dog lawfully performing its duties. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § 2, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.86. - Obstructing an animal control officer. 
    Whoever shall willfully obstruct, resist, oppose or interfere with an animal control officer in the lawful performance of his or her duties of enforcing and administering the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § 2, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.87. - Impoundment and release procedures. 
(1)  Animals impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be confined at the city pound or at an animal shelter designated by the city. An animal that has been impounded because it attacked or bit a person; because it is suspected of having rabies; or because it is a dangerous animal shall be confined for ten (10) days. 
(2)  No impounded animal shall be released from the city pound or shelter to its owner or his or her authorized agent until: 
(a)  Any required confinement period has expired; 
(b)  All pick-up, impoundment, veterinary medical, and boarding fees have been paid. 
(c)  The animal has been vaccinated and issued a valid license as required by this chapter; and 
(d)  All licensing and vaccination fees have been paid. 
(3)  Fees to be charged and collected for the picking-up, impoundment, and boarding of an animal at the city pound or shelter shall be as determined by city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § 2, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.88. - Penalties. 
    Unless expressly provided otherwise, all violations of any section of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in section 1.703 of chapter 15 of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 1575 , § 1, 5-2-10) 
Sec. 9.89. - Electronic pet fence. 
    An "electronic pet fence" means an electrical wire which, when used with a pet collar or other device, is intended to keep a cat or dog from crossing beyond or exiting from the area or boundaries delineated by the wire. A sign shall be placed at each corner of that portion of a property abutting a street upon which such a fence is installed. The signs shall be obtained from the city and shall read: "electronic pet fence in use". The cost of a sign, if any, shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1576 , § 1, 6-27-10; Ord. No. 1632 , § 1, 11-23-14) 
CHAPTER 114. - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 

Sec. 9.121. - Discharge of a firearm or a bow. 
(1)  As used in this section: 
(a)  Firearm means a weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by an explosive, or by gas or air. Firearm does not include a smooth bore rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling by a spring, or by gas or air, BBs not exceeding .177 caliber. 
(b)  Bow means a weapon that is made of a strip of flexible material with a cord connecting the two (2) ends and holding the strip bent and that is used to propel a dangerous projectile. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm or a bow within the limits of the city. 
(3)  This section does not apply to: a law enforcement officer discharging a firearm or bow in the course of his or her duty; a citizen discharging a firearm or bow when lawfully defending himself or herself or another person; or a person discharging a firearm or a bow at a sport shooting range that conforms to generally accepted operational practices as defined by 1989 PA 269, as amended, being MCL 691.1541 et seq., and is approved by the chief of police. 
(4)  Any firearm or bow used contrary to this section is hereby declared forfeited to the city, and shall be turned over to the commissioner of the Michigan State Police or his designated representative for such disposition as the commissioner may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9.122. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to act in a disorderly manner. Any person who commits any of the following acts, either separately or in combination with another, shall be deemed to have acted in a disorderly manner: 
(1)  Making, aiding, countenancing or assisting in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of peace. 
(2)  Engaging in any obscene or indecent conduct in any public place or making an obscene exhibit or indecent exposure of a person's body. 
(3)  Being intoxicated in a public place and endangering directly the safety of another person or property or acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(4)  Engaging in window peeping. 
(5)  Refusing or neglecting to support one's family when a person is of sufficient ability to do so. 
(6)  Engaging in any illegal occupation or business, including, but not limited to, prostitution and gambling, or soliciting another to engage in any illegal occupation or business. 
(7)  Loitering knowingly in or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(8)  Loitering in or about any place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(9)  Begging in a public place. 
(1)  Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that the City of Southfield has a duty to protect the rights of all people to exercise their First Amendment rights safely. The City of Southfield has a compelling governmental interest in imposing certain reasonable time, place and manner regulations whenever potential first amendment activities such as begging, solicitation and panhandling occur on streets, highways, sidewalks, walkways, plazas, and other public venues within the city. 
(b)  This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds or engage in constitutionally protected activities. The provisions of this section are expressly established to most narrowly tailor any such restrictions to protect the First Amendment rights of all people within the City of Southfield as well as the rights of persons who are being solicited and their property, and to ensure the rights and safety of all people and/or property to the extent possible. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Beg, begging, or panhandling shall be synonymous and shall mean asking for money or objects of value, with the intention that the money or object be transferred at that time, and at that place. 
(b)  Aggressive manner shall mean: 
i.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, or damage to or loss of property or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
ii.  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
iii.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
iv.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
v.  Using violent or threatening language and/or gestures toward a person solicited which are likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction from the person being solicited; 
vi.  Following the person being solicited, with the intent of asking that person for money or other things of value; 
vii.  Soliciting in a manner with conduct, words, or gestures intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear immediate bodily harm, danger or damage to or loss of property or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or any other thing of value; 
viii.  Soliciting any person in public after dark, which shall mean the time from one-half (1/2) hour before sunset to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise. 
(c)  Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments which are made available to banking customers. 
(d)  Solicit or soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means of communication with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value the same as begging or panhandling and also include the offer to immediately exchange and/or sell any goods or services. 
(3)  Prohibition of begging/soliciting. 
(a)  No person shall beg or solicit from another person under any of the following circumstances: 
i.  In an aggressive manner; 
ii.  On private property where the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has requested that the person not solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcomed on the property; 
iii.  Within fifteen (15) feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the automated teller machine facility; or 
iv.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any outdoor seating area of any café, or restaurant. 
(10)  Being a vagrant. 
(11)  Loitering in or about a police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court building or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
(12)  Jostling or roughly crowding any person or people unnecessarily in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 1627 , § 1, 11-30-14) 
Cross reference- Behavior in dance halls regulated, § 7.226. 
Sec. 9.123. - Assault, assault and battery, domestic assault. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(2)  An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(3)  As used in this section, "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two (2) individuals in a business or social context. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 1475, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Sec. 9.124A. - Malicious use of service provided by communications common carrier. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously use any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following: 
(a)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(b)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured; has suddenly taken ill; has suffered death; or has been the victim of a crime, or of an accident. 
(c)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service. 
(d)  Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(e)  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call, and without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(f)  Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call which is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subdivision, "an unsolicited, commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device, on behalf of a person, corporation, or other entity, soliciting business or contributions. 
(g)  Deliberately calling a telephone of another person in a repetitive manner which causes interruption in telephone service or prevents the person from utilizing his or her telephone service. 
(2)  Any person violating this section may be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. An offense is committed under this section if the communication either originates or terminates or both originates and terminates in this city and may be prosecuted at the place of origination or termination. 
(Ord. No. 1474, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Sec. 9.124B. - Cutting, breaking, tapping, connecting line, wire, or cable. 
    Any person who shall wilfully and maliciously cut, break, tap, or make any connection with, or read, or copy, by the use of telegraph or telephone instruments, or otherwise, in any unauthorized manner, any message, either social or business, sporting, commercial, or other news reports, from any telegraph or telephone line, wire or cable so unlawfully cut or tapped in this city; or make unauthorized use of the same, or who shall wilfully and maliciously prevent, obstruct, or delay by any means or contrivance whatsoever the sending, conveyance, or delivery, in this city, of any authorized communication, sporting, commercial, or other news reports, by or through any telegraph or telephone line, cable, or wire under the control of any telegraph or telephone company doing business in this city, or to wilfully and maliciously aid, agree with, employ, or conspire with any other person or persons to do any of the aforementioned unlawful acts, may be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 1474, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540. 
Sec. 9.125. - Malicious destruction or damage of property; use of motor vehicle involving damage to plants and vegetation; special penalties. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure the real or personal property of another, by any means. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cut down, destroy or injure any trees, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil of another that is standing, growing or located on the land of another. A person convicted under this subsection shall be required to make restitution for any damage done. 
(3)  A person convicted under subsection (2) who committed the offense with a vehicle, as defined in section 79 of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949 (MCL 257.79), as amended, and as defined in section 10.79 of Chapter 126 of Title X, the traffic code of the city, may have his or her license to operate a vehicle in the state suspended for up to one (1) year in addition to any other penalty imposed under subsection (2). 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1.15. 
Sec. 9.126. - Soliciting and accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, male or female, seventeen (17) years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place, or in or from any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or any other means, to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as a law enforcement officer. 
Sec. 9.127. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or for any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, to without lawful authority neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
Sec. 9.127A. - Entering without breaking and without permission. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter, or to enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or outbuildings belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent or person having immediate control thereof. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to entering without breaking any place at which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. 
(3)  This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or a person acting under the direction of a peace officer in the lawful performance of duty. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 9.128, as amended by Ord. No. 939, § 1, enacted June 13, 1977, pertained to fireworks and explosives and was deleted by Ord. No. 1141, §§ 1, 2, enacted July 9, 1984. 
Sec. 9.129. - Loitering in or about buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter, sit or stand in any public room in any hotel, motel, office or business establishment in the city, or any court house corridor, or to use any public room for business or social purposes, or to obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, or if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. The term "public room," for the purpose of this section; includes any basement, attic, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom, sitting room, or any other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants, guests or customers, and situated in a hotel, motel, office building, public building, parking lot or business establishment, in the city. 
Sec. 9.130. - Loitering on or about public ways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter, sit or stand on any street, sidewalk, overpass or public place in such a manner as to hinder or impede, or tend to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
Sec. 9.131. - School disturbances. 
(1)  No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by any public, private or parochial school or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(2)  No person shall wilfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any class, gathering or other function in any public, private or parochial school or on the grounds belonging thereto is disturbed. 
(3)  No person shall use profane, indecent or immoral language or indulge in indecent or immoral conduct in any building or on any property owned, occupied or otherwise used by a public, private or parochial school. 
(4)  No person shall enter or remain in any building or on any grounds owned, occupied or otherwise used by any public, private or parochial school for any purpose other than a purpose related to school business unless authorized in writing by a duly empowered official of such public, private or parochial school, or is a student or employee thereof or a parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein. The term "student" as used in this section is hereby defined as any person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he or she is present. 
Sec. 9.131A. - Public building disturbances. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wilfully destroy, deface, mutilate or injure any of the public buildings, grounds, sidewalks, signs, streetlights, monuments, fire hydrants or other property of the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter public property or any part thereof in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance or at any point of approach or entry to such public property or to any part or portion thereof. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance in any public building or upon any other property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 5-29-84) 
Sec. 9.132. - Interference with business. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a disturbance shall be any act causing annoyance, disquiet, agitation or derangement to another, or interrupting his peace, or interfering with him in the pursuit of a lawful and appropriate occupation or contrary to the usages of a sort of meeting and class of persons assembled that interferes with its due progress or irritates the assembly in whole or in part. 
Sec. 9.132A. - Entering upon health facility or agency premises for purpose of engaging in prohibited activity or conduct relating to intimidation, harassment, molestation, etc. 
(1)  Subject to subsection (3), an individual shall not enter upon the premises of a health facility or agency that is an inpatient facility, an outpatient facility, or a residential facility for the purpose of engaging in an activity that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested, and that actually causes a health facility or agency employee, patient, resident, or visitor to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. This subsection does not prohibit constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose. 
(2)  An individual who violates subsection (1) shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(3)  Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to a nursing home covered under MCL 333.21763(5) and 21799c(1)(c). 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 9.132B. - Definitions. 
(1)  For purposes of section 9.132A, "health facility or agency" means: 
(a)  An ambulance operation, aircraft transport operation, nontransport pre-hospital support operation, or medical first response service. 
(b)  A clinical laboratory. 
(c)  A county medical care facility. 
(d)  A freestanding surgical outpatient facility. 
(e)  A health maintenance organization. 
(f)  A home for the aged. 
(g)  A hospital. 
(h)  A nursing home. 
(i)  A hospice. 
(j)  A hospice residence. 
(k)  A facility or agency listed in subdivisions (a) to (h) located in a university, college, or other educational institution. 
(2)  "Health maintenance organization" means a health facility or agency that does all of the following: 
(a)  Delivers health maintenance services that are medically indicated to enrollees under the terms of its health maintenance contract, directly or through contracts with affiliated providers, in exchange for a fixed prepaid sum or per capita prepayment, without regard to the frequency, extent, or kind of health maintenance services. 
(b)  Is responsible for the availability, accessibility, and quality of the health maintenance services provided as described in subdivision (a). 
(3)  "Home for the aged" means a supervised, personal care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care facility, hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility that provides room, board, and supervised personal care to twenty-one (21) or more unrelated, nontransient, individuals sixty (60) years of age or older. "Home for the aged" includes a supervised, personal care facility for twenty (20) or fewer individuals, sixty (60) years of age or older if the facility is operated in conjunction with and as a distinct part of a licensed, nursing home. 
(4)  "Hospice" means a health care program that provides a coordinated set of services rendered at home or in outpatient or institutional settings for individuals suffering from a disease or condition with a terminal prognosis. 
(5)  "Hospital" means a facility offering inpatient, overnight care, and services for observation, diagnosis, and active treatment of an individual with a medical, surgical, obstetric, chronic, or rehabilitative condition requiring the daily direction or supervision of a physician. "Hospital" does not include a mental health hospital licensed or operated by the department of community health or a hospital operated by the Department of Corrections. 
(6)  "Hospital, long-term, care unit" means a nursing care facility, owned and operated by and as part of a hospital, providing organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven (7) or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. 
(7)  "Nursing home" means a nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, that provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven (7) or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. "Nursing home" does not include a unit in a state correctional facility. "Nursing home" does not include one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  A hospital. 
(b)  A veterans facility created under Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, being MCL 36.1 to 36.12. 
(c)  A hospice residence that is licensed under state law. 
(d)  A hospice that is certified under 42 C.F.R. 418.00. 
(8)  "Person" means a person as defined in MCL 333.1106 or a governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 9.133. - Litter; prohibition; construction of terms; removal of debris from highways. 
    It is unlawful for a person knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. The phrase "public or private property or water" includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach thereof, including the ice above the water; a park, playground, building, refuse, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties or timberlands. It is unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle, wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road or street, to fail to remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of the accident. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish, § 2.9; accumulations of litter, § 2.10; causing litter to fall from or on or throwing into path of vehicles prohibited, § 9.148. 
Sec. 9.134. - Assemblage of noisy or riotous persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any noisy or riotous persons to assemble in any house or building or upon any land owned, occupied or controlled by him, to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace. 
Sec. 9.135. - Public places, spitting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to spit upon any public sidewalk, or upon the floor or interior of any public conveyance, or upon the floor or walls of any theater, hall, assembly room, church, school, public building or place open to the public. 
Sec. 9.136. - Larceny. 
(1)  A person who commits larceny by stealing any of the following property of another person is guilty of a crime as provided in this section: 
(a)  Money, goods, or chattels. 
(b)  A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order, or certificate. 
(c)  A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to become due, or to be delivered. 
(d)  A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other valuable contract in force. 
(e)  A receipt, release, or defeasance. 
(f)  A writ, process, or public record. 
(2)  If the property stolen has a value of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(3)  The values of property stolen in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any twelve-month period may be aggregated to determine the total value of property stolen. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356. 
Sec. 9.136A. - False pretenses with intent to defraud. 
    Any person who, with intent to defraud or cheat, shall designedly, by color of any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or measures obtain a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 10-12-82) 
Sec. 9.136B. - Larceny from motor vehicles or trailers; attached accessories; breaking or entering, damaging. 
(a)  A person who commits larceny by stealing or unlawfully removing or taking any wheel, tire, air bag, radio, stereo, clock, telephone, computer, or other electronic device in or on any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or semitrailer shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(b)  A person who enters or breaks into a motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or semitrailer to steal or unlawfully remove property from it shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1473, enacted May 13, 2002, amended § 9.136B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.136B pertained to retail fraud and derived from Ord. No. 1247, enacted June 13, 1988. 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356a. 
Sec. 9.136C. - Embezzlement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who as the agent, servant or employee of another, or as the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another, or of any partnership, voluntary association, public or private corporation, or of this city or school district within this city to fraudulently dispose of or convert to his own use, or take or secrete with intent to convert to his own use without the consent of his principal, any money or other personal property of his principal which shall have come to his possession or shall be under his charge or control by virtue of his being such agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 9.136D. - Retail fraud, third degree. 
(1)  A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud in the third degree, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both imprisonment and a fine: 
(a)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(b)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(c)  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  A person who commits retail fraud in the third degree shall not be prosecuted under MCL 750.360 or section 9.136F. 
(3)  The values of the difference in price, property stolen, or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained in separate incidents, pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any twelve-month period may be aggregated to determine the total value involved in the offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356d. 
Sec. 9.136E. - Larceny from vacant dwelling. 
    A person or persons who shall steal or unlawfully remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment, or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction or who shall break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully removing, taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment, or other property belonging to, connected with, or used in the construction of such vacant structure or building whether built or in the process of construction, shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.359. 
Sec. 9.136F. - Larceny; places of abode, work, storage, conveyance, worship, and other places. 
    A person or persons who shall commit the crime of larceny by stealing in any dwelling house, house trailer, office, store, gasoline service station, shop, warehouse, mill, factory, hotel, school, barn, granary, ship, boat, vessel, church, house of worship, locker room, or any building used by the public shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.360. 
Sec. 9.136G. - Larceny; embezzlement; or conversion. 
    Any person to whom any money, goods, or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, shall have been delivered, who shall embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own use, or shall secrete with the intent to embezzle, or fraudulently use such goods, money, or other property, or any part thereof, shall be deemed by so doing to have committed the crime of larceny, and shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days, or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.362. 
Sec. 9.136H. - Larceny; rented motor vehicle; or other tangible property; penalty. 
(a)  A person to whom a motor vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property is delivered on a rental or lease basis under a written agreement providing for its return to a particular place at a particular time who with intent to defraud the lessor, refuses or wilfully neglects to return the vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property after expiration of the time stated in a written notice mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to that person's last know address is guilty of larceny, punishable as provided in this section. 
(b)  If the vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property has a value of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.362a. 
Sec. 9.136I. - Theft of motor vehicle fuel by pumping fuel into a motor vehicle; suspension of license. 
    The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of a person convicted of an offense or attempted offense under this section involving the theft of motor vehicle fuel that occurred by pumping the fuel into a motor vehicle, as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
(Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 5-13-02) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.367c. 
Sec. 9.137. - Receiving, buying, concealing or possessing stolen property. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing the same to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(2)  A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer or collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal right to do so, or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.138. - Breaking jail, escaping or attempting to break or escape. 
    Any person lawfully imprisoned in the city jail, awaiting trial, arraignment, sentence or after sentence awaiting or during transfer to or from any prison, for any crime or offense, or charged with any crime or offense under ordinance of the city, who shall break such jail or place of confinement and escape, or break jail, although no escape be actually made, or who shall escape or who shall leave such jail or place of confinement without being discharged from the same by due process of law, or who shall break or escape while in or being transferred to or from any courtroom or courthouse, or any place where court is being held, or who shall attempt to break or escape therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 9.139. - False personation of a police officer. 
    Any person who falsely assumes or pretends to be a sheriff, deputy sheriff, conservation officer, coroner, constable, police officer or member of the state police, and shall take upon himself to act as such, or to require any person to aid and assist him in any matter pertaining to the duty of a sheriff, deputy sheriff, conservation officer, coroner, constable, police officer or member of the state police, or shall falsely take upon himself or act or officiate in any office or place of authority, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 9.140. - Unauthorized wearing of badge or uniform. 
    Any person who shall wear, exhibit, display or use for any purpose the badge or uniform or a badge or uniform substantially identical to that worn by the city police unless he shall be a city policeman, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 9.141. - Resisting or obstructing officer in discharge of his duty. 
    Any person who shall knowingly and wilfully obstruct, resist or oppose any city policeman, constable or other officer or person duly authorized in serving or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule or order made or issued by lawful authority, or who shall resist any officer in the execution of any ordinance by law, or any rule, order to resolution made, issued or passed by the city council or who shall assault, beat or wound any city policeman, constable or other officer or person duly authorized, while serving or attempting to serve or execute any such process, rule of order, or for having served, or attempted to serve or execute the same, or who shall so obstruct, resist, oppose, assault, beat or wound any of the above-named officers or any other person or persons authorized by law to maintain and preserve the peace, in their lawful acts, attempts and efforts to maintain, preserve and keep the peace, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 9.142. - Fictitious reports to police officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and knowingly make to any city police officer a fictitious report of the commission of any violation of any ordinance of the city, knowing the same to be false. 
Sec. 9.142A. - Misrepresentation, falsification or disguise with intent to obstruct police officer in performance of duty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to misrepresent, falsify or otherwise disguise himself or herself or the fact of his or her identity, with the intent to obstruct the due execution of the law, or with the intent to intimidate, hinder, obstruct or interrupt any police officer of the city or any other person in the legal performance of his or her duty, or the exercise of his rights under the constitution and laws of the state or ordinances of the city whether such intent be effected or not. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.142B. - False fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully commit any one (1) or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Raise, assist in the raising, or cause to be raised a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place; 
(2)  Operate, assist in the operation, or cause to be operated any bell, mechanical or electrical apparatus, or combination thereof for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire; 
(3)  Raise, assist in the raising, or cause to be raised with the city police department, fire department, or public safety department, by telephone, in person, or by other means, a false alarm of fire. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 7-8-85) 
Sec. 9.142C. - False medical emergency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully make, assist in making, or cause to be made to any city police officer, firefighter, or public safety technician a fictitious report of a medical emergency requiring the services of the city emergency medical service. 
Sec. 9.143. - Defrauding boardinghouse keepers. 
    Any person who shall stop, put up, board or lodge at any boardinghouse as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month, or shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boardinghouse for credit, with intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodation, or any person who, with intent so to defraud, shall obtain credit at any boardinghouse for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided that no conviction shall be had under the provisions of this section unless complaint shall be made within ten (10) days of the time of the violation hereof. 
Sec. 9.144. - Defrauding hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe keepers. 
    Any person who shall put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as a guest and shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, or who, with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, shall obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe for such food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. No conviction shall be had under the provisions of this section unless complaint is made within sixty (60) days of the violation hereof. 
Sec. 9.145. - Prima facie evidence of intent to defraud. 
    Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud mentioned in sections 9.143 and 9.144. 
Sec. 9.146. - Inciting language in the presence of another person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any indecent, immoral, obscene, vulgar or insulting language in the presence or hearing of any other person, when such language is inherently likely to provoke a violent reaction by any person present, or when such language, by the very utterance thereof, either inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of peace. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.147. - Damaging, tampering or meddling with a motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
Intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of such motor vehicle; or 
Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; or 
Intentionally release the brake or braking device upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure such machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
Sec. 9.148. - Causing litter to fall [from or] on or throwing into the path of a vehicle prohibited; penalty; presumptions; definitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall [from or on] or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling upon a highway, or place open to the public. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) and costs of prosecution, or imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. The court, in lieu of any other sentence imposed, may direct a substitution of litter-gathering labor, including, but not limited to, the litter connected with the particular violation, under the supervision of the court. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (f) involving litter from a leased vehicle or leased vessel, in a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle or vessel is presumed to be responsible for litter which is thrown, dropped, dumped, deposited, placed, or left from the vehicle or vessel on public or private property, or waters. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, "vehicle" means every motor vehicle registered under Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being MCL 2547.1 to 257.923; and "vessel" means a vessel registered under Act No. 303 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, being MCL 281.1001 to 281.1199. 
(f)  In a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a leased motor vehicle or leased vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 1, 12-8-86) 
Editor's note- Littering prohibited, § 9.133. 
Sec. 9.149. - Reckless endangerment. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to commit the offense of reckless endangerment by recklessly engaging in conduct which creates a substantial risk of physical injury to another person. 
(2)  A person acts "recklessly" with respect to a result or to a circumstance under subsection (1) when such person is aware of and consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the result will occur or that the circumstance exists. The risk must be of such nature and degree that disregard thereof constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the situation. A person who creates such a risk but is unaware thereof solely by reason of voluntary intoxication also acts recklessly with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.150. - Willful neglect to make personal property statement. 
(1)  Every person, firm, or corporation having personal property in his or her possession shall make and subscribe to a true and correct written statement, under oath, administered by the Southfield city assessor, or an officer authorized to administer an oath under the laws of the state, of all the personal property of such person, firm, or corporation whether owned by him or it or held for the use of another, and every such person, firm, or corporation, shall make such statement under the form of oath provided at section 18 of the General Property Tax Act, being 1893 P.A. 206, as amended (MCL 211.1 et seq.). 
(2)  The written statement under oath, provided for in subsection (1) above shall be in such form and of such content as may be prescribed by the state tax commission and shall be completed and delivered to the city assessor on or before February 20th of each year. 
(3)  In every case when any person or member of any firm or officer of any corporation shall wilfully neglect or refuse to make out and deliver a true and correct sworn statement, under oath, administered by the city assessor or members of the state tax commission or other officer duly authorized to administer oaths herein provided for, or shall answer falsely or refuse to answer questions concerning his or her property or property under his or her control, as required by the General Property Tax Act, being 1893 P.A. 206, as amended (MCL 211.1 et seq.), such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 1-14-91) 
CHAPTER 115. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1466, enacted May 29, 2001, amended ch. 115 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 115 consisted of §§ 9.151-9.157, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 959, enacted April 7, 1978; Ord. No. 1066, enacted August 24, 1981; and Ord. No. 1328, enacted November 25, 1991. 
Cross reference- Intoxicating liquors in public parks or grounds, § 3.7; liquor licenses, § 7.190 et seq.; alcoholic liquor prohibited in dance halls; exception, § 7.228; operation of vehicle by person under the influence of intoxicating liquor, § 10.625 et seq. 

Sec. 9.151. - Definitions. 
(1)  Minor means a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Alcohol means the product of distillation of fermented liquid, whether or not rectified or diluted with water, but does not mean ethyl or industrial alcohol, diluted, or not, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes. 
(3)  Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids, and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the commission according to alcoholic content as belonging to one (1) of the varieties defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1958. 
(4)  All definitions contained within the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (1998 PA 85), as amended, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.152. - Consumption of alcoholic liquor on unlicensed premises. 
(1)  A person shall not maintain, operate, lease, or otherwise furnish to any person, any premises, or place which is not licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 within which the other person may engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquor for consideration. 
(2)  A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor in a commercial establishment selling food if the commercial establishment is not licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. A person owning, operating, or leasing a commercial establishment selling food which is not licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 shall not allow the consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to any hotel or any licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
(4)  As used in this section, "consideration" includes any fee, cover charge, the storage of alcoholic liquor, the sale of food, ice, mixers, or other liquids used with alcoholic liquor drinks, or the furnishing of glassware or other containers for use in the consumption of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the sale of food. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.153. - Consumption in public. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(a)  No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public highways. 
(b)  No alcoholic liquor, except for beer and/or wine, shall be consumed in public parks and places of amusement not licensed to sell for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed in any public place, or in any place open to the general public, including any place designated for the parking of motor vehicles, including any store or establishment doing business with the public not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, nor shall anyone who owns, operates, or controls any such public establishment or store permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein. 
(d)  This section is a continuation of former section 9.152 of Ordinance No. 959, as amended by Ordinance No. 1328, and is enacted pursuant to MCL 436.1915 (1998 PA 58). 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.154. - Sales to minor prohibited. 
(1)  Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a minor. Except as otherwise provided by law, a person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a minor, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A suitable sign describing the content of MCL 436.1701 and the penalties for its violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each room where alcoholic liquor is sold. The signs shall be approved and furnished by the Liquor Control Commission. 
(2)  (Reserved) 
(3)  If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the Liquor Control Commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (1) unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
(4)  If the enforcing agency involved in the violation is the state police or a local police agency, a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (1) unless enforcement action under section 9.155 is taken against the minor who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed, or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor and, if applicable, enforcement action is taken under this section, against the person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the minor. If the enforcing agency is the commission, then the commission shall recommend to a local law enforcement agency that enforcement action be taken against a violator of this section or section 9.155, who is not a licensee. However, this subsection does not apply under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The person against whom enforcement action is taken under section 9.155 or the person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the minor is not alive or is not present in this state at the time the licensee is charged. 
(b)  The violation of subsection (1) is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored, internal, enforcement action. 
(c)  The violation of subsection (1) is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. However, any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor shall have been under the direction of the state police, the liquor commission, or the local police agency and shall have been part of the undercover operation. 
(5)  If a minor participates in an undercover operation in which the minor is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of a law enforcement agency, his or her parents or legal guardian shall consent to the participation if that person is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(6)  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(7)  (Reserved) 
(8)  As used in this section: 
(a)  "Corrective action" means action taken by a licensee or a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a minor from further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. "Corrective action" includes, but is not limited to, contracting a law enforcement agency and ejecting the minor and any other person suspected of aiding and abetting the minor. 
(b)  "Diligent inquiry" means a diligent, good faith effort to determine the age of the person, which includes at least an examination of an official, Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license; an official, Michigan personal identification card; or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.155. - Persons under 21, consumption or possession, court orders for preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
(1)  A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions and is not subject to the penalties prescribed in section 9.158. 
(a)  For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (5). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection. 
(b)  For a violation of this section following a prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or both. A court may order a minor to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (5). 
(c)  For a violation of this section following two (2) or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, as applicable. A court may order a minor to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (5). 
(2)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or, notwithstanding subsection (1), a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or both. 
(3)  If an individual pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of subsection (1)(b) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a violation of subsection (1)(b), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions of that probation may include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in subsection (1)(c), payment of the costs including minimum state cost as provided for in section 18(m) of chapter XIIA of the Probate Code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18m, and section 1j of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in section 3 of chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon a finding that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. There may be only one (1) discharge or dismissal under this subsection as to an individual. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation under this subsection, and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The secretary of state shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. This record shall be furnished to any of the following: 
(a)  To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection. 
(b)  To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
(i)  At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency. 
(ii)  The record is used by the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(4)  A misdemeanor violation of subsection (1) successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (3) is considered a prior judgment for purposes of subsection (1)(c). 
(5)  The court may order the person convicted of violating subsection (1) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community mental health entity as defined in section 100A of the mental health code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection (1) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. the parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is less than eighteen (18) years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation. 
(6)  The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (1) or (2) as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
(7)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(8)  A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (1) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian not later than forty-eight (48) hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly violated subsection (1) is less than eighteen (18) years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than seventeen (17) years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (1), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(9)  This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, by the commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(10)  The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (1): 
(a)  A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520B to 520G of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520B to 750.520G, committed against a minor. 
(b)  A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria: 
(i)  Has consumed alcoholic liquor. 
(ii)  Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520B to 520G of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520B to 750.520G, committed against a minor. 
(c)  A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern. 
(11)  If a minor who is less than eighteen (18) years of age and who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation as provided under subsection (10), the health facility or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the health facility or agency. 
(12)  This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, as amended. 
(13)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited, postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this chapter if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(14)  The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this chapter. 
(15)  Subsection (1) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(a)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored, internal enforcement action. 
(b)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency, and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(16)  The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (1), or MCL 436.1801(2), or MCL 436.1701(1). 
(17)  In a criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (1) concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(18)  As used in this section: 
(a)  Any bodily alcohol content means either of the following: 
(i)  An alcohol content of two-hundredths (0.02) grams or more per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine. 
(ii)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(b)  Emergency medical services personnel means that term as defined in section 20904 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904. 
(c)  Health facility or agency means that term as defined in section 20106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106. 
(d)  Prior judgment means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the united states substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
(i)  This section or MCL 436.1801(2), MCL 436.1701(1), or MCL 436.1707. 
(ii)  Section 624A, 624B, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624A, 257.624B, and 257.625. 
(iii)  Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127. 
(iv)  Section 167A or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1939 PA 328, MCL 750.167A and 750.237. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 6-13-05; Ord. No. 1689 , § 1, 4-12-18) 
Sec. 9.156. - Power of peace officer or law enforcement officer witnessing violation to stop and detain person. 
    A peace officer or law enforcement officer, who witnesses a violation of section 9.155, may stop and detain a person and obtain satisfactory identification and seize illegally possessed alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.157. - Consumption of alcoholic liquor on school property; misdemeanor. 
(1)  A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor on school property or possess alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property. 
(2)  A person who violates this section shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  If the person has no prior convictions, by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or both. 
(b)  If the person has one (1) prior conviction, by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(3)  This section does not prohibit a person from consuming alcoholic liquor on school property or possessing alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  As part of a generally recognized, religious service or religious ceremony. 
(b)  At a nonschool function or event on school property if the superintendent of the school district, or, if the school is not operated by a school district, the administrator of the school, or his or her designee, has approved consuming alcoholic liquor on school property or possessing alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property during that function or event. 
(4)  This section does not prohibit an individual from being convicted of or found responsible for any other violation of law arising out of the same transaction as the violation of this section. 
(5)  This section does not apply to a minor who could be subject to prosecution under section 9.154 of this chapter. 
(6)  As used in this section: 
(a)  Prior conviction means a conviction for violating state law or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to state law. 
(b)  School means a public school offering developmental kindergarten, kindergarten, or any grade from one (1) through twelve (12). 
(c)  School property means a building, playing field, vehicle, or other property used for functions and events sponsored by a school, except a building used primarily for adult education or college education courses. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
Sec. 9.158. - Penalty for violation. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person who violates this chapter is guilty of a minor offense. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a licensee who violates this chapter or a rule or regulation promulgated under this chapter is guilty of a minor offense punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(3)  A person who performs any act for which a license is required under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 without first obtaining that license is guilty of a minor offense, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(4)  It is the intent of the city council that the court, in imposing punishment under this section, should discriminate between casual or slight violations and habitual sales of alcoholic liquor or attempt to commercialize violation of this chapter or the rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 5-29-01) 
CHAPTER 116. - FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1411, § 1, enacted October 27, 1997, amended ch. 116 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 116 contained similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 1006, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979. 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes, § 4.22. 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 1.116 et seq.; burning garbage, rubbish, leaves and grass prohibited, § 2.9; water for fire protection, § 2.81 et seq.; open fires in parks and playgrounds, § 3.5; fire exits in dance halls, § 7.226; dance halls to comply with fire regulations, § 7.227; housing code, § 8.141 et seq.; general building regulations, § 8.201 et seq. 

Secs. 9.181-9.183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1541, enacted November 20, 2006, repealed §§ 9.181-9.183 in their entirety. Former §§ 9.181-9.184 pertained to BOCA Fire Prevention Code, code on file, references in code, and derived from Ord. No. 1411, enacted October 27, 1997. 
Sec. 9.184. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
    The code official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and property, are empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations and to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The code official may prohibit any person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The code official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.185. - Interference with fire department operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.186. - Compliance with orders. 
    A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the code official or interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.187. - Vehicles crossing fire hose. 
    A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the code official in command of said operation. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.188. - Definition of authorized emergency vehicle. 
    Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.189. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the code official or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.190. - Vehicles following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than three hundred (300) feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.191. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. 
    A person shall not without proper authorization from the code official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.192. - Damage, injury to fire department equipment, personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle at any time or to injure, or attempt to injure, fire department personnel while performing department duties. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.193. - Emergency vehicle operation. 
    The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in section 9.188 of this chapter, when responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire may: 
(a)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic regulations; 
(b)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(c)  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or property; 
(d)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
The exemptions granted in this section to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.194. - Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
    It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections located on public or private streets and access lanes or on private property. 
    If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the code official and with the approval of the chief administrative official, and the legal authority of the municipality may institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.195. - Hydrant use approval. 
    A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the code official. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.196. - Public water supply. 
    The code official shall recommend to the chief administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.197. - Yard systems. 
    All new and existing occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the code official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The code official shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The code official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.198. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs or when permitted by the code official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.199. - Sale of defective fire extinguisher. 
    A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the code official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the code official. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.200. - Street obstructions. 
    A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the municipality. The word "street" as used in this chapter, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 9.201. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1909, the ICC International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, promulgated and published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois, 60478, is hereby adopted by the city as in this chapter modified for the purpose to prescribe minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, or use of hazardous substances, materials, devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property, or public welfare in the use or occupancy of building, structures, tents, lots, or premises. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 2, 11-20-06) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1541, enacted November 20, 2006, amended § 9.201 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.201 pertained to changes in the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and derived from Ord. No. 1411, § 1, October 27, 1997. 
Sec. 9.202. - Code on file. 
    Completed printed copies of the 2006 ICC International Fire Code, adopted herein, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 3, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 9.203. - References in code. 
    References in the ICC International Fire Code shall have the following meanings: 
1.  References to "state" shall mean the State of Michigan. 
2.  References to "municipality" shall mean the City of Southfield. 
3.  References to "municipal charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Southfield. 
4.  Reference to "local ordinances" shall mean the City Code of the City of Southfield. 
5.  References to "International Building Code" or "building code" shall mean the Michigan Building Code. 
6.  References to "International Plumbing Code" or "plumbing code" shall mean the Michigan Plumbing Code. 
7.  References to "International Mechanical Code" or "mechanical code" shall mean the Michigan Mechanical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 3, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 9.204. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the 2006 ICC International Fire Code are hereby amended as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added or deleted as indicated. Section numbers refer to sections of the 2006 ICC International Fire Code. 
    Section 103, Department of fire prevention, being subsections 103.1 through 103.4.1, is deleted. 
Subsection 104.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    104.1 General. The fire code official shall be the Fire Chief, or his duly authorized representative as appointed by the Fire Chief. The fire code official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code and shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code, and to adopt policies, procedures, rules and regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures, rules and regulations shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
Subsection 105.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the fire code official. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official. 
Subsection 105.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.1.2 Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by section 105.6 for either: 
1.1.  A prescribed period. 
1.2.  Until renewed or revoked. 
Subsection 105.1.4 is added and shall read as follows: 
    105.1.4 Permit fees. An application for a permit required by this code shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
Subsection 105.3 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.3 Conditions of a permit. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other construction, equipment installation or modification in accordance with the provisions of this code where a permit is required by section 105.6. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this code or other applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction. 
Subsection 105.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked or for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued. 
Subsection 105.3.3 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing an operational permit that indicates that applicable provisions of this code have been met. 
    Subsection 105.3.4, Conditional permits, is deleted. 
Subsection 105.3.6 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.3.6 Compliance with code. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
    Subsection 105.4, Construction documents, being 105.4 through 105.4.6, is deleted in its entirety. 
    Subsection 105.7, Required construction permits, being 105.7 through 105.7.13, is deleted in its entirety. 
Subsection 108.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall consist of three members appointed by the governing body and shall serve staggered terms of three years each or until a successor has been appointed. The governing body shall also appoint one alternate member who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. An alternate shall possess the qualifications required for board membership, and shall be appointed for three years or until a successor has been appointed. Compensation, if any, for board members and the alternate shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
Subsection 108.3 is amended to read as follows: 
    108.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of three individuals, one from each of the following professions or disciplines: 
1.  Registered design professional that is a registered architect; or a superintendent of building construction with at least ten years experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
2.  Registered design professional with mechanical or plumbing engineering experience; or a mechanical or plumbing contractor with at least ten years experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work; and 
3.  Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience; or a fire protection contractor with at least ten years experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
Subsection 108.4 is added and shall read as follows: 
    108.4 Members. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial interest. 
Subsection 108.5 is added and shall read as follows: 
    108.5 Rules. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting business except as provided by this section, applicable city ordinances, or governing state law. 
Subsection 108.6 is added and shall read as follows: 
    108.6 Notice of meetings. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within ten days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. When three members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request and receive a postponement of the hearing. A new hearing shall be held within five business days. 
Subsection 108.7 is added and shall read as follows: 
    108.7 Meetings. All hearing before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The board may modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of two members. All decisions and findings by the board shall be in writing with copies being provided to the appellant and the fire code official. 
Subsection 3301.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    3301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the possession, manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of explosives, explosive materials, fireworks and small arms ammunition. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard or National Guard. 
2.  Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia. 
3.  The possession, storage and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging requirements. 
4.  The possession, storage, and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption. 
5.  The use of explosive materials by federal, state and local regulatory law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities. 
6.  Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials. 
7.  The possession, storage and use of blank industrial-power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging regulations. 
8.  Transportation in accordance with DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-178. 
9.  Items preempted by federal regulations. 
10.  Items preempted by state statute, such statutes including, but not limited to, the Model Rocket Law (1965 PA 333, as amended), the Explosives Law (1970 PA 202, as amended), and the Fireworks Law (1931 PA 328, as amended). 
    APPENDIX - A: BOARD OF APPEALS, as promulgated and published, is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 3, 11-20-06) 
CHAPTER 117. - AIR GUNS 

Sec. 9.221. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Air gun: Any gun, rifle or pistol, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile by the action of compressed air or gas, or by the action of a spring or elastic, but such term does not include a firearm. 
(2)  Dealer: Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles designated in the preceding paragraph. 
Sec. 9.222. - Sales to minors. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air gun to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years where the dealer knows or has reasonable cause to believe the person to be under eighteen (18) years of age or where such dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of such person and such person is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, lend or otherwise transfer any air gun to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and pupil exists between such person and the person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Sec. 9.223. - Possession by minors. 
    Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this Code, it shall be lawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to have in his possession any of the articles defined in section 9.221 if such article is: 
(1)  Kept within his domicile; 
(2)  Used by the person under eighteen (18) years of age and he is a duly enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its facilities, or has written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range, to possess, load and fire at such rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult; 
(3)  Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when such an article designated in section 9.221 can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from transversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such grounds or residence. 
Sec. 9.224. - Carrying air guns in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to carry any air gun on the streets, alleys, public roads or public lands within the city unless accompanied by an adult; provided, that such person under eighteen (18) years of age may carry such air gun, unloaded, in a suitable case or securely wrapped. 
Sec. 9.225. - Discharge of air guns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun from or across any street, sidewalk, alley or public land or public place, except on a properly constructed target range. 
CHAPTER 118. - FUMIGATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Use of commercial pesticides by lawn care businesses, § 7.398. 

Sec. 9.251. - Definition. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, "fumigator" shall mean a person licensed under this Code to engage in the trade, work or occupation of fumigating as described in this chapter, or a person to whom a permit has been issued to fumigate a specific building or structure, while he is engaged in the fumigation of the building or structure for which the permit is issued. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.252. - Fumigator, license required. 
    No person shall engage in the trade, work or occupation of exterminating insects, vermin, rodents or other pests, including germs, by the process of fumigation, in which process of fumigation is used hydrocyanic acid gas, any derivation of cyanide, any gas of the halogen group, carbon monoxide gas, or any other lethal gas, fumes or vapors, except he be a licensed fumigator, or have a licensed fumigator in his employ. No license shall be issued except upon application to the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 70 of this Code and payment of the fee prescribed in Chapter 71. 
Sec. 9.253. - Fumigator to superintend. 
    No person shall fumigate any building, structure or part thereof, or cause the same to be fumigated by the use of any such gases, fumes or vapors, unless a licensed fumigator is in attendance and personally supervises all preparations and fumigation and the flushing and airing after fumigation, nor unless a permit is procured as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 9.254. - Permit to fumigate single building. 
    No person shall use any such gases, fumes or vapors in the fumigation of a building or structure or any part thereof, except a licensed fumigator, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 9.255. - Examination. 
    The city clerk shall submit each application for a permit or license under this chapter to the health officer, who, for the purpose of safeguarding health and life, shall make a thorough investigation of the training, experience, qualifications, character and fitness of the applicant to be engaged as a fumigator or carry on the fumigating for which a permit is sought and shall examine the applicant with respect thereto. If, as a result of any such investigation and examination, the health officer finds that the applicant is qualified to engage in the trade, work or occupation of a fumigator, or to conduct the fumigation of the building or structure for which a permit is sought, he shall approve the application. 
Sec. 9.256. - Special permits required. 
(1)  No person, whether or not he is a licensed fumigator, shall fumigate any building, structure or any part thereof by the use of any such gases, fumes or vapors, where the wall of any other building or structure adjoins it or is contiguous thereto, or is located within ten (10) feet thereof, without first obtaining a special permit from the health officer or his authorized representative. No fee shall be charged for such permit. 
(2)  No special permit shall be issued until the health officer or his authorized representative shall determine that the proposed fumigation can be conducted without endangering health, life or property. No fumigator shall fumigate any such building, structure or part thereof except in strict compliance with the specifications and conditions of such permit. 
Sec. 9.257. - Safety measures required. 
    No fumigator shall fumigate any building, structure or part thereof by the use of such gases, fumes or vapors, unless he shall comply with all the safety measures enumerated in this section: 
(1)  Notify police and fire department. At least four (4) hours before any such gases, fumes or vapors are generated or liberated, the fumigator shall notify the office of the police chief and the fire chief of the proposed fumigation, the address of the place to be fumigated, the time it will start, and the type of fumigant to be used. 
(2)  Inspection and instructions to occupants. The fumigator shall personally inspect the premises before any fumigation is started and shall give the occupants thereof a printed list of precautions and instructions, which list shall include the following items of information in detail: 
(a)  The dangerous characteristics of the fumigant to be used; 
(b)  The time fumigation will start and the length of time it will continue; 
(c)  The length of time the premises must remain vacant; 
(d)  The items of food, drink and material that must be removed; and 
(e)  The warning concerning bed clothing and opening of bedroom windows. 
(3)  Personal inspection by fumigator required. Immediately before any fumigation is started, the fumigator shall, by a personal inspection determine the following: 
(a)  That the entire building or structure of which any part is to be fumigated has been entirely vacated by human beings and domestic animals and that all ice and any food and drink likely to be affected by the fumigant has been removed; 
(b)  That all openings through which gas may escape in dangerous quantities have been sealed; 
(c)  That all entrances and doors, except one (1) have been securely locked and fastened in such a manner that they cannot be opened from the outside even though the proper keys be used in such effort; 
(d)  That a suitable warning card has been securely affixed to each entrance, which card shall have printed thereon in English, with black letters, not less than three (3) inches in height, the words "DANGER-KEEP AWAY-POISON GAS," and shall also give the name, address and telephone number of the fumigator. 
(4)  Locking and guarding exit door. Before any gases, fumes or vapors are generated or liberated, the fumigator shall lock from the inside the door through which he will leave the building or structure after releasing the gas. Upon leaving, the fumigator shall securely fasten the exit door in such a manner that it cannot be opened by another person even though the proper key for that door be used. A responsible adult guard shall be posted on the premises at all times throughout the period of fumigation. 
(5)  Ventilation. At the conclusion of the period of fumigation, the fumigator shall release the gases, fumes or vapors in a careful manner so that they are transmitted to the outside air in such a manner that health and life will not be endangered and so as to ventilate thoroughly and air the entire building or structure. The fumigator shall further see that all rooms and other enclosed areas are free of dangerous concentrations of gases, fumes or vapors, and that no such dangerous concentrations remain at any place on the premises. No fumigants shall be dropped on the floor or left exposed where persons or domestic animals may come in contact with them. 
Sec. 9.258. - Entry of persons into fumigated buildings. 
    No person, other than the fumigator, or a city officer or employee in the discharge of duty, shall enter any place where fumigation has been carried on until all trace of gases, fumes or vapors have disappeared and the warning signs have been removed by the fumigator or the health officer and in no event shall any person enter or be permitted to enter any such premises until twelve (12) hours after the ventilation thereof has been started; nor shall any aged, infirm or convalescent adult nor any child under the age of six (6) years enter or be permitted on such premises until twenty-four (24) hours after ventilation has been started. The fumigator shall determine when reentry may be made, and who may reenter and occupy the premises, and shall not remove or permit the removal of warning signs until after the lapse of time herein prescribed, nor until after reinspection of the entire building or structure. The fumigator shall remove the warning sign and all fumigants and equipment remaining on the premises promptly after expiration of such twenty-four-hour time limit. 
Sec. 9.259. - Rules and regulations. 
    The health officer is authorized and directed to make, publish and enforce such rules and regulations relative to fumigation with gases, fumes or vapors as are not in conflict with this chapter as he may deem necessary for the protection of life and health. No person shall violate any such rules and regulations. 
CHAPTER 119. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 9.321. - Definitions. 
    The word "firearm," except as otherwise specifically defined in this Code, shall be construed to include any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.322. - Transportation and possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or to have in possession in or upon any vehicle a firearm unless the same be unloaded in both barrel and magazine and carried in the luggage compartment of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful to carry a firearm on any public street or in any public place unless unloaded and enclosed in a case. 
Sec. 9.323. - Persons exempted. 
    Police officers, peace officers and persons in the military service, in pursuit of official duty, and persons duly authorized by federal or state law to carry firearms, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
CHAPTER 120. - AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 9.351. - Definitions. 
    The word "aircraft," as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air. The word "heliport" shall mean a permanent landing field designed and intended for the use of helicopters. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.352. - Operation of aircraft. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any aircraft within the city limits in excess of the manufacturer's specifications, recommendations or limitations, as set forth in the pilot's manual for that particular make and model. 
Sec. 9.353. - Landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
    Except as hereafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to take off from or land any type of aircraft, including a helicopter or hot air balloon, within the city limits at any place except at an approved landing field or at a landing site approved by the chief of police and the fire chief, or their respective designee(s), of the city. It shall further be unlawful for any person to conduct air lift, air crane, or related operations ("air operations") within the city limits unless prior approval therefore has been obtained from the chief of police and the fire chief, or their respective designee(s), of the city. No such approval shall be given by the chief of police unless (s)he makes a finding that the proposed air operations or use of the landing site shall not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood. No approval shall be given by the fire chief until the city fire marshal shall have inspected the proposed landing field or site or reviewed the proposed air operations and determined that no fire or life safety hazards related to fire service exist, and that such operations or the site will be safe for the requested use. In emergency circumstances where there exists a significant and imminent threat to life or property, "hospital emergency medical evacuation service" helicopters, as defined in the United States Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Regulations, ("FAR") may take off from or land at landing sites or engage in air operations as may be directed by the city police or fire department personnel assuming command of the emergency situation. "Public aircraft," as defined in FAR, acting in the scope of their official duties, are expressly exempt from the requirements of this section 9.353. 
(Ord. No. 1540, § 1, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 9.354. - Pilot certification. 
    No person shall be a pilot within the city of any type aircraft unless such person is both fully qualified and properly certificated, in accordance with all rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency or a branch of the military service, to perform as pilot for the particular type of flight in which he emerges. 
Sec. 9.355. - Parachute jumping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to participate in, assist in, aid or permit any jump by parachute or other means of descent in which the parachutist or person making the descent lands within the city limits. 
Sec. 9.356. - Emergency conditions. 
    No provision of this section shall be construed to make illegal any course of conduct by a pilot or other person, either on the ground or in the air, which is calculated to meet emergency conditions and best cope with an imminent danger that threatens life or property, either on the ground or in the air, when such emergency has arisen as a result of the operation of any type of aircraft. 
CHAPTER 121. - CONTROL OF OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES 

Sec. 9.361. - Preamble. 
    The city council finds and declares that the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city require the regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in this city. 
Sec. 9.362. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following words shall have the meaning ascribed in this section: 
(1)  Outdoor assembly, hereinafter referred to as assembly means any event, attended by more than five thousand (5,000) attendants, all or part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, including, but not limited to musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does not mean: 
(a)  An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property; or 
(b)  An event which is conducted or sponsored by an entity qualifying for tax exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Act 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, being section 206.201 of the Compiled Laws of 1948; or 
(c)  An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure. 
(2)  Person means any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or organization. 
(3)  Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly. 
(4)  Attendant means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of money, by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission, by gratuity or otherwise. 
(5)  Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.7. 
Sec. 9.363. - License requirement. 
    A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the city unless he shall have first made application for, and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each such assembly. 
Sec. 9.364. - Application for license. 
    Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the clerk of the city and shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall include at least the following: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. (Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having financial interest greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00)); 
(2)  A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly; 
(3)  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the proposed assembly; 
(4)  The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted; 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
Sec. 9.365. - Submission of plans. 
    Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  Police and fire protection; 
(2)  Food and water supply and facilities; 
(3)  Health and sanitation facilities; 
(4)  Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and equipment; 
(5)  Vehicle access and parking facilities; 
(6)  Camping and trailer facilities; 
(7)  Illumination facilities; 
(8)  Communications facilities; 
(9)  Noise control and abatement; 
(10)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal; 
(11)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
    In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly. 
Sec. 9.366. - Review of application. 
    On receipt by the clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement and health officers for the city, the state fire marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the clerk deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the council. 
Sec. 9.367. - Action on application. 
    Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application, the city council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license. The council may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five (5) days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
Sec. 9.368. - Denial of license. 
    A license may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any and all requirements of this chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; or 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
Sec. 9.369. - License information. 
    A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
Sec. 9.370. - Minimum requirements for license. 
    In processing an application the city council shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the city, in cooperation with the director of state police, is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2)  Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water-using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source constructed, located and approved in accordance with Act 294, Public Acts of 1965, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in manner approved by county health officer. 
(3)  Restroom facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Act 266, Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the county health officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with Act 273, Public Acts of 1939; and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. 
The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities, constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with Act 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels. 
The number and type of facilities required shall be determined on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities Male Female Toilets 1:300 1:200 Urinals 1:100 Lavatories 1:200 1:200 Drinking fountains 1:500 Taps or faucets 1:500  
Where the assembly is to continue for more than twelve (12) hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities Male Female Shower heads 1:100 1:100  
All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the county health officer. 
(4)  Food service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of Act 269, Public Acts of 1968, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. 
If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants. 
(5)  Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the county health officer. 
(6)  Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the county health officer. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled, "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with Act 243, Public Acts of 1951, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the county health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(7)  Solid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, flytight and rodentproof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the county health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
(8)  Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with Act 218, Public Acts of 1967, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(9)  Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with Act 230, Public Acts of 1966, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(10)  Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the director of the department of state police and the director of the department of the state highways must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
(11)  Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less than one (1) automobile space for every four (4) attendants. 
(12)  Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with Act 171, Public Acts of 1970, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provisions of state or local law. 
(13)  Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the department of building and safety engineering. 
(14)  Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) and property damage insurance with a limit of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) from a company or companies approved by the commissioner of insurance of the state, which insurance shall ensure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the clerk of the city in writing at least ten (10) days before the expiration or cancellation of such insurance. 
(15)  Bonding. Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state, a corporate surety bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in a form to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers and employees and the council of the city against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the assembly. 
(16)  Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by the state fire marshal, to ensure fire protection. 
(17)  Sound equipment. Sound-producing equipment, including but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of Southfield. 
(18)  Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress. 
(19)  Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one (1) unit for each one thousand (1,000) attendants. 
(20)  Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the city council may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the city. 
Sec. 9.371. - Revocation. 
    The city council may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated herein by reference. 
Sec. 9.372. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee or agent to knowingly: 
(1)  Advertise, promote or sell tickets to or conduct or operate an assembly without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter; 
(2)  Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance; 
(3)  Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement; 
(4)  Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct; 
(5)  Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises; 
(6)  Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotic, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in Act 343, Public Acts of 1952. 
    Any of the above-enumerated violations is a separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately enjoinable in the circuit courts, and is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
    It is further provided that any of the above violations is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate enjoining in the circuit court of the assembly. 
CHAPTER 122. - SOUTHFIELD HUMAN RIGHTS ORDINANCE-DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, enacted March 8, 2015, deleted former ch. 122, §§ 9.381-9.389 and enacted a new ch. 122. Former ch. 122 pertained to fair neighborhood practices and derived from Ord. No. 1051, adopted February 9, 1981; Ord. No. 1088, adopted March 8, 1982; Ord. No. 1199, adopted April 28, 1986; Ord. No. 1301, adopted April 30, 1990; and Ord. No. 1362, adopted October 25, 1993. 
Cross reference- City housing commission, § 1.171 et seq. 

Sec. 9.380. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council does hereby find that Southfield is a diverse community consisting of people of many different races, colors, religions, national origins, sexes, ages, heights, weights, physical and mental disabilities, marital statuses, family statuses, sexual orientations, and gender identities. It is the intent of the City of Southfield that no person be denied the equal protections of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of their actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identity. 
(b)  The prohibition against discrimination as provided for in this chapter shall not be deemed preempted by federal or state law, but is intended to supplement state and federal civil rights laws prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and housing. Provided, however, this chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence regarding, in particular, the freedom of speech and exercise of religion. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall require the preferential treatment of any person or group on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation or gender identity. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.381. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Age means chronological age. 
(b)  Discriminate means to make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identity of another person. 
Discrimination based on sex includes sexual harassment, which means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature when: 
(i)  Submission to such conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations, or housing; 
(ii)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting such individual's employment, public accommodations, or housing; or 
(iii)  Such conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations, or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, or housing environment. 
Discrimination based on actual or perceived physical or mental disability includes discrimination because of the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids. 
(c)  Family status means one (1) or more individuals under the age of eighteen (18) residing with a parent or other person having custody or in the process of securing legal custody of the individual or individuals or residing with the designee of the parent or other person having or securing custody, with the written permission of the parent or such other person. For purpose of this definition, parent includes a person who is pregnant. 
(d)  Gender identity means a person's actual or perceived gender, including a person's self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior, whether or not that self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's biological sex as assigned at birth as being either female or male. 
(e)  Housing accommodation includes improved or unimproved real property, or a part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one (1) or more persons. 
(f)  Marital status means the state of being married, unmarried, divorced or widowed. 
(g)  Person means an individual, agent, association, corporation, partnership, receiver, trust, unincorporated organization, a political subdivision of the state or an agency of the state, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(h)  Physical or mental disability means a determinable physical or mental characteristic resulting from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder which is unrelated to one's ability to competently perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; or unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent, and maintain property; or unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation. Physical or mental disability does not include any condition caused by the use of a controlled substance or the use of alcoholic liquor by an individual. 
(i)  Place of public accommodation means a business, or an educational, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, health, or transportation facility, or institution of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. 
(j)  Real property includes a building, structure, home, mobile home, real estate, land, mobile home park, tenement, leasehold or an interest in a real estate cooperative or condominium. 
(k)  Real estate transaction means the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real property, or an interest therein, or the listing thereof for such purpose. 
(l)  Real estate broker or salesperson means a person, whether licensed or not, who for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of those activities; who holds himself out as engaged in those activities; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of a real estate broker or salesperson. 
(m)  Sexual orientation means male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality, by orientation or practice. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-7. 
Sec. 9.382. - Unlawful or discriminatory real estate transactions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, real estate broker or salesperson to: 
(a)  Discriminate in leasing, selling, or otherwise making housing accommodations available; 
(b)  Encourage, discourage, discriminate, or otherwise influence any real estate transaction based on the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, weight, height, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identification, of the seller, purchaser, lessor or lessee, or person involved in the transaction; 
(c)  Encourage, discourage, discriminate or otherwise influence any real estate transaction based on the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, weight, height, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identification of any person who uses, occupies or holds an interest in real property located in the block, neighborhood, or area wherein the real property contemplated in the real estate transaction is located; 
(d)  Represent with intent to encourage, discourage, discriminate, or otherwise influence any real estate transaction, that a change has or will or may occur in the composition with respect to religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, weight, height, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identification of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property contemplated in the real estate transaction is located or represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, a decline in the quality of the schools, or an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located; 
(e)  The provisions of subsections (b) through (d) shall not preclude a person, a real estate broker or salesperson from making a factual response to a direct question or a response-demanding statement provided that the question or statement is not solicited by the person, real estate broker or salesperson and provided further that the response does not express an opinion which would encourage, discourage, discriminate, or otherwise influence a real estate transaction in a manner prohibited in subsections (b) through (d); 
(f)  Place more than one (1) "for sale" sign per seventy-five (75) feet of frontage of each street upon which the property being offered for sale shall abut; 
(g)  Place any sign advertising the sale of real property on any city-owned property or any street within the city without authority, except that "open" signs relating to real property being offered for sale may be placed on city streets under the following conditions: 
(i)  For purposes of this section a street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way, and the boundary lines shall be the property lines of the abutting property owners; 
(ii)  "Open" signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in total area and shall not exceed three (3) feet in height; 
(iii)  "Open" signs shall be placed only in the unimproved area of the street (the area between the roadway and sidewalk of the roadway and property line of abutting property, whichever the case may be); 
(iv)  No more than one (1) directional "open" sign leading into a subdivision from any main arterial road is allowed during the period of an open house or houses, regardless of the number of owners or companies that have open houses for public showing. This subsection does not prohibit more than one (1) directional "open" sign at an intersection within a subdivision provided each sign is necessary to direct a visitor in a different direction to an "open" house; 
(v)  "Open" signs shall under no circumstances be placed so as to constitute a traffic hazard; 
(vi)  "Open" signs shall be displayed only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and no "open" sign shall be displayed other than during the hours a house is open for public showing. 
(h)  Allow a "sold" or a "for sale" sign, either alone or in conjunction with one another, to remain or residential property in either of the following situations: 
(i)  For more than thirty (30) days after a purchase agreement for the sale of said property has been executed; or 
(ii)  For more than twenty-four (24) hours following the closing for the purchase of said property. 
"Sold" signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in total area; 
(i)  Refer to race, color, nationality, religion, age, sex, marital status, weight, height, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identification in any advertisement offering property for sale or rental; 
(j)  Advertise for sale or rental property which is nonexistent or which is not actually for sale or rental. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.383. - Unlawful real estate solicitations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation which engages in the sale and/or listing for sale of residential real property for profit or commercial gain to solicit the sale or listing for sale for any purpose relating to the sale of any residential real property, either by telephone, through the mail, in person or by any other method after the owner of such property has indicated through written notice a desire not to be solicited in accordance with the procedure outlined in this section. 
(b)  The city information center shall make available, upon request, forms for the use by the owner of such residential property. The owner shall sign the form listing the address of the property and specifically state that he or she does not wish to be solicited. 
(c)  The city information center shall maintain a record of listings concerning the aforementioned request forms, which listings shall be available for public inspection during business hours. 
(d)  The filing of the request forms with the city information center shall serve as notice to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations or corporations who solicit for the sale or listing for sale of residential property within the city that the owner of the residential property does not wish to be solicited. 
(e)  The city information center shall on a monthly basis compile and maintain a list of owners of such residential properties and shall, upon request, make the list available to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations or corporations who solicit for the sale or listing for sale of residential real property within the city. 
(f)  The city information center shall remove the owner's request form from its records upon the issuance of the next succeeding monthly listing: 
(i)  After the owner's written request to do so; or 
(ii)  After receiving written notice of a change or ownership of the residential property; or 
(iii)  After five (5) years from the date of filing the request form with the city. 
(g)  The owner shall be free to renew his or her request form upon the expiration of five (5) years. 
(h)  A person who solicits by any of the above-described means the sale of residential real property for the personal use or occupancy by him or herself or members of his or her immediate family shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(i)  No person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation shall be considered in violation of this section after the owner publicly offers or advertises the real property for sale. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.384. - Unlawful discrimination by lending institutions or finance companies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any lending institution or finance company to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identity, in the financing or lending of money or credit in the sale or transfer of real property. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.385. - Discriminatory public accommodation practices. 
    No person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of any place of public accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.386. - Discriminatory employment practices. 
    No person shall discriminate in the employment, compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or demotion, or termination of employment of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.387. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, the following practices shall not be violations of this chapter: 
(1)  For a religious organization or institution to restrict any of its facilities of housing or accommodations which are operated as a direct part of religious activities to persons of the denomination involved or to restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors and clergy to persons of that denomination. 
(2)  For the owner of an owner-occupied one-family or two-family dwelling, or a housing facility or public accommodation facility, respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex. 
(3)  To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of low income, over fifty-five (55) years of age, or who have a physical or mental disability. 
(4)  To discriminate based on a person's age when such discrimination is required by state, federal or local law. 
(5)  To refuse to enter into a contract with an unemancipated minor. 
(6)  To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic beverages a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  To refuse to admit persons under eighteen (18) years of age to a business providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of such business deems unsuitable for minors. 
(8)  For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 
(9)  To provide discounts on products or service to students, minors and senior citizens. 
(10)  To discriminate in any arrangement for the sharing of a dwelling unit. 
(11)  To restrict use of lavatories and locker room facilities on the basis of sex. 
(12)  For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations. 
(13)  To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age or sex. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
Sec. 9.388. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Any person or persons claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice or conduct covered by this chapter shall file a written complaint with the city attorney's office within sixty (60) days of the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory act. 
(b)  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in section 1.703 of chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(c)  Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  No civil infraction shall be issued for any violation of this chapter except by written authorization of the city attorney's office. In lieu of authorizing the issuance of a civil infraction, in appropriate circumstances, the city attorney may refer the matter to the Michigan Department of Civil Rights, the county prosecutor, the United States Department of Justice, the United States Equal Employment Opportunity commission, or other applicable enforcing agency. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city or any person for the prevention or correction of unlawful discrimination. Private actions and remedies shall be in addition to any actions for a violation of this chapter which the city may take. 
(Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 3-8-15) 
CHAPTER 123. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1066, § 1, enacted August 24, 1981, amended ch. 123 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 123 contained similar subject matter and was derived from the 1976 codification. 
Cross reference- Unlawful distribution of medicine or drug samples, § 9.3; operation of vehicle by person under the influence of a controlled substance, § 10.625 et seq. 

Sec. 9.391. - Possession or use of marijuana. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, control, use, give away or sell marijuana or cannabis, which is defined as all parts of the plant Cannabis, including all possible species thereof among the same being Cannabis sativa L, Cannabis indica, and Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; its seed or resin; and every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the above, unless such possession, control, use or sale is pursuant to a license, prescription or other legal exemption as provided in Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended (MCL 333.7101-333.7545). This definition does not include the mature stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compounds, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
(2)  A violation of this section shall be subject to a punishment of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, where such violation constitutes the unlawful possession, sale, control or giving away of marijuana. 
(3)  A violation of this section constituting the unlawful use of marijuana shall be subject to a punishment of a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(4)  In any prosecution for violation of this section, the burden of establishing any license, prescription or other legal exemption shall be upon the defendant, but this does not shift the burden of proof for the violation. 
(5)  No liability is imposed by this section upon any authorized officer of the city engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.392. - Keeping or maintaining a place for unlawful use of marijuana. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or maintain any store, shop, warehouse, dwelling, building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or other structure or place which is resorted to by persons using marijuana in violation of section 9.391 for the purpose of using these substances, or which is used for keeping them. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.393. - Toxic chemicals; introduction into respiratory or circulatory system prohibited. 
(1)  As used in this section, "chemical agent" means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent into his or her respiratory or circulatory system for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system. This section shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81) 
Sec. 9.394. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1503, enacted May 24, 2004, repealed § 9.394, in its entirety. Former § 9.394 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 1212 enacted November 24, 1986. 
Sec. 9.395. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia; 
(2)  To possess drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, product, or material of any kind which is primarily intended or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, concealing, producing, processing, preparing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, possession of which is unlawful. It includes items primarily intended or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, PCP, methamphetamine, or amphetamines into the human body, such as: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
(2)  Water pipes; 
(3)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(5)  Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(6)  Miniature spoons with level capacities of one-tenth ( 1/10 ) cubic centimeter or less; 
(7)  Chamber pipes; 
(8)  Carburetor pipes; 
(9)  Electric pipes; 
(10)  Air-driven pipes; 
(11)  Chillums; 
(12)  Bongs; 
(13)  Ice pipes or chillers; 
(14)  Wired cigarette papers; or 
(15)  Cocaine freebase kits. 
(c)  In determining whether an item constitutes "drug paraphernalia," in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following may be considered: 
(1)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the item concerning its use; 
(2)  Descriptive materials accompanying the item which explain or depict its use; 
(3)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(4)  The manner in which the item is displayed for sale; 
(5)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the item, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the item(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(7)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the item in the community; 
(8)  Expert testimony concerning its use; and 
(9)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects concerning its use. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person authorized by local, state, or federal law to manufacture, possess, or distribute such items; or 
(2)  Any item that, in the normal lawful course of business, is imported, exported, transported, or sold through the mail or by any other means, and traditionally intended for use with tobacco products, including any pipe, paper, or accessory. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 1212, § 1, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 1503, § 2, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 9.396. - Possession, use and trafficking of synthetic marijuana and bath salts. 
(1)  Declaration of findings and purpose. The city finds that synthetic marijuana and bath salt products marketed in the United States that provide a marijuana-like high when smoked or ingested have become increasingly popular, particularly among teens and young adults and that these products consist of plant material that has been laced with chemicals that have not been approved by the FDA for human consumption. 
The city further finds that based on information and reports from poison control centers, hospitals, emergency room physicians, and police agencies, that individuals who use synthetic marijuana and bath salts experience side effects including convulsions, tremors, seizures, hallucinations, unconsciousness, anxiety attacks, dangerously elevated heart rates, increased blood pressure, vomiting, and disorientation, evidencing that these products are harmful if consumed and present an imminent and significant public health danger to persons consuming such products and other persons coming in contact with them. 
The city further finds that the state has moved to prohibit the sale and possession of similar products, but the changing nature of the products has resulted in the availability of synthetic marijuana and bath salt products that exceed the state's definition and statutes and therefore are not properly regulated by state law. 
Based on these findings, this ordinance is adopted for the purpose and with the intent to protect the public health and safety of the city and its residents from the threats posed by the availability and use of synthetic marijuana and bath salts by prohibiting persons from trafficking in, possessing, and using them in the city. 
(2)  Definitions. 
1.  Act means the controlled substances provisions in article 7 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7101 to MCL 333.7545, as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as part of this section. 
2.  Bath salts mean a consumable product or material that contains a synthetic cathinone. 
3.  Consumable product or material means a product or material that regardless of packaging disclaimers or disclosures that it is not for human consumption or use, is in a form that readily allows for human consumption by inhalation, ingestion, injection, or application, through means including, but not limited to smoking, or ingestion by mouth with or without mixing with food or drink. 
4.  Controlled substance, for purposes of this section, means any substance containing a synthetic cannabinoid or synthetic cathinone. 
5.  Person means any person, firm, group, association, organization, partnership, business, corporation, company, limited liability company, or other business entity. For the purposes of this section, the president, managers, owners, shareholders, partners, members or other persons in charge of the business shall be responsible to require the business to comply with this section and shall likewise be subject to the penalties imposed for violations of this section by the business entity. 
6.  Synthetic cannabinoid includes any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is not otherwise listed as a controlled substance under the Act, is not approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration as a drug, and contains any quantity of the substances, their salts, isomers (whether optical, positional, or geometric), homologues (analogs), and salts of isomers and homologues (analogs), unless specifically excepted under the Act, whenever the existence of these salts, isomers, homologues (analogs) and salts of isomers and homologues (analogs) is possible within the specific chemical designation, as set forth in the synthetic cannabinoid appendix that is part of this section, as may be amended from time to time by the city council. 
7.  Synthetic cathinone means any material, compound, mixture or preparation that is not otherwise listed as a controlled substance under the Act, is not approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration as a drug, and contains any quantity of the substances, their salts, isomers (whether optical, positional, or geometric), homologues (analogs), and salts of isomers and homologues (analogs), unless specifically excepted under the Act, whenever the existence of these salts, isomers, homologues (analogs), and salts of isomers and homologues (analogs) is possible within the specific chemical designation, as set forth in the synthetic cathinones appendix that is part of this section, as may be amended from time to time by the city council. 
8.  Synthetic marijuana means a consumable product or material that contains a synthetic cannabinoid, including, without limitation, herb and herbal incense products marketed and most commonly known as K-2 and spice. 
9.  Traffic and trafficking means to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, or transfer. 
10.  Transfer means to dispose of a controlled substance to another person without consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution. 
(3)  Possession or use. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess or use, or knowingly allow the possession and/or use on property owned or controlled by that person, of synthetic marijuana or bath salts. 
(4)  Trafficking. It shall be unlawful for a person to traffic in synthetic marijuana or bath salts, or knowingly allow trafficking in synthetic marijuana or bath salts on property owned or controlled by that person. 
(5)  Penalties. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and be subject to a punishment of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(6)  City officers. No liability is imposed by this section upon any authorized officer of the city engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties. 
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID APPENDIX 
    Synthetic cannabinoid includes any material, compound, mixture or preparation containing any quantity of any of the following substances: 
(i)  Any compound containing a 3-(1-Naphthoyl) indole structure, also known as Napthoylindoles, with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: JWH 007, JWH 015, JWH 018, JWH 019, JWH 073, JWH 081, JWH 122, JWH 200, JWH 210, JWH 398, AM 1220, AM 2201, and WIN 55 212-2. 
(ii)  Any compound containing a 1H-Indol-3-YL-(1-Naphthyl) methane structure, also known as Napthylmethylindoles, with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: JWH-175, and JWH-184. 
(iii)  Any compound containing a 3-(1-Naphthoyl) pyrrole structure, also known as Naphtoylpyrroles with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the pyrrole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: JWH 370, JWH 030. 
(iv)  Any compound containing a naphthylideneindene structure with substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl1-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the indene ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: JWH-176. 
(v)  Any compound containing a 3-Phenylacetylindole structure, also known as Phenacetylindoles, with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: RCS-8 (SR-18), JWH 250, JWH 203, JWH-251, and JWH-302. 
(vi)  Any compound containing a 2-(3-Hydroxycyclohexyl) phenol structure, also known as Cyclohexylphenols, with substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not substituted on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: CP 47, 497 (and Homologues [Analogs]), cannabicyclohexanol, and CP 55, 940. 
(vii)  Any compound containing a 3-(Benzoyl) indole structure, also known as Benzoylindoles, with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: Pravadoline (WIN 48, 098), RCS 4, AM-630, AM-679, AM-1241, and AM-2233. 
(viii)  Any compound containing a 11-Hydroxy- /_\8- Tetrahydrocannabinol structure, also known as Dibenzopyrans, with further substitution on the 3-pentyl group by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkyethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: HU-210, JWH 051, JWH 133. 
(ix)  Any compound containing a 3-(L-Adamantoyl) indole structure, also known as Adamantoylindoles, with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-Methyl-2-Piperidinyl) methyl, or 2-(4-Morpholinyl) ethyl group, whether or not further substituted on the adamantly ring system to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to: AM-1248. 
(x)  Any other synthetic chemical compound that is a cannabinoid receptor agonist and mimics the pharmacological effect of naturally occurring cannabinoids that is not listed in Schedules II through V of the Act and is not approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration as a drug. 
SYNTHETIC CATHINONE APPENDIX 
    Synthetic cathinone includes any material, compound, mixture or preparation containing any quantity of any of the following substances: 
(i)  Any compound containing a 2-Amino-1-Propanone structure with substitution at the 1-position with a monocyclic or fused polycyclic ring system and a substitution at the nitrogen atom by an alkyl group, cycloalkyl group, or incorporation into a heterocyclic structure. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to, Dimethylcathinone, Ethcathinone, and Alpha-Pyrrolidinopropiophenone. 
(ii)  Any compound containing a 2-Amino-1-Propanone structure with substitution at the 1-position with a monocyclyc or fused polycyclic ring system and a substitution at the 3-position carbon with an alkyl, haloalkyl, or alkoxy group. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to, naphyrone. 
(iii)  Any compound containing a 2-Amino-1-Propanone structure with substitution at the 1-position with a monocyclyc or fused polycyclic ring system and a substitution at any position of the ring system with an alkyl, haloalkyl, halogen, alkylenedioxy, or alkoxy group, whether or not further substituted at any position on the ring system to any extent. Examples of this structural class include, but are not limited to, mephedrone, methylone, and 3-fluoromethylone. 
(Ord. No. 1592 , § 1, 6-24-12) 
CHAPTER 124. - CITY CONSTABLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1147, § 1, enacted Sept. 24, 1984, amended the Code by adding a new ch. 124, §§ 9.390-9.395. Such provisions were redesignated by the editor as ch. 124, §§ 9.401-9.406. 
Cross reference- Police department, § 1.101 et seq. 

Sec. 9.401. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City Constable Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
Sec. 9.402. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prescribe a manner for the appointment of city constables; to restrict and limit the authority conferred upon a constable at law; to restrict or limit the duties of city constables prescribed by law; and to provide for payment for the service rendered by constables; as permitted by section 32 of 1909 PA 279 as amended by 1976 PA 408 [MCL 117.32], and section 7.16 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
Sec. 9.403. - Appointment of city constables. 
    The city council may by resolution appoint one (1) or more city constables. Unless the resolution of appointment restricts or limits the authority conferred upon a constable by law, the individual so appointed shall possess all of the authority conferred by law. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
Sec. 9.404. - Authority of constables. 
(a)  Unless the resolution appointing an individual as a city constable specifies restrictions or limitations on such person's authority, city constables shall have like powers and authorities in matters in civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service or process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships, except: 
(i)  A city constable may be appointed by the 46th District Court as a district court officer and may perform duties permitted pursuant to Chapter 83 of Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being sections 600.8301 to 600.8395 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(ii)  No constable shall perform both statutory criminal and civil duties until such constable first fulfills the minimum employment standards established by the Law Enforcement Officers Training Council pursuant to section 9 of Act 203 of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended, being section 28.609 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. The cost of complying with these standards shall be borne by the city. 
(b)  If the resolution appointing an individual as a city constable so provides, the constable shall be deemed to be a public servant other than a police officer, who is specially authorized by law to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a certain class of ordinance violations, and shall possess the authority conferred upon such public servants by section 9c of 1927 PA 175 as amended by 1980 PA 506 [MCL 764.9c]. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
Sec. 9.405. - Duties of city constables. 
    Unless the resolution appointing an individual as a city constable specifies restrictions or limitations on such person's duties, the constable shall serve all warrants, notices and process lawfully directed to him by the city and shall perform other duties required of a constable by law, including the services of all process issued for breaches of ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
Sec. 9.406. - Payment for services. 
    The resolution appointing an individual as a city constable shall specify the amount and manner of his or her remuneration. A constable may be paid a salary in addition to fees. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-24-84) 
CHAPTER 125. - CURFEWS 

Sec. 9.501. - Minors 15 years of age and younger. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor fifteen (15) years of age or younger to loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, park, or other place open to the general public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 6-8-87) 
Sec. 9.502. - Minors 16 or 17 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age to loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, park, or other place open to the general public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 6-8-87) 
Sec. 9.503. - Spray paint. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, "spray paint" means any can or similar container of paint, varnish, lacquer, stain, pigment, or similar solvent or substance commonly used in painting and applied by a spraying method, atomizer or similar technique. 
(2)  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall possess a can of spray paint, except a person under age eighteen (18) may possess spray paint for use at or in the course of lawful employment or for other lawful uses with written proof of the same from an employer, parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9.504. - Curfew during state of disaster or emergency. 
    In the event the city is subject to a declaration of a state of disaster or emergency, the mayor may order a curfew in all or part of the city during such hours as deemed necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or disobey the terms of such curfew. 
(Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 9-29-03) 
Sec. 9.505. - Parental responsibility. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(a)  Delinquent acts means those acts which violate the laws of the United States, the laws of the state, or city ordinances; those acts which cause or would tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division of the Probate Court as defined by MCL 712A.2; or those acts by which the minor intentionally causes physical harm to another or deliberately creates an unreasonable risk of physical harm to himself or herself or to others. "Delinquent acts" do not include traffic violations which are designated as civil infractions. 
(b)  Drugs means the controlled substance as defined by the Public Health Code for the state. 
(c)  Minor means any unemancipated person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  Parent means a mother, father or legal guardian of a minor who has the responsibility for the health, welfare, care, maintenance and supervision of the minor at the time the delinquent act is alleged to have been committed by the minor. 
(2)  The parent of any minor has a continuous responsibility to exercise reasonable control and supervision over the minor to prevent the minor from committing or participating in the commission of any delinquent act. The parental responsibility to exercise reasonable control includes the following duties, set forth for the purposes of illustration and not limitation: 
(a)  To keep drugs out of the home and out of the possession of the minor, except those drugs duly prescribed by a licensed physician or other authorized medical professional; 
(b)  To keep firearms out of the possession of the minor except those used for hunting in accordance with state law and with the knowledge and supervision of a parent; 
(c)  To know the curfew ordinance of the city and to require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance; 
(d)  To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to prevent the minor from being absent from school without parental or school permission; 
(e)  To prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully damaging, defacing or destroying real or personal property belonging to others; 
(f)  To prevent the minor from engaging in theft of property or keeping in his or her possession property known to be stolen. 
(3)  Whenever a minor is arrested or detained by the police department for the commission of any delinquent act, the parent of the minor shall be notified as soon as reasonably possible by the police of the minor's arrest or detention and the reason therefore, and of the parent's responsibility under this section. A record of such notification shall be kept by the police department. 
(4)  If the minor of a parent commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be responsible for a violation of this section if: 
(a)  Any act, word or nonexercise of parental responsibility by the parent encouraged, caused or allowed to occur the commission of the delinquent act by the minor, or 
(b)  The parent knew or reasonably should have known that the minor was likely to commit a delinquent act, but failed to take timely and appropriate action to prevent the commission of the delinquent act by the minor. If, at any time within forty-five (45) days following the giving of notice as provided in subsection (3) above, the minor to whom such notice related or applied commits a delinquent act as defined in this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the minor committed the delinquent act with the knowledge of the parent. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 9.506. - Possession of tobacco by minors. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
(b)  Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered, or pulverized tobacco that may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed, or placed against the gums. 
(2)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. 
(3)  (a)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to the fine stated in subsection (a), a minor who violates this section may be required by the court to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A minor who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, a minor who violates this section is subject to the following: 
(i)  For the first violation, the court may order the minor to do one of the following: 
a.  Perform not more than sixteen (16) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
b.  Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection. 
(ii)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the minor to perform not more than thirty-two (32) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(iii)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the minor to perform not more than forty-eight (48) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 8-23-99) 
CHAPTER 125A. - REGULATION OF THE IGNITION, DISCHARGE, AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS 

Sec. 9.601. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks, in accordance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12) 
Sec. 9.602. - Definitions. 
(1)  Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as a part of this chapter. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks, as defined in the Act, means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission, and other requirements in the Act. "Consumer fireworks" does not include low-impact fireworks. 
(3)  Fireworks, as defined in the Act, means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. 
(4)  Low-impact fireworks, as defined in the Act, means ground and handheld sparkling devices. 
(5)  Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(6)  National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
(a)  New Year's Day, January 1; 
(b)  Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January; 
(c)  Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February; 
(d)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; 
(e)  Independence Day, July 4; 
(f)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September; 
(g)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October; 
(h)  Veteran's Day, November 11; 
(i)  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; and 
(j)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12) 
Sec. 9.603. - Ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks. 
    A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks in the city; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to the use of consumer fireworks during the hours of 8:01 a.m. and 12 midnight on the day preceding, the day of, and the day after a national holiday in accordance with provisions of the Act, except that with respect to New Year's Day only, this prohibition shall not apply to the use of consumer fireworks during the hours of midnight and 1:00 a.m. and during the hours of 8:01 a.m. and 12 midnight, in accordance with provisions of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12; Ord. No. 1612 , § 1, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 9.604. - Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. 
    A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12) 
Sec. 9.605. - Enforcement; seizure. 
(1)  The city fire marshal, fire chief, or their respective designee(s), or sworn law enforcement officers of the city are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  If the city fire marshal, fire chief, or their respective designee, or a sworn law enforcement officer of the city, determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the fire marshal, fire chief, or designee, or sworn officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12) 
Sec. 9.606. - Penalties. 
(1)  Unless expressly provided otherwise, all violations of any section of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in section 1.703 of chapter 15 of the City Code; provided, however, any violation of section 9.603 shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and shall subject the violator to the civil fines and penalties as provided in section 1.703 of chapter 15 of the City Code, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation and no other fine or sanction, in accordance with section 7(3) of the Act. 
(2)  Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this chapter, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible for a violation of this chapter shall be required to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1593 , § 1, 6-24-12; Ord. No. 1612 , § 2, 7-7-13) 
Title X - TRAFFIC 
CHAPTER 126. - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1008, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979, amended ch. 126 to read as herein set out. Subsequent amendments are indicated in history notes following affected sections. Former ch. 126 contained similar subject matter and was derived from the 1976 codification. Ord. No. 924, § 1, enacted January 31, 1977; Ord. No. 951, § 1, enacted October 11, 1977; and Ord. No. 968, § 1, enacted June 19, 1978, all amended former ch. 126 but were never included as part of the Code. 
Pursuant to subsection 3(k) of the Home Rule Cities Act, 1909 PA 209 as amended, being MCL 117.3(k), the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300 as amended, being MCL 257.1 through MCL 257.923 inclusive, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective are hereby adopted by the city. (Ord. No. 1500, adopted Sept. 13, 2003.) 
Cross reference- Functions of police department, § 1.102; vehicles in parks, § 3.6; police regulations, tit. IX. 

SUBCHAPTERS A-C. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1500, enacted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed §§ 10.1A-10.715 inclusive, which in effect repealed subchapters A-C. Former §§ 10.1A-10.715 pertained to words and phrases, registration and licensing, and obedience and effect of traffic laws. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 

Secs. 10.1A-10.715. - Reserved. 
SUBCHAPTER E. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS AND VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 10.716. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1500, enacted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed § 10.716 in its entirety. Former § 10.716 pertained to size, weight and load restrictions and derived from Ord. No. 1326, enacted Sept. 23, 1991. 
Sec. 10.716A. - Traffic engineer. 
    The office of traffic engineer is hereby established. The traffic engineer shall be appointed in a manner prescribed by the ordinance making body and shall exercise the powers and duties provided in this chapter in a manner consistent with prevailing traffic engineering and safety practices and in the best interest of the city, or with respect to property owned by the Southfield Public Schools. In the absence of the appointment of a traffic engineer, the authority of such engineer shall be vested in the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79; Ord. No. 1285, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 10.716B. - Duties of traffic engineer. 
    It is the general duty of the traffic engineer to plan and determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices; to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to device remedial measures; to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions; to plan the operation of traffic on the streets of the city and Southfield Public Schools, including parking areas; to cooperate with other officials or this governmental unit and the Southfield Public Schools in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the ordinances of this governmental unit. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79; Ord. No. 1285, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 10.716C. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
    The traffic engineer shall place and maintain, or remove, traffic-control signs, signals, lane markings and other devices and shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, when and as required under the traffic ordinance of this governmental unit to indicate and to carry out the provisions of such ordinance, of this governmental unit and under state law, to regulate, warn or guide traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716D. - Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the official state manual of uniform traffic-control devices. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout this governmental unit. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law of this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716E. - Limit to authority. 
    Notwithstanding the authority granted to the traffic engineer under this chapter, no traffic-control device shall be placed or maintained upon any trunkline highway under the jurisdiction of the state highway commissioner except by the latter's permission or upon any county road without the permission of the county road commission having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716F. - Traffic-control orders. 
(a)  The authority to regulate traffic contained in this chapter shall be exercised by the traffic engineer by the issuance of traffic-control orders which shall specify the rules and regulations adopted or established by him. Such traffic-control orders shall become effective upon being filed with the clerk and upon erection of adequate signs or signals giving notice of the existence of such regulation, if signs or signals are required by the provisions of this chapter pertaining to such regulation. Traffic-control orders may be issued by the traffic engineer on his own authority but when so issued shall be known as temporary traffic-control orders and shall not be effective after the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date of filing, nor shall any such temporary traffic-control order be renewed or extended except upon its approval by the ordinance-making body. Permanent traffic-control orders shall be issued by the traffic engineer, approved by the ordinance-making body and filed with the clerk. Temporary orders shall become permanent orders upon approval by the ordinance-making body, but notice of such approval shall be filed with the clerk as in the case of an original traffic-control order. All such orders and any action modifying or repealing such orders shall be kept in a separate book by the clerk to be known as the traffic-control order book. 
(b)  Copies of traffic-control orders certified by the clerk to be a true transcript compared by him with the original in this office shall be evidence in all courts, and proceedings in like manner as the original would be if produced. If it shall appear that a traffic-control sign, signal or device conforming to the provisions of this chapter was erected or in place when the alleged violation of this chapter occurred, such showing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of a lawful traffic-control order authorizing such traffic-control sign, signal or device, and it shall be unnecessary for the prosecution to affirmatively show the existence of a valid traffic-control order in such cases unless and until such presumption is rebutted by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716G. - Emergency regulations. 
    The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716H. - Testing traffic-control devices. 
    The traffic engineer may test or experiment with traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716I. - Through streets. 
    Where any through street is duly established, it shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of this governmental unit unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the traffic engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716J. - Intersections where stop required. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716K. - Stop signs at railroad grade crossings. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate certain grade crossings of railways by highways as "stop" crossings, and to erect signs thereat notifying drivers of vehicles upon any such highway to come to a complete stop before crossing such railway tracks, and whenever any such crossing is so designated and signposted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than ten (10) feet from such railway tracks before traversing such crossings. The erection of, or failure to replace or maintain, such signs shall not be a basis for any action of negligence against local authorities. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716L. - Yield right-of-way signs. 
    The traffic engineer may determine and designate intersections where conditions warrant requiring vehicles to yield the right-of-way to cross vehicles and to determine whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at one (1) or more entrances to any such intersection. A yield sign shall be erected at every place where approaching vehicles are required to yield the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716M. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716N. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716O. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles upon the left-hand side of such street. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716P. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    The traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716Q. - No stopping, standing or parking zones. 
    The traffic engineer may determine and designate zones where stopping, standing parking is prohibited due to hazardous conditions which may exist or when conditions exist which would cause undue delay to traffic. Such zones shall be designated by posting proper signs at such locations. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716R. - Tow-away zones. 
    The traffic engineer may establish tow-away zones as follows: 
(a)  At locations already designated as no stopping, standing or parking zones; 
(b)  On streets where the normal width of the roadway is reduced by a building or buildings or by a construction project; 
(c)  At or adjacent to streets and locations where safety and traffic movement is affected by occurrence of a public event; 
(d)  Such tow-away zones shall be designated by posting signs reading "Tow-away zone." Such signs shall be posted independently or as an extra panel attached below the posted signs prohibiting, stopping, standing or parking at the location. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716S. - Curb loading zones. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which such zones shall be restricted for loading purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716T. - Permits for curb loading zones. 
    The traffic engineer shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The traffic engineer upon granting a permit and issuing such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit with the treasurer a service fee, in the amount specified by resolution of the ordinance-making body, for year or fraction thereof. The governmental unit may by regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716U. - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
    The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privileges as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716V. - Clerk to issue permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
    The clerk, upon receipt of a written application, shall issue, subject to the approval of the traffic engineer, permits to back a vehicle at right angles to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading of merchandise or material. Such permits shall be subject to the terms and conditions stated thereon. Every such permit shall expire at the end of each calendar year, but may be reissued. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716W. - Clerk to issue permit for curb loading zones. 
    The clerk, upon receipt of a written application, shall issue, subject to the approval of the traffic engineer, permits for curb loading zones. Such permits shall be subject to the terms and conditions stated thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716X. - Public carrier stands. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs, which he shall cause to be erected. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716Y. - Parking meter zones. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the ordinance-making body, to determine and designate metered parking zones, and to install and maintain as many parking meters as necessary in such metered parking zones, where it is determined that the installation of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.716Z. - Angle parking zones. 
    The traffic engineer shall determine the location of angle parking zones, and shall erect and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and giving notice thereof, except that no such zones shall be established on state trunkline highways. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1500, enacted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed § 10.717 in its entirety. Former § 10.717 pertained to maximum width of vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 1326, enacted Sept. 23, 1991. 
Sec. 10.717A. - Duty to erect parking signs. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to erect and maintain appropriate signs giving notice of regulations relating to the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717B. - Speed restrictions. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish, increase or decrease speed regulations provided for in this chapter, and to erect signs giving notice thereof, as follows: 
(a)  Establish prima facie lawful speed limits on streets outside of business or residential districts, which shall in no case be less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour; 
(b)  Increase the prima facie speed limits on through streets within business or residential districts; 
(c)  Establish the prima facie speed limit in public parks, alleys, cemeteries, and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79; Ord. No. 1285, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 10.717C. - Authority to place turning markers. 
    The traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning as such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717D. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717E. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    Where any one-way street or alley is duly established, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717F. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717G. - Authority to establish no passing zones. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate no passing zones on streets or parts of streets and shall place and maintain official signs or markings on the roadway to indicate such zones. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717H. - Truck routes, road limits. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to prohibit the use of designated streets by trucks or other commercial vehicles, and to impose limitations as to the weight of vehicles on designated streets, but such prohibitions and limitations shall not become effective until notice thereof is given by means of official signs. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717I. - Prohibiting certain traffic. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by bicycles, horsedrawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717J. - Bicycles on sidewalks prohibited. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets where riding bicycles upon the sidewalks is prohibited and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717K. - Crosswalks. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717L. - Safety zones. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717M. - Traffic lanes. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
Sec. 10.717N. - Authority to regulate parking on private property. 
    With consent of the owners or persons in charge of private property open to the general public for travel, the traffic engineer may determine and designate no parking zones on such property which shall be effective upon the owner or persons in charge placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating the same. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717O. - When traffic devices required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717P. - Obedience to official traffic-control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this governmental unit, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Sec. 10.717Q. - Permit required for transporting buildings over city streets and rights-of-way. 
(1)  Whoever moves, transports or conveys or participates in moving, transporting or conveying, any building or any room of any building upon, across or over any highway, roadway, street or vehicular right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city without having first obtained a permit from the city traffic engineer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  The city traffic engineer shall promulgate rules, regulations, procedures and standards for granting such permits, which rules shall be effective upon approval of the city council and filing with city clerk. 
(3)  Whoever moves, transports or conveys or participates in moving, transporting or conveying, any building or any room of any building, upon, across or over any highway, roadway, street or vehicular right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city in violation of the terms of any permit granted under this section, or in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city traffic engineer and approved by the city council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, "building" is defined as any structure greater in width than eight (8) feet eight (8) inches or greater in length than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy and which is considered as real property and not as personal property according to the law of the state and specifically excludes mobile homes, trailers, wheeled vehicles and structures not designed as shelters. 
(5)  The intent of this section is to amend the traffic chapter so as to govern the manner in which city streets may be utilized for transporting buildings from one (1) parcel of land to another parcel of land while maintaining the smooth and orderly flow of traffic, ensuring adequate fire and police protection, protecting the public streets from damage, and maintaining utility, street light and traffic signal cables. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 7-23-79) 
Secs. 10.718-10.729. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1500, enacted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed §§ 10.718-10.729 in their entirety. Former §§ 10.718-10.729 pertained to various traffic-control regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1326, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, and Ord. No. 1008, enacted July 23, 1979. 
SUBCHAPTER F. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 10.730. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1326, § 3, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, repealed former § 10.730, which pertained to warrant for arrest and derived from Ord. No. 1008, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979. 
Sec. 10.731. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1326, § 3, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, repealed former § 10.731, which pertained to evidence of conviction for violators pertaining to use of motor vehicles inadmissible in civil actions and derived from Ord. No. 1008, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979. 
Sec. 10.732. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10.733. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1326, § 3, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, repealed former § 10.733, which pertained to release of accident record information and derived from Ord. No. 1008, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979. 
Secs. 10.734-10.740. - Reserved. 
Secs. 10.741, 10.742. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1326, § 3, enacted Sept. 23, 1991, repealed former §§ 10.741, 10.742, 10.743-10.750 which pertained to civil infraction actions and derived from Ord. No. 1008, § 1, enacted July 23, 1979; and Ord. No. 1053, § 1, enacted April 13, 1981. 
Sec. 10.742A. - Issuance of parking citations by nonpolice personnel. 
(1)  The city, pursuant to the power conferred by MCL 257.742(5), as amended, and section 10.742(5) of this Code, does expressly designate the chief of police as its agent, in his or her discretion, to authorize and appoint person other than police officers to issue and serve citations for civil infraction violations of section 10.674, as amended, involving the unlawful parking of motor vehicles upon specified property within the city. 
(2)  The chief of police shall maintain a list of all such persons appointed by him or her under this subsection, and he or she shall have the further express power at will to remove or add such appointments on a continuing basis. 
(3)  Persons appointed pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce on such specified property the provisions of section 10.674 or any other ordinance of the city pertaining to, regulating or restricting, the parking of motor vehicles upon such property, by way of the issuance of service of citations in compliance with the procedures set forth in sections 10.675C and 10.742 of this Code, as amended, and all other ordinances applicable to their function. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 3-14-83; Ord. No. 1297, § 1, 2-12-90) 
Secs. 10.743-10.750. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 10.741. 
Secs. 10.751-10.900. - Reserved. 
SUBCHAPTER G. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1500, enacted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed §§ 10.901-10.908 in their entirety. Former §§ 10.901-10.908 pertained to penalties. See Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 10.901-10.908. - Reserved. 
SUBCHAPTER H. - SOUTHFIELD VEHICLE CODE 

Sec. 10.1001. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to subsection 3(k) of the Home Rule Cities Act, 1909 PA 209 as amended, being MCL 117.3(k), the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300 as amended, being MCL 257.1 through MCL 257.923 inclusive, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective are hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 10.1002. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to local authorities shall mean the City of Southfield. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 10.1003. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code for violations of said code are hereby adopted by the city by reference, provided however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment for violation thereof is greater than ninety-three (93) days; however, a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(C) and the Southfield Motor Vehicle Code 10.625(1)(c) is punishable by one (1) or more of the following: 
i.)  Community service of not more than three hundred sixty (360) hours; 
ii.)  Imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; and, 
iii.)  A fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 1599 , § 1, 12-23-12) 
Sec. 10.1004. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 10.1005. - Title of subchapter and method of citing. 
    This subchapter shall be known as the Southfield Vehicle Code. For purposes of citing the provisions of this subchapter, the section number of the Michigan Vehicle Code shall be inserted immediately following the designation "section 10". As an example, a violation of section 626(b) of the Michigan Vehicle Code for careless driving shall be cited as a violation of section 10.626(b) of the Southfield Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 10.1006. - Parking regulations. 
    A motor vehicle shall not be parked on any public street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.; however, permission to park during these hours may be granted by the chief of police or his designee for a period not to exceed seven (7) days when a social function is being held, construction is in progress prohibiting the use of a driveway or garage, or other special occasion(s) upon the finding by the chief of police or his designee that such permission will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood; provided, however, any such permission to park on the public street during these hours issued by the chief of police or his designee shall be limited to no more than two (2) annually per residence or household. 
(Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 1696 , § 1, 8-9-18) 
Secs. 10.1007-10.1100. - Reserved. 
SUBCHAPTER I. - HAND-HELD PHONES 

Sec. 10.1101. - Using a hand-held phone while committing a traffic offense. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a traffic offense while operating a motor vehicle on any highway, or other place open to the general public including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, while using a hand-held phone. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction and may be penalized as provided for in section 10.907. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 10-9-07) 
CHAPTER 127 - SOUTHFIELD MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY CODE 

Sec. 10.1201. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote safety and highways of the city by regulating the operation of certain vehicles, to establish the qualifications of persons necessary for the safe operator of such vehicles, to limit the hours of service of persons engaged in operating such vehicles, to require the keeping of records of such operations, and to provide penalties for the violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Sec. 10.1202. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to subsection 3(k) of the Home Rule Cities Act, being MCL 117.3(k), the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, being P.A. No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.) as amended by P.A. 1984, No. 23; P.A. 1990, No. 339; P.A. 1995, No. 265; P.A. 2000, No. 98; P.A. 2005, No. 177; P.A. 2006, No. 50; P.A. 2011, No. 160; P.A. 2012, No. 231, and as may be further revised or amended now or in the future, is hereby adopted by the City of Southfield, and incorporated by reference as an ordinance of the City of Southfield. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Sec. 10.1203. - References in code. 
    Reference in the Motor Carrier Safety Act to "City" shall mean the City of Southfield, and reference to "local ordinance" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Southfield. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Sec. 10.1204. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act for violations of said code are hereby adopted by the City of Southfield; provided, however, that the City of Southfield shall not enforce any provision of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act for which the maximum period of imprisonment for violation thereof is greater than ninety-three (93) days. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Sec. 10.1205. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner provided by law, and the fact that a complete copy of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Sec. 10.1206. - Title of chapter and method of citing. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Southfield Motor Carrier Safety Code. For purposes of citing the provisions of this chapter the section number of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act shall be inserted immediately following the designation section "10.1202". As an example, a violation of section 7b of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, operation of a commercial motor vehicle with serious safety defects, shall be cited as subsection 10.1202.7b of the Southfield Motor Carrier Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1631 , § 1, 12-7-14) 
Title XI - TAXES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to tax, § 9.1. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for public improvements, § 1.221 et seq.; tax increment finance authority, § 2.400 et seq. 

CHAPTER 140. - TAX EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter (sections 11.1 through 11.9) is to provide for a complete exemption for ad valorem taxes and to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a housing project for low income persons and families to be financed with a federally-aided, or regulated pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, or an authority-aided mortgage loan or an advance or grant from the authority, pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq., (the "Act"). 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, published February 9, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 11.1 through 11.9, and adding new §§ 11.1 through 11.9. Former 11.1 through 11.9 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 943, adopted July 11, 1977. 
Sec. 11.2. - Title. 
    This chapter (sections 11.1 through 11.9) shall be known and cited as the "Southfield Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.3. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Act. The city is authorized by the Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of sections 11.1 through 11.9 for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated in sections 11.1 through 11.9 are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of the housing projects that is constructed or rehabilitated with financing extended in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that the sponsor (as defined below) has offered, subject to receipt of either a mortgage loan from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, or a federally-aided mortgage and/or receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit program from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct/acquire and rehabilitate, own and operate a housing project identified as "River Park Place" on certain property located at 24300 Civic Center Drive, (more specifically described in Exhibit A, which is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk) in the city to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing project an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14; Ord. No. 1634 , § 1, 12-21-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.4. - Definitions. 
A.  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
B.  Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of a housing project representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of utilities. 
C.  Contract rents means the total contract rents (as defined by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated, pursuant to section 8 of the US Housing Act of 1937, as amended) received in connection with the operation of a housing project during an agreed annual period, exclusive of utilities. 
D.  Federally-aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A below market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"); 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by HUD and augmented by a program of rent subsidies; 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by HUD; 
(4)  A mortgage on a housing development to which the authority allocates low income housing tax credits under section 22b of the Act; 
(5)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income housing, consistent with the Act. 
E.  Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move into a housing project. 
F.  Mortgage loan means a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation, acquisition, and/or permanent financing of the housing project, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project. 
G.  Sponsor means the Southfield River Park Place Limited Dividend Housing Association LLC, and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan or federally-aided mortgage. 
H.  Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer, and other utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing project. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.5. - Class of housing projects. 
    It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing projects for low income persons and families that are financed with a mortgage loan by the authority or financed by a federally-aided mortgage. It is further determined that "River Park Place" is of this class. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.6. - Annual service charge. 
A.  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing project identified as "River Park Place" and the property on which it is located, 24300 Civic Center Drive, Southfield, Michigan (more specifically described on Exhibit A), shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction or rehabilitation. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of sections 11.1 through 11.9, and the qualification of the housing project for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in sections 11.1 through 11.9. Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct/rehabilitate and operate the housing project, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan or a federally-aided mortgage or an allocation under the low income housing tax credit program from the authority, the annual service shall be equal to four (4) percent of the annual shelter rents/contract rents actually collected by the housing project during each operating year. 
B.  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection 11.6.A, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing project that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the housing project were not tax exempt. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14; Ord. No. 1634 , § 1, 12-21-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.7. - Contractual effect of sections 11.1 through 11.9. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of sections 11.1 through 11.9. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.8. - Payment of service charge. 
    The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under sections 11.1 through 11.9 shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city and distributed to the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. The annual payment for each operating year shall be paid on or before July 1 of the following year. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.9. - Duration. 
    The provisions of sections 11.1 through 11.9 shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as a MSHDA mortgage or a federally-aided mortgage, or regulation by a qualified low-income housing credits pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, remains in effect and encumbers the property. 
(Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 2-9-14) 
Note- See editor's note, § 11.1. 
Sec. 11.10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter [sections 11.10 through 11.18] is to provide for complete exemption from taxes and any service charges for a proposed multiple-family dwelling project with congregate care amenities for senior citizens and handicapped persons pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 P.A. 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.11. - Title. 
    This chapter [sections 11.10 through 11.18] shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "City of Southfield Tax and Service Charge Exemption Ordinance No. 2." 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.12. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its senior citizens and handicapped persons and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for an exemption from all taxes imposed by the state or by any political subdivision, public body or taxing district in which the housing is located as permitted by the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 P.A. 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city (hereinafter "city") is authorized by said Act to establish a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain tax and service charge exemption therefor is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of sections 11.10 through 11.18 for tax and service charge exemption during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. It is further acknowledged that there presently exists in the city a pressing need for senior citizens congregate care housing facilities. 
    The city acknowledges that McDonnell III Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (hereinafter the "sponsor") has offered to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as The Trowbridge on certain property located in the city (as more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof) to serve senior citizens and handicapped persons and has also agreed to incorporate certain congregate care amenities and that the city has agreed, in consideration thereof, to grant an exemption from all taxes and service charges for such development pursuant to the authority duly vested in the city council by the Act and by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 1236 is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 11.13. - Definitions. 
    [As used in sections 11.10 through 11.18:] 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(c)  Housing development means a development for senior citizens and handicapped persons and such elements of commercial, recreational and communal facilities to improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for senior citizens and handicapped persons. 
(d)  Mortgage loan means the loans to be made by the authority or insured or co-insured by FHA to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
(e)  Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan or to FHA for insurance or co-insurance to finance a housing development. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.14. - Class of housing developments. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be those housing developments financed with federally aided or authority aided mortgages which have insurance or co-insurance issued by The Federal Housing Administration ("FHA") under the authority of the department of housing and urban development, as of September 1, 1987, and which housing developments provide, in conjunction with the housing facilities, a dining room sufficient to seat not less than one-half (1/2) of its residents, covered parking, a kitchen with range, refrigerator, disposal and dishwasher in each apartment, community space with kitchen facilities, laundry facilities to service the residents, community space for recreational activities, facilities for barber and beauty shop and space for social work and health personnel. It is further determined that The Trowbridge is of this class of housing developments. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.15. - Exemption from taxes and nonassessment of service charges. 
    The housing development identified as FHA Project No. 044-36604 and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all taxes and/or service charges from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the sponsor's mortgagee have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of sections 11.10 through 11.18 and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all taxes and service charges whatsoever, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct, own and operate said housing development, hereby agrees not to assess any taxes or service charges and to completely abate any taxes or service charges for the duration of sections 11.10 through 11.18 as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.16. - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) or any other provisions of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the sponsor's mortgagee and the authority as third party beneficiaries thereunder, to provide tax and service charge exemption as hereinabove set forth, is effected and implemented by enactment of sections 11.10 through 11.18 [Ord. No. 1236]. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.17. - Duration. 
    Sections 11.10 through 11.18 shall remain in effect and shall not terminate or be repealed so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the FHA has any interest in the property; provided, that construction of the housing development commences within one (1) year from the effective date of sections 11.10 through 11.18 [Ord. No. 1236]. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.18. - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 10-26-87) 
Sec. 11.19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27] is to provide for a complete exemption from taxes and any service charges for a proposed multiple-family dwelling project for senior citizens and handicapped persons of low and moderate income to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 P.A. 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.20. - Title. 
    This chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27] shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "City of Southfield Tax and Service Charge Exemption Ordinance No. 3." 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.21. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its senior citizens and handicapped persons of low and moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for an exemption from all taxes imposed by the state or by any political subdivision, public body or taxing district in which the housing is located as permitted by the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 P.A. 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city (hereinafter "city") is authorized by such act to establish a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the act. It is further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain tax and service charge exemption therefor is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this chapter [sections 11.19-11.27] for tax and service charge exemption during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. It is further acknowledged that there presently exists in the city a pressing need for housing for senior citizens and handicapped persons. 
    The city acknowledges that Meadowcrest Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (hereinafter the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Meadowcrest Apartments on certain property located in the city (as more particularly described in "Exhibit A" attached hereto and made a part hereof) to serve persons of low and moderate income and that the city has agreed, in consideration thereon, to grant an exemption from all taxes and service charges for such development pursuant to the authority duly vested in the city council by the act and by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 1293 is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 11.22. - Definitions. 
    As used in the chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27] the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed in this section: 
(a)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(b)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(c)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low or moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low and moderate income. 
(d)  Mortgage loan means the loans to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
(e)  Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.23. - Class of housing development. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply, shall be those housing developments financed with authority-aided mortgages which have been accepted by the authority for participation under the authority's taxable bond program utilizing the nine (9) percent tax credit as of September 1, 1989. It is further determined that Meadowcrest Apartments is of this class of housing development. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.24. - Exemption from taxes and nonassessment of service charges. 
    The housing development identified as authority project No. 803 and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all taxes and/or service charges from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this chapter [sections 11.17 through 11.27] and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all taxes and service charges whatsoever, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a permanent mortgage loan from the authority, to own and operate such housing development, hereby agrees not to assess any taxes or service charges and to completely abate any taxes or service charges for the duration of this chapter [sections 11.17 through 11.27] as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.25. - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
    Notwithstanding the provision of section 15(a)(5) or any other provisions of the act to the contrary, a contract between the city and sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary thereunder to provide tax and service charge exemption as hereinabove set forth, is effected and implemented by enactment of this chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27]. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.26. - Duration. 
    This chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27] shall remain in effect and shall not terminate or be repealed so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; provided, that construction of the housing development commences within one (1) year from the effective date of this chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27]. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 11.27. - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter [sections 11.19 through 11.27] shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provisions of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any section or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 12-11-89) 
CHAPTER 141. - NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE ZONES 

Sec. 11.50. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to preserve Southfield neighborhoods and to further the maintenance, preservation, improvement and development of housing for all persons regardless of income level; to provide that the city, by resolution, may designate one (1) or more neighborhood enterprise zones pursuant to the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, Public Act 147 of 1992, as amended, being MCL 207.771 et seq.; and to encourage, through ad valorem property tax benefits established by said Act, the construction of new structures that have as their primary purpose owner-occupied one (1) or two (2) unit residential housing and the rehabilitation of existing structures having as their primary purpose residential housing consisting of one (1) to eight (8) units, and under specific circumstances for newly constructed market rate rental residential projects, by bringing them into conformity with minimum building and housing code standards and improving the livability of the units. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.51. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Certificate of compliance means a certificate issued by the building official, or his or her designee, attesting to the fact that a new, rehabilitated or market rate rental facility for which an enterprise zone certificate is in effect is in compliance with the construction or safety codes of the city. 
(2)  Neighborhood enterprise zone means any zone designated by the city council by resolution from time to time as a neighborhood enterprise zone pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, Public Act 147 of 1992, as amended, being MCL 207.771 et seq., (the Act). 
(3)  Neighborhood enterprise zone certificate means a certificate as defined and issued pursuant to the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act. 
(4)  New facility means one (1) or both of the following: 
(i)  A new structure of a portion of a new structure that has as its primary purpose residential housing consisting of one (1) or two (2) units, one (1) of which is or will be occupied by an owner as his or her principal residence. New facility includes a model home or a model condominium unit. New facility includes a new individual condominium unit, in a structure with one (1) or more condominium units that has as its primary purpose residential housing and that is or will be occupied by an owner as his or her principal residence. 
(ii)  A new structure or a portion of a new structure that meets all of the following: 
(A)  Is rented or leased or is available for rent or lease. 
(B)  Is a mixed use building or located in a mixed use building that contains retail business space on the street level floor. 
(C)  Is located in a qualified downtown revitalization district. 
(5)  Owner means the record title holder of, or the vendee of the original land contract pertaining to a new facility or a rehabilitated facility for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is applied for or issued. 
(6)  Rehabilitated facility means an existing structure or a portion of an existing structure with a current true cash value of eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00) or less per unit that has or will have as its primary purpose residential housing, consisting of one (1) to eight (8) units, the owner of which proposes improvements that if done by a licensed contractor would cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per owner-occupied unit or fifty (50) percent of the true cash value, whichever is less, or seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per nonowner-occupied unit or fifty (50) percent of the true cash value, whichever is less, or the owner proposes improvements that would be done by the owner and not a licensed contractor and the cost of the materials would be in excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per owner-occupied unit or four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00) per nonowner-occupied unit and will bring the structure into conformance with minimum Southfield Housing Code standards for occupancy or improve the livability of the units while meeting minimum Southfield Housing Code standards. Rehabilitated facility also includes an individual condominium unit, in a structure with one (1) or more condominium units that has as its primary purpose residential housing, the owner of which proposes the above described improvements. Rehabilitated facility also includes existing or proposed condominium units in a qualified historic building with one (1) or more existing or proposed condominium units. Rehabilitated facility does not include a facility rehabilitated with the proceeds of an insurance policy for property or casualty loss. A qualified historic building may contain multiple rehabilitated facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.52. - Designation of zones. 
    The city council, by resolution, may designate from time to time one (1) or more neighborhood enterprise zones. 
(1)  A neighborhood enterprise zone for rehabilitation and new construction shall contain not less than ten (10) platted parcels of land. A neighborhood enterprise zone located in a qualified downtown revitalization district may contain less than ten (10) platted parcels if the platted parcels together contain ten (10) or more facilities. All the land within a neighborhood enterprise zone shall also be compact and contiguous. Contiguity is not broken by a road, right-of-way, or property purchased or taken under condemnation. 
(2)  The total acreage of the neighborhood enterprise zones designated under this section shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total acreage contained within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.53. - Application for certificate. 
    Once a neighborhood enterprise zone is established in the manner provided in section 11.52 and the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, any person who proposes to construct a new facility or to rehabilitate property located in a neighborhood enterprise zone, and who intends to seek the tax benefits provided in the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act, may file an application for a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate with the city assessor. The application must be filed before a building permit is issued for the work proposed and shall be filed in the form and manner prescribed for in said Act. The city shall charge a non-refundable application fee set by city council resolution from time to time to be paid with the filing of the application. The application for a certificate shall be subject to the requirements, approvals and conditions of the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone Act and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.54. - Inspections. 
(1)  Before the sale of a new facility, rehabilitated or rental facility for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect, an inspection by the city shall be requested and made to determine compliance with the building and housing codes of the city, chapters 100 and 102 of the City Code. 
(2)  No sale of any new, rehabilitated, or rental facility for which a neighborhood enterprise zone certificate is in effect may be finalized until there is compliance with the building and housing codes of the city, chapters 100 and 102 of the City Code, and a certificate of compliance attesting to the fact is issued by the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.55. - Issuance of certificate of compliance. 
(1)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued only after the new, rehabilitated, or market rate rental facility has been inspected and meets the requirements or the construction or safety codes of the city. An inspection report shall be completed by the inspector after the inspection is completed. The report shall note all violations found in the facility. Before a certificate of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and the required inspection fee paid. 
(2)  After issuance, a certificate of compliance shall only be valid for one (1) sale of a new, rehabilitated, or market rate rental facility. A new inspection and certificate of approval shall be required each time a new or rehabilitated facility is sold. 
(3)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, the duration of the neighborhood enterprise certificate shall be not less than six (6) years or more than fifteen (15) years in accordance with section 12 of the Act, and shall be determined in accordance with the schedule adopted by the city council by resolution from time to time which fixes the number of years beyond the minimum to additional investment levels in the rehabilitated facility beyond the base investment set forth in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Sec. 11.56. - Inspection fee. 
    The city shall charge a non-refundable inspection fee which shall be set by city council resolution from time to time, which shall be paid in advance of the certificate of approval inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1695 , § 1, 6-7-18) 
Title XII - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities, franchises, permits, § 10.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Utilities and services, tit. II. 

CHAPTER 145. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1457, enacted Sept. 25, 2000, amended ch. 145 in its entirety to read as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 

Sec. 12.1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Southfield Cable Communications Procedure Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.2. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of cable communications service in the city in the interest of the public; to promote and encourage adequate economical and efficient cable communications service to the residents of the city; to provide for the furnishing of a cable communications system service to the residents of the city without unjust discrimination, undue preference, or advantages; to provide oversight of community programming on public, education and government (PEG) channels, and to promote viewership. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context: 
(a)  Access cablecasting shall mean services provided by a cable television system on its public, education, local government, leased or other channels. 
(b)  Cable communications system, cable system, CATV or system shall mean a system of coaxial cables, fiber optics or other equipment used to receive signals off the air or otherwise, and to transmit them via cable to subscribers, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voice, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air. Such definition does not include: 
(i)  Any system which offers service to fewer than fifty (50) dwelling units. 
(ii)  Any master antenna system distributing only local broadcast stations or security channels. 
(c)  Cable communications service shall mean the business, in whole or in part, of receiving directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifying or otherwise modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one (1) or more signals, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to members of the public located in the city. 
(d)  Cable manager shall mean the manager of the City of Southfield cable television department. 
(e)  City shall mean the City of Southfield, Michigan, and all the territory within its territorial corporate limits. 
(f)  City administrator shall mean the administrator of the City of Southfield or his/her designee. 
(g)  Council is the city council of Southfield, Michigan. 
(h)  Franchise or franchise agreement shall mean the separate agreement by which a franchise is granted to the grantee, as authorized by this chapter. 
There shall be two (2) types of franchises: A city-wide franchise to operate a cable communications system which encompasses a major portion of the geographic area of the city; and a limited franchise for a cable communications system restricted to a specific geographic area for private multiple dwelling units or cable communications system connecting private multiple dwelling units operating under the same ownership. 
(i)  Grantee shall mean any person or company and parent company thereof granted a franchise in accordance with this chapter. 
(j)  Pay TV shall mean an arrangement under which a charge is made to a television receiver for receiving a particular television program. 
(k)  Person or company means and includes one (1) or more individuals, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or organizations of any kind, and any combination thereof. 
(l)  Street shall mean the surface of or the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel, and shall include such other easements and rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting signals over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable television system. 
(m)  Subscriber shall mean a person or organization whose premises are physically wired to receive any transmission from the system. 
ARTICLE I. - FRANCHISE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 12.4. - Franchise required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the city whether or not it is deemed to use, occupy or traverse the city streets or rights-of-way, nor shall any person provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control of a cable communications company in the city whether or not it is deemed to use, occupy or traverse the city streets or rights-of-way without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(b)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets, alleys, lanes, avenues, boulevards, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, rights-of-way or any other public place or public way in the city or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable communications system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable communications franchise therefor for the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(c)  Any franchise agreement shall contain specifications, including, but not limited to, the following terms: duration of franchise; transfer of franchise; renewal of franchise; forfeiting of franchise, fees, reporting, and records; penalties and procedures; insurance; construction, performance and other bonds; construction schedule and standards; access, local origination, data, pay, and other programming; privacy; system maintenance; employment practices; funding of access, local origination, and other community programming; and any other operating practices. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.5. - Application. 
(a)  A person wishing to secure a city-wide or limited franchise to furnish, install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or service shall file a written application with the city clerk's office (with copies to the city attorney and the city administrator) in such form and containing such information and supportive documentation as the city may require. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set by the city council which shall be used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in processing said application. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.6. - Application process. 
(a)  Upon receiving the application and the fee, the cable manager shall investigate and review the application. 
(b)  The cable manager shall recommend approval of the application unless he/she finds that (a) the applicant, (b) the proposed cable communications system, or (c) the proposed franchise does not conform to the standards embodied in the regulations promulgated by the commission or that the proposed franchise would be in violation of any other regulation, ordinance, law or not be in the public interest. 
(c)  The cable manager shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve or disapprove the application and set forth in writing the reasons for its decision. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.7. - Council action. 
(a)  The city council may hold a public hearing on the recommendation of the cable manager to review the findings of the cable manager. Council may request additional information it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a cable communications system or service in the city. 
(b)  If the council determines that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical, and otherwise, reasonably to assure applicant's ability satisfactorily to install, construct, maintain, and operate a cable communications system in the city, the council may approve the franchise application contingent upon compliance with standards, terms or conditions set by the city council and direct its staff and/or agents to negotiate a franchise agreement with such successful applicant. Upon approval of such franchise agreement, council may issue the applicant a non-exclusive franchise therefor in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.8. - Current cable franchises. 
    Any cable communications system or service which, pursuant to an existing franchise agreement, (i) was lawfully engaged in actual operations, or (ii) had commenced substantial construction of a cable communications system or service with the approval of city council at the date of the execution of this chapter, may continue to exercise said franchise pursuant to the terms thereof provided such company files with the city within sixty (60) days from the execution hereof, such additional information and supporting documentation as the city may require of other applicants. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.9. - Franchise: transfer, renewal, amendment. 
(a)  No transfer, renewal or amendment of any franchise or any transfer of control of a franchise or of facilities constituting a significant part of any cable communication system shall be effective without prior review and approval of the city council. 
(b)  A person wishing to transfer, renew or amend a franchise, or to transfer control of a franchise or a substantial part of the facilities thereto shall file with the city clerk an application for approval of such change, in such form and containing such information and supportive documents as the city may require. The application shall be accompanied by such fee as the city council may set. 
(c)  The cable manager shall recommend approval of the application unless it finds that the applicant, the proposed transfers or cable television system does not conform to the standards embodied in the regulations, promulgated by the cable manager, the terms of its franchise agreement, or that approval would be in violation of any other regulation, ordinance, law, standard, or the public interest, provided, that such noncompliance is not without reason and approval would be in the public interest. 
(d)  The cable manager shall make his/her recommendations of approval or denial to city council setting forth in writing the reasons for his/her decision. 
(e)  The city council may hold a public hearing to review the recommendation of the cable manager. It may approve the application contingent upon compliance with standards, terms or conditions which serve the interest of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.10. - Civil penalties. 
    If the grantee fails to perform any obligation under the franchise agreement, the cable manager may assess a monetary penalty. 
    The following monetary penalties shall apply, and liability therefore shall accrue from the date of mailing of notice: 
Failure to render payment of the reimbursement of the city's expenses within the specified time, per day, from time due until paid ..... $500.00 
Failure to make timely application, registration, or any other filing with the FCC, per day, from time due until filed ..... $300.00 
Failure to deliver timely evidence of company insurance, per day, from time due until delivered ..... $100.00 
Failure to timely obtain and file with the city the construction bond, per day, from time of lapse until restored ..... $300.00 
Failure to make timely any payment in respect to the security fund or to deposit or restore the letter of credit in a timely fashion, per day, from time due until paid, deposited or restored ..... $200.00 
Failure to render timely payment of the franchise fee, per day, from time due until paid ..... $1,000.00 
Failure of the grantee to perform its obligations in the event of a major public emergency or disaster condition in accordance with the franchise agreement, per occurrence ..... $10,000.00 
Failure to restore damaged property timely, per day until restored ..... $50.00 
Failure to apply for utility company agreements within the specified thirty (30) days, per day, from time due until application is made ..... $500.00 
Failure to commence construction in a timely fashion, per day, from time due until begun ..... $500.00 
Failure to complete construction in a timely fashion, per day, from due until completed ..... $500.00 
Failure to respond to a request for repair or adjustment by the next business day, per day, per subscriber, until response made ..... $100.00 
Failure to commence service to a subscriber within the specified time limits, per day, per subscriber, until service begun ..... $100.00 
Failure to pay a timely refund due a subscriber, per day, per subscriber, from due until paid ..... $50.00 
Failure to provide a subscriber at least the specified notice prior to disconnection, per subscriber, per occurrence ..... $50.00 
Failure to respond in a timely fashion to a billing complaint, per day, per subscriber, until response made ..... $50.00 
Failure to file timely any report required by this agreement, per day, per report, from time due until filed ..... $100.00 
Violation of privacy restrictions of section 4.18, per violation, per subscriber ..... $100.00 
Failure to maintain availability of fixed studio or mobile facility, and all required equipment for access programming use, per day, from 24 hours after interruption of availability, beyond a reasonable period of time for maintenance or repairs, as determined by custom and usage in the U.S. cable television industry, until restored to service ..... $200.00 
Failure to submit a timely original or revised system description, per day, from time due until submitted ..... $20.00 
Failure to submit a timely construction status report, per day, from time due until submitted ..... $100.00 
Failure to comply with any other franchise requirement and/or FCC customer service standards, per day, until default is remedied ..... $100.00 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.11. - Hearing procedures. 
    Before the commencement of proceedings that may result in the imposition of a penalty, the cable manager shall give notice, by certified mail, to the grantee of facts or conduct which warrant this intended action. The grantee shall then be given reasonable opportunity to show compliance with franchise or previous order of the city. If upon review it appears to the cable manager that the grantee continues to be in violation of the franchise or previous order of the city, the cable manager may assess a penalty. 
(a)  Upon the cable manager, assessing a penalty, written notice of such assessment shall be sent to the grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a concise statement of the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days after mailing of a notice, the grantee may request an appeal of the cable manager's decision to the city administrator, in a proceeding affording due process. The pendency of a hearing shall suspend payment of the penalty until ten (10) days after mailing to the grantee by first class mail of the decision of the city administrator confirming said penalty in whole or in part. 
(c)  The decision of the city administrator shall be in writing and shall contain statement of findings made by the city administrator. 
(d)  The grantee shall pay the full amount of any penalty to the city within ten (10) days after mailing of a notice. 
(e)  Amounts received by the city as penalties assessed against the grantee, may be used by the city for any purpose it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMISSION 

Sec. 12.12. - Establishment of commission. 
    The Southfield Cable Communications Commission is hereby created, hereinafter referred to as the "commission." 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.13. - Membership. 
    The commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city, shall be subscribers, and appointed by the city council. No person shall be appointed as a member, and any member shall vacate his or her chair who, simultaneously holds any position at any level of government as an elected or appointed officer, or department head, whether elected or appointed, or as a member of any board, commission or committee of any political subdivision, or any position specified in section 5.1 of the Southfield City Charter except an "employee" at any level of government and who is not otherwise disqualified. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.14. - Removal as a member. 
    A member may be removed at any time with or without cause by a majority vote of the city council having appointed such member. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.15. - Term of office. 
(a)  The original members of the commission shall be appointed for the following terms: 
1.  Three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of (3) years, their terms expiring on October 1, 2003. 
2.  Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, their term expiring on October 1, 2002. 
3.  Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of (1) year, their terms expiring on October 1, 2001. 
(b)  Upon expiration of the original terms, subsequent appointments by the original appointing body will be for a term of three (3) years. 
(c)  A commissioner, whose term of office has expired, shall continue to hold office until a successor has been appointed, as herein provided. 
(d)  Should a vacancy occur on the commission, a replacement shall be named by city council to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.16. - Rules of procedure. 
    Within ninety (90) days of its original formation, the commission shall adopt by-laws for the conduct of its business and elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson. Annually thereafter, elections for a chairperson and vice chairperson shall occur. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.17. - Powers of the commission. 
    The commission shall have the following specified purposes only: 
(1)  Conduct periodic survey of cable subscribers and other residents to determine interests and suggestions for public-education and government (PEG) programs. 
(2)  Evaluate each of the three (3) PEG channels for strengths and weaknesses, assist in establishing goals for each. 
(3)  Become familiar with any city marketing plan and assist in incorporating themes into programs, promotions and so forth. 
(4)  Complete training at public access facility and have option to volunteer to work on community shows. 
(5)  Assist with public relations for access channels (booths at special events, contests, video festivals, etc.). 
(6)  Review candidates and recommend person to be considered for annual scholarship to high school students planning to pursue degree in telecommunications. 
(7)  Research and discuss various programming including diverse cultural features to be included on access channels. 
(8)  Establish rules for use of public access channel and facilities. 
(9)  Settle disputes with public access users related to rules or studio procedures. 
(10)  Periodically review level of customer service with cable manager. 
(11)  Complete annual evaluation of access programming and report to mayor and council through the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.19. - Staff liaison. 
    A staff liaison person shall be named from time to time by the city administrator, whose duties shall be to act as secretary to the commission and to provide administrative support to the commission in the fulfillment of its duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 12.20. - Conduct of meetings. 
    Meetings of the cable communications commission, and meetings of any committees created thereby, shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act; PA 267 of 1976, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 9-25-00) 
CHAPTER 147. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1082, § 1, enacted December 17, 1981, added a new ch. 147. Such provisions were codified a §§ 12.24 and 12.25 at the direction of the city. 
Charter reference- Power to grant utility franchises, § 10.2. 

Sec. 12.24. - Permission to operate. 
    Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Charter of the city and chapter 145 of this Code, there is hereby granted to Continental Cablevision of Oakland County, Inc., a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise for a period of ten (10) years, the right, privilege and franchise to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, use, operate, own and maintain a cable system for the entire area of the city subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in a certain document dated September 21, 1981, together with the First Amendment to Franchise Agreement, and the Second Amendment to Franchise Agreement and entitled "Franchise Agreement" which document has been on file with the city clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least thirty (30) days before final adoption of this section by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 12-17-81) 
Sec. 12.25. - Effective date of franchise. 
    This franchise is required to take effect within one (1) year after the adoption of this section (December 17, 1981). 
(Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 12-17-81) 
CHAPTER 148. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 12.26. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, "Act" shall mean the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time; "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission; "FCC Rules" shall mean all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act; "basic cable service" shall mean "basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules; "associated equipment" shall mean all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.923; an "increase" in rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services; and "cable commission" shall mean the Southfield Cable Communications Commission. All other words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.27. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and 
(2)  Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. 
This chapter shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.28. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.29. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten (10) copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this chapter, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten (10) copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations consistent with the Act or FCC Rules prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to section 12.29(a) above, the city administrator may request and the cable operator shall then provide additional information that is related to and reasonably necessary for the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city administrator may establish reasonable deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC § 543 and 47 CFR § 76.922 and § 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.30. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this chapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 12.29(a) or any request for information pursuant to section 12.29(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five (5) working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.31. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten (10) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 12.29(a) above, the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: 1) The filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and 2) Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven (7) days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least five (5) days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least five (5) days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.32. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after thirty (30) days from the date of filing under section 12.29(a) above unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the thirty-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within thirty (30) days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the thirty-day deadline for an additional ninety (90) days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional one hundred fifty (150) days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.33. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 12.32 and 47 CFR § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 12.29 of this chapter. The cable commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: 1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held, 2) interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates, and 3) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.34. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the cable commission shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall include a summary of the comments and/or objections presented by interested parties at the public hearing. The report shall further include (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments, objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 12.35. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than twenty (20) days before the city council acts under section 12.35. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk at any time prior to the date city council is scheduled to act under section 12.35. If at least ten (10) copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.35. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within ninety (90) days of the tolling order under section 12.32 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within one hundred fifty (150) days after the tolling order under section 12.32 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.36. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR § 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven (7) days written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.37. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 12.35 or section 12.36 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: 1) summarize the written decision, and 2) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.38. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 12.29, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.39. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this chapter shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council, so long as there is substantial compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.40. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the city council or the cable commission may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council or cable commission, respectively, in their sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.41. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this chapter shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
Sec. 12.42. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to and limited by applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 10-25-93) 
CHAPTER 149. - MCI METRO TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE 

Sec. 12.43. - Grant of franchise. 
    Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the City Charter there is hereby granted to MCI Metro Access Transmission Services, Inc., a Delaware Corporation and its approved successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise for a period of fifteen (15) years, to construct, reconstruct, use, operate, own and maintain a telecommunications system for the entire area of the city subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in a certain agreement entitled "Franchise For Use of the Public Way Between the City of Southfield and MCI Metro Access Transmission Services, Inc.," which agreement has been on file with the city clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least thirty (30) days before final adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 1, 10-16-95) 
CHAPTER 160. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1453, enacted May 8, 2000, as amended by Ord. No. 1481, enacted October 14, 2002, enacted new provisions to be designated as ch 148. Inasmuch as there already exists a ch. 148 and in order to maintain the numeric style of the Code, said provisions have been included as ch. 160. 

Sec. 13.1 - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.3. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 1 
(2)  City means the City of Southfield, Michigan. 
(3)  City council means the city council of the City of Southfield or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
(4)  City administrator means the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(5)  Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(6)  All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
(a)  Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
(b)  MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
(c)  Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
(d)  Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
(e)  Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
(f)  Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. "Telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
1.  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
3.  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Note- 1 A copy of the Act can be obtained on the Internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
Sec. 13.4. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one (1) copy of the application with the city clerk, one (1) copy with the city administrator, and one (1) copy with the city attorney. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act. 2 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Additional information. The city administrator may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city administrator deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city administrator. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, within one hundred eighty (180) days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the five hundred dollars ($500.00) application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Note- 2 A copy of the application form as approved by the Commission can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
Sec. 13.5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city administrator. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, the city administrator shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 13.4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act, the city administrator shall notify the MPSC when the city administrator has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city administrator shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city administrator shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 3 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act, the city administrator may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city administrator may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Note- 3 Copies of the permit forms currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the internet at http:// 
www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
Sec. 13.6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 33 of the Southfield City Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within ninety (90) days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps shall be in both paper and electronic format, unless and until the city council determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition, in accordance with the city utility policy, dated March, 1998, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 13.4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of the ordinance from which this chapter derived, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act, if section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 13.11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act, the city administrator shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting the ordinance from which this chapter derived is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231, 215.246, as provided in subsection 13.4(c) of this chapter; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 13.4(f) of this chapter; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred dollars ($500.00) application fee, in accordance with subsection 13.4(g) of this chapter; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 13.5(a) of this chapter; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 13.5(a) of this chapter; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 13.5(a) of this chapter; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 13.5(b) of this chapter; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 13.5(c) of this chapter; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 13.5(d) of this chapter; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 13.6 of this chapter; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of the ordinance from which this chapter derived, in accordance with section 13.11 of this chapter; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 13.14 of this chapter; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 13.15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.19. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city administrator or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations under this chapter as provided by the Southfield City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 13.20. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in chapter 15, section 1.703 of the Southfield City Code. Nothing in this section 13.20 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 10-14-02) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since October 13, 1975, which are included in this Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 906  5-24-76 1 2.153 907  6-21-76 1 2.153 917 11-15-76 1 2.171, 2.172 918 11-15-76 1 2.153 923  1-17-77 1 1.382 926  2- 7-77 1 8.415, 8.416 933  4-11-77 1 9.11 942  7-18-77 1 1.91 2 1.125 943  7-11-77 1 11.1-11.9, Exhibit A 948  9- 6-77 1 2.171 959  4-17-78 1 9.152 961  4-24-78 1 8.401 962  4-24-78 1 8.401.1, 8.401.2 966  6-19-78 1 2.171 981 11-20-78 1 8.201-8.204 982 11-20-78 1 8.255-8.261 983 11-20-78 1 8.451-8.458, 8.461 984 12-11-78 1 1.382 987  3-26-79 1 8.204 994  6-11-79 1 2.153, 2.154 995  6-11-79 1 2.171 997  6-18-79 1 2.201-2.207 1006  7-23-79 1 9.181-9.184 1008  7-23-79 1 10.1(1)-(43), (45)-(88); 10.215; 10.223-10.225; 10.228; 10.251B-10.251E; 10.252; 10.255, 10.256; 10.301, 10.302; 10.311; 10.312A; 10.313; 10.315; 10.321A; 10.324-10.328; 10.601, 10.602; 10.602A; 10.603; 10.604; 10.606, 10.607; 10.611-10.616; 10.617A; 10.618-10.625; 10.625A-10.625D; 10.626; 10.626A, 10.626B; 10.627-10.629; 10.629B; 10.631-10.643; 10.643A; 10.644, 10.645; 10.647-10.650; 10.652-10.661; 10.661A; 10.662; 10.671-10.674; 10.674A; 10.675; 10.675A, 10.675B; 10.676; 10.676B; 10.677-10.679; 10.679A; 10.680; 10.682; 10.682A; 10.716A-10.716Z; 10.717A-10.717Q; 10.726A; 10.727, 10.728; 10.728D, 10.728E; 10.729-10.731; 10.733; 10.741, 10.742; 10.742-10.750; 10.901; 10.903; 10.907, 10.908 1009  8- 6-79 1 2.131 1010  8- 6-79 1 5.364 1013 10-15-79 1 2.201-2.205 1015 10- 9-79 1 8.141-8.144 1025 12-10-79 1 2.171 1029  3-10-80 1 10.682, 10.904 1031  3-24-80 1 8.255-8.260 1033  5-27-80 1 1.271-1.281 1034  5-27-80 1 7.167, 7.167A 1038  6-16-80 1 2.153, 2.154 1039  6-30-80 1 2.1 2 2.12, 2.13 1041  8-18-80 1 2.301-2.307 1043 11-24-80 1 2.153, 2.154 1049  1-12-81 1 12.1-12.4 1051  2- 9-81 1 9.381-9.388 1052  3-23-81 1 8.31-8.120 1053  4-13-81 1 10.4B, 10.6, 10.6B, 10.8B, 10.35A; 10.252; 10.317; 10.321A; 10.328; 10.625; 10.625A, 10.625B, 10.625C, 10.625D; 10.674; 10.675A, 10.675B, 10.675C; 10.681, 10.682; 10.742; 10.746; 10.747; 10.904 1063  6-22-81 1 2.153, 2.154 1064  6-22-81 1 2.171 1066  8-24-81 1 9.122, 9.125, 9.127A, 9.137, 9.142A, 9.146, 9.149, 9.153-9.157 9.391-9.395 1067  9-14-81 1 4.43 1070 10- 5-81 1 2.171 1073 10-26-81 1 12.10-12.22 1074 10-26-81 1 3.75-3.81 1076 12-10-81 1 8.201-8.204 1077 12-10-81 1 8.401-8.436 1078 12-10-81 1 8.401.1, 8.401.2 1079 12-10-81 1 8.255-8.260 1080 12-10-81 1 8.451-8.458, 8.461 1081 12-17-81 1 2.400-2.412 1082 12-17-81 1 12.24, 12.25 1084  2-23-82 1 8.161-8.177 2 8.178 1085  2-23-82 1 7.286, 7.287 5 7.287(3) 1088  3- 8-82 1 9.382 1089  3- 8-82 1 8.43 1093  4-26-82 1 7.190-7.193 1097  6-14-82 1 2.153, 2.154 1098  6-14-82 1 2.171 1109  9-27-82 1 10.717Q 1110  9-28-82 1 1.181-1.189 1111 10-12-82 1 12.1-12.22 1112 10-12-82 1 9.136A 1114  1-10-83 1 2.171 1116  3-14-83 1 12.23 1117  2-28-83 1 8.401.2 1118  3-14-83 1 10.742A 1119  3-14-83 1 10.311, 10.606, 10.625, 10.625A-10.625D, 10.625H, 10.660, 10.676, 10.904 1123  6-27-83 1 2.153, 2.154 1124  6-27-83 1 2.171 1127  8- 8-83 1 10.32B, 10.658 1130  8-22-83 1 12.24 1133 12-15-83 1 7.158 1137  4-23-84 1 1.311-1.345 1138  4-23-84 2 9.3(10) 1139  5-29-84 1 9.131A 1145  8-27-84 1 12.25 1147  9-24-84 1 9.401-9.406 1150 10- 9-84 1(1)-(5), (7)-(11) 5.601-5.610 1156  2-25-85 1       Rpld 8.201-8.204,       Added 8.201-8.204 1157  2-25-85 1       Rpld 8.451-8.458, 8.461       Added 8.451-8.458, 8.461 1158  2-25-85 1 8.401, 8.402-8.436 1159  2-25-85 1 8.401.1, 8.401.2 1160  2-25-85 1       Rpld 8.255-8.259.3, 8.260, 8.263-8.279, 8.285-8.288, 8.291-8.299, 8.304-8.312, 8.317-8.321, 8.325-8.327, 8.331-8.338, 8.345,       Added 8.255-8.260 1161  2-25-85 1 8.265-8.267 1162  2-25-85 1       Rpld 8.161-8.177,       Added 8.161-8.177 1167  3-11-85 1       Rpld 2.301-2.307,       Added 2.301-2.307 1173  5-13-85 1 1.400-1.402 1178  7- 8-85 1 9.142B, 9.142C 1179  7- 8-85 1 3.31 1180  7-22-85 1 2.153, 2.154 1181  7-22-85 1 2.171 1182  7-22-85       Added 2.184 1186 10-15-85 1 4.45 1188 11-25-85 1 5.701-5.704 1198  4-14-86 1 8.141-8.144 1199  4-28-86 1 9.382, 9.383, 9.389 1200  4-28-86 1 8.73 1201  4-28-86 1 1.227 1204  6- 9-86 1 3.7, 3.9-3.11 1205  6-23-86 1.279, 1.280 1208  8-25-86 1 2.501-2.517 1209  8-11-86 1 7.153, 7.167-A 1212 11-24-86 1 9.394, 9.395 1213 11-24-86 1 9.81 1214 12- 8-86 1 7.501-7.514 1215 12- 8-86 1 9.133 1216 12- 8-86 1 9.148 1217 12- 8-86 1       Rpld 9.51-9.55       Added 9.51-9.60 1231  6- 8-87 1       Rpld 8.31, 8.35, 8.40-8.48, 8.50-8.59, 8.71-8.73, 8.75, 8.76, 8.81, 8.82, 8.85-8.87, 8.91, 8.92, 8.95-8.97, 8.101-8.108, 8.111-8.113, 8.115-8.117, 8.120       Added 8.31-8.66 1232  6- 8-87 1 9.501, 9.502 1233  8-24-87 1 1.154 1235  8-31-87 1 1.183 1236 10-26-87 1 11.10-11.18 1239 12-21-87 1       Rpld 7.190-7.193       Added 7.190-7.194 1245  4-25-88 1 5.725-5.728 1246  6-13-88 1 2.601-2.606 1247  6-13-88 1 9.136B 1248  6-13-88 1 9.136C 1250  6-25-88 1       Rpld 8.201-8.204       Added 8.201-8.204 1251  6-25-88 1       Rpld 8.451-8.458, 8.461       Added 8.451-8.454 1252  6-25-88 1       Rpld 8.255-8.260, 8.265-8.267       Added 8.255-8.260 1253  6-25-88 1       Rpld 8.401, 8.401.1, 8.401.2, 8.402-8.436       Added 8.401-8.404 1254  6-25-88 1 8.410-8.444 1255  6-25-88 1       Rpld 8.161-8.177       Added 8.161-8.177 1256 11-14-88 1       Rpld 12.14(e) 1258  1- 9-89 1 2.14 1259  1-23-89 1 1.154 1274  4-10-89 1 9.41 1285  5-22-89 1 10.20 10.38 10.64 10.601 10.602 10.716A 10.716B 10.717B 1289  9-25-89 1 7.6 1290  9-25-89 1 1.500 1291 10-23-89 1       Added 8.501-8.507 1292 12-11-89 1       Added 5.750-5.753 1293 12-11-89 1       Added 11.19-11.27 1294 12-11-89 1 8.170 1295  1- 8-90 1 1.271-1.281 1296  1- 8-90 1 2.31, 2.32A 
2.38, 2.40 
2.43, 2.52 
2.54, 2.82 
2.86 1297  2-12-90 1 10.742A 1301  4-30-90 1 9.383 1307  8-13-90 1       Rpld 1.311-1.345       Added 1.311-1.344 1308  8-27-90 1 9.11(12) 1311 11-26-90 1 1.13 1312 11-26-90 1 1.14 1314 11-26-90 1       Rpld 1.106-1.110 1316  1-14-91 5.754-5.757 1317  1-14-91 1 9.150 1318  1-28-91 1 1.382 1319  4-22-91 1 9.48 1323  6-24-91 1 1.328 1325  8-12-91 1 7.430-7.432 1326  9-23-91 1 10.6C, 10.7A, 
10.9, 10.18B, 
10.39A, 10.50, 
10.56, 10.57C, 
10.67B, 10.216, 
10.312, 10.328A, 
10.613D, 10.625L, 
10.629C, 
10.710D, 10.710E, 
10.716-10.718, 
10.720-10.726, 
10.726B, 10.910A, 
10.904A, 10.904B 2 10.4B, 10.8B, 
10.19A, 10.21, 
10.37, 10.42, 
10.52, 10.57, 
10.59A, 10.77, 
10.215, 10.224, 10.225, 10.255, 10.256, 10.301, 10.311, 10.312A, 10.315, 10.324, 10.328, 10.602A, 10.625, 10.627-10.629, 10.629B, 10.631, 10.634, 10.650, 10.658, 10.674, 10.674A, 10.675, 10.682, 10.904, 10.907, 10.908 3       Rpld 10.6B, 10.30A, 
10.32, 10.252, 
10.313, 
10.675A-10.675C, 
10.726A, 
10.727, 10.728, 
10.728D, 10.728E, 
10.730, 10.731, 
10.733, 
10.741-10.750, 
10.903 1328 11-25-91 1 10.6B, 10.24C, 
10.45A, 10.624A, 
10.625G 2 9.152, 10.8A, 
10.18, 10.52, 
10.625, 
10.625A- 
10.625D, 10.904, 
10.904B 3       Rpld 10.625H 1332  4-13-92 1       Rpld 8.161-8.176       Added 8.161-8.177 1350  6-22-92 1 1.328 1351  6-22-92 1 9.63, 9.73, 9.74 2 9.82, 9.83 1352 10-26-92 1 5.990-5.996 1354 10-26-92 1 9.82 1355 10-26-92 1 2.171       Dltd 2.179 1356 12-14-92 1 1.319 1357  1-25-93 1 1.382 1361 10-25-93 1       Added 12.26-12.42 1362 10-25-93 1 9.386 1363 11-29-93 1 1.322 1366  5- 9-94 1 7.152, 7.154, 7.158 1374  1-30-95 1       Added 9.84 1379  6-27-95 1 2.76 1383  9-18-95 1 9.62-9.64, 9.67, 9.70-9.72, 9.77, 9.79, 9.81, 9.82 2       Added 9.85-9.87 3       Rpld 9.66, 9.78 1384  9-18-95 1 1.328 1385  9-18-95 1 1.321 1386 10-16-95 1       Added 12.43 1390  4- 8-96 1       Added 2.607-2.616 1394  7-22-96 1 5.601-5.609 1397 11-12-96 1       Added 9.503 1398 11-12-96 1       Added 9.121 1400  1-13-97 1       Added 9.505 1401  1-13-97 1 1.235, 1.236 1407  5-12-97 1 12.21 1409  7-21-97 5.198 1411 10-27-97 1 9.181-9.201 1417  3-30-98 1 2.6 1420 12-15-98 1 8.201-8.204 1421 12-15-98 1 8.401-8.404 1422 12-15-98 1 8.255-8.260 1423 12-15-98 1 8.451-8.454 1433  7-27-98 1 2.104 2 2.184 1438  8-24-98 1       Added Ch. 21A 1440 10-26-98 5.194 1442  1-25-99 1 ch. 9 1443  3-15-99 1       Added 12.51 1444  6-14-99 1       Added 9.49 1448  8-23-99 1       Added 9.506 1449  8-23-99 1 2.184A 2-4 2.185 5-7 2.186 8 2.187 9 2.188 10, 16-19 2.200(a)-(e) 11 2.190 13 2.196 14 2.197 15 2.189 22 2.200(g) 1450 10-25-99 1 10.318, 10.624A, 10.624B, 10.625-10.625D       Rpld 10.625G-10.625L       Added 10.625M 10.901-10.901B, 10.904-10.904B       Added 10.904C-10.904E 1451 12- 6-99 1 ch. 9 1452 12- 6-99 1       Added 1.600 1453  5- 8-00 1       Added ch. 160 1454  9-11-00 1       Added 9.42-9.44 1456  8-28-00 1 2.184A 2-4 2.185 5-7 2.186 8 2.187 9 2.188 10, 16-19 2.200(a)-(e) 11 2.190 13 2.196 14 2.197 15 2.189 22 2.200(g) 1457  9-25-00 1 ch. 145 1458 11-13-00 1       Added Ch. 84 2       Dltd 9.3(10) 1460  1-16-01 1       Added 12.52 1461  5-29-01 5.58 1464  5-29-01 1       Added ch. 14 1465  5-29-01 1 9.123 1466  5-20-01 1 ch. 115 1467  7-23-01 1       Added 9.132A, 9.132B 1468  7-23-01 1       Added 10.653A 1470 12-17-01 1 ch. 8 1473  5-13-02 1 9.136, 9.136B       Added 9.136D-9.136I 1474  5-13-02 1       Dltd 9.124       Added 9.124A, 9.124B 1475  5-13-02 1 9.123 1476  6-17-02 1 ch. 9 1478  8-26-02 1       Added ch. 16 1479  8-26-02 1       Added ch.15 1481 10-14-02 1 ch. 160 1483  2-16-03 5.125-5.129 1485 12-16-02 1 ch. 9 1488  1-13-03 1 7.141-7.145, 7.149, 7.151, 7.152, 7.155, 7.166-7.168, 7.170 1489  2-24-03 1 2.154 1490  2-24-03 1 2.172 1491  2-24-03 1 ch. 9 1493  3-31-03 1 8.31-8.66 1494  4- 6-03 1.31(note) 1497  9-15-03 1       Added 10.233, 10.328(8) 10.321(A), 10.328, 10.907 1499  9-29-03 1       Added 9.504 1500  9-15-03 1       Added 10.1001-10.1005 2       Rpld 10.1A-10.716, 10.717, 10.718-10.729, 10.901-10.908 1503  5-24-04 1       Dltd 9.394 2 9.395 1504  7-26-04 1 ch. 101 1505  7-26-04 2.131 5.363, 5.364(1), (2) 1510  4-11-05 1       Added 2.15 1511  4-25-05 1       Dltd ch. 71, §§ 7.31-7.40       Added 7.31 1512  5-16-05 1 ch. 101 1513  5-16-05 1 2.44, 2.45 
2.49(4), 2.64 
2.82 1514  5-16-05 1 2.155 1515  5-16-05 1 2.173 1516  5-16-05 1 2.177 1517  5-16-05 1       Dltd 7.51-7.61       Added 7.51-7.64 2       Rpld Ch. 73 1518  6-13-05 1 9.155 1528  1-30-06 5.57 1530  1-17-06 1 1.604(6), 1.624 
1.625, 1.627 1531  1-30-06 1 1.319(3) 2       Added 1.322(4) 1533  2-27-06 1       Dltd 8.31-8.66       Added 8.31-8.65 1534  2-27-06 1 1.314 1538 10-10-06 5.49 1539 10-10-06 5.76 1540 12-18-06 1 9.353 1541 11-20-06 1       Rpld 9.181-9.183 2 9.201 3       Added 9.202-9.204 1543  1-16-07       Added 5.59 1544  4-30-07 1 5.27 1545  4-30-07 1       Added 2.16 1546  4-30-07 1 2.101-2.134 1547  4-30-07 1 Ch. 48 1548  5-14-07 1 1.165-1.168 1549  6-25-07 1       Dltd 5.176-A 5.176 1550  7-30-07 1 8.501-8.507 1551  7-30-07 1 1.313, 1.314, 
1.316, 1.319-1.323, 
1.327, 1.328, 1.330 1552  7-30-07       Rpld 1.600-1.635 1       Added 1.600-1.640 1553 10- 9-07 1       Added 10.1101 1554 11-19-07 1       Added 5.222 1556  2-11-08 1 2.40 1557  2-25-08 1 3.25 1559  8-31-08 1       Added 9.50 1560  6- 3-12 1       Rpld 1.165-1.168 1564 11-27-08 1 Ch. 49 1565  2-17-09 1.395 1566  2-17-09 1 9.50 1567  2-17-09 1 Ch. 49 1568  8- 9-09 1 2.153(1) 1569  8- 9-09 1       Added 8.601-8.610 1570  8- 9-09 1 1.328(1), 1.330 1571 10-11-09 1       Rpld 2.101-2.121 2.130-2.134       Added 2.101-2.115 2.130-2.134 1572 10-11-09       Added 2.136-2.149 1575  5- 2-10 1 9.61-9.65 9.67-9.77 9.79-9.87       Added 9.88 1576  6-27-10 1       Added 9.89 1577  8-15-10 1 9.82 1578 12-26-10 1 2.171(4) 1580  6- 3-12 1 9.81 1585  6-19-11 1 1.13(1) 2 1.13(4) 1587 11- 6-11 1 5.29, 5.30 2 5.176 1588 12-25-11 1 5.4 2 5.62-5.62B 1589  2-26-12 1       Added 1.900-1.903 1591  5- 6-12 1 5.22-1 1592  6-24-12 1       Added 9.396 1593  6-24-12 1       Added 9.601-9.606 1594  7- 3-12 1 8.33 1596  8-19-12 1 2.184(2), (3) 1597 11-11-12 1 5.3-5.5, 5.8, 5.30, 5.169 1598 12-23-12 5.37-1 1599 12-23-12 1 10.1003 1600 12-30-12 1 8.33 1603  4- 7-13 1 5.3 2 5.8 3 5.9 4       Added 5.22-3 1604  3-31-13 1       Added 9.50A 1605  3-31-13 1 2.6 1606  6- 2-13 1 5.6 1607  6-30-13 1 8.31-8.65       Added 8.50A, 8.50B 1609  8-18-13 1       Added 9.50B 1611  7- 7-13 1       Added 1.319(n) 2       Rnbd 1.319(n)-(q) 1612  7- 7-13 1 9.603 2 9.606 1613  8-18-13 1 5.4 2 5.193-5.195 1614  9- 8-13 1 5.58 1615 12-15-13 1 1.183(8), (9) 1618  3- 9-14 1 5.22 1619  3- 9-14 1 5.4, 5.8, 5.9 2 5.30 3 5.134 4 5.140 5 5.169 1620  2- 9-14 1 11.1-11.9 1621  3-30-14 1       Added 7.701-7.717 1626  6-29-14 1 8.204 1627 11-30-14 9.122(9) 1628  9- 7-14 1       Added 8.701-8.703 1629  9- 7-14 1       Added 7.195-7.197 1630 11-30-14 1       Added 1.177-1.180 1631 12- 7-14 1       Added 10.1201-10.1206 1632 11-23-14 1 9.89 1633 11-23-14 1 9.50B 1634 12-21-14 1 11.3, 11.6 1635  3- 8-15 1       Added 5.22-4 1636  3- 8-15 1       Dltd 9.381-9.389       Added 9.380-9.388 1637  4- 5-15 1 5.3-5.5, 5.7-5.9 2       Added 5.179 1638  4- 5-15 1       Added 7.801-7.813 1639  5-10-15 1 2.173 2 2.174 1640  5-10-15 1 5.22-3 1641  5-31-15 1 5.29-5.31 2 5.84 3 5.94 4 5.134, 5.137 5 5.140 6 5.169 1642  7-19-15 1 5.75 2 5.83 3 5.139 4 5.195 1645 10- 4-15 1 8.161-8.177       Added 8.178 1647 11- 1-15 1 8.33 2       Added 8.50C 1648 12-27-15 1 5.27 2 5.62 1651  2-28-16 1 8.701-8.703 1652  2-28-16 1       Added 8.801-8.810 1653  2-28-16 1 2.16 1654  3-20-16 1 5.5 2 5.8 3 5.30 4 5.62A 5 5.103 6 5.134 7 5.169 1655  3-20-16 1       Dltd 8.141-8.144       Added 8.141-8.143 1656  3-20-16 1       Dltd 8.501-8.507       Added 8.501-8.514 1657  4- 3-16 1       Added 5.22-5 1659  4- 3-16 1       Dltd 8.201-8.204, 8.255-8.260, 8.401-8.404, 8.410-8.444, 8.451-8.454       Added 8.201-8.207, 8.255-8.257, 8.401-8.403, 8.451-8.453, 8.460 1660  4- 3-16 1 2.155 1661  4- 3-16 1 2.177 1662  5- 1-16 1 5.185 1663  5-29-16 1       Dltd 8.161-8.177       Added 8.161-8.178 1664  9- 8-2016 1 5.28 5.183-5.185 1667  2- 9-2017 1       Rpld 8.31-8.65       Added 8.31-8.65 1668  2- 9-2017 1 2.501 1670  3- 2-2017 1 1.600-1.640 1671  3-16-2017 1 8.141-8.143       Added 8-144 1672  3-16-2017 1 8.601-8.610 1674  5- 4-2017 1 1.177-1.180 1675  6- 8-2017 1       Rpld 1.600-1.640       Added 1.600-1.640 1678  7- 6-2017 1 5.3, 5.4 5.6-5.9 2 5.22-5.22-6 5.29-5.32 5.38 5.51 5.60D 3 5.78 4 5.88 5 5.94 5.98 6 5.105 7 5.113, 5.114 8 5.129 9 5.134 5.138 10 5.141 11 5.151 12 5.161 13 5.169 5.170 14 5.180 15 5.188 1680  8-31-2017 1 5.993 1681 10-12-2017 1 9.75 1682 10-12-2017 1       Added 9.50C 1683 11- 2-2017 1 2.104 2 2.105 1684 11- 2-2017 1 2.184 1688  4-12-2018 1 7.501-7.511       Rpld 7.512, 7.513 7.514 1689  4-12-2018 1 9.155 1690  4-12-2018 1 8.44 1692  4-26-2018 1 8.701-8.703       Added 8.704-8.707 1693  6-14-2018 1 5.22-5 1694  5-17-2018 1       Added 2.617-2.625 1695  6- 7-2018 1       Added 11.50-11.56 1696  8- 9-2018 1 10.1006  
