CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: April 15, 2002 
Effective: May 6, 2002 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SPRINGFIELD, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Susan L. Anderson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Harry Burdett 
Larry Eib 
Harold Gestring 
Timothy Good 
Carol Hinton 
Carey Whitfield 
City Council 
____________ 
James D. Jenkins 
City Manager 
____________ 
John Macfarlane 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kris Vogel 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Springfield, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through January 4, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Bill Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. James D. Jenkins, City Manager, Mr. John H. Macfarlane, City Attorney, and Ms. Michelle Johnson, Code Official, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Springfield, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Springfield, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Springfield, Michigan. 2002. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1 OF 2002 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 4, 2000, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the discretion of the court; provided however that a violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, and/or imprisonment not exceeding 93 days, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 4, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective May 6, 2002. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Council this 15th day of April, 2002. 
By: 
      Mayor, Susan L. Anderson   ATTEST: 
      City Clerk, Kris Vogel, CMC   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2010-3  1- 4-2010 Include 10 2011-1  4- 4-2011 Include 10 2011-2  5- 9-2011 Include 10 2011-3  5- 9-2011 Include 10 2011-4  8-15-2011 Include 10 2011-5 11- 4-2011 Include 10 2011-6 12- 5-2011 Include 10 2010-3  2- 1-2010 Include 11 2012-1  2- 6-2012 Include 11 2012-2  3-19-2012 Include 11 2013-1  3-18-2013 Include 11 2013-2  5-20-2013 Include 11 2013-3  6-17-2013 Include 11 2013-4  6-17-2013 Include 11 2013-6 11-18-2013 Include 12 2014-1  4-21-2014 Include 13 2015-1  2-17-2015 Include 13 2015-2  9-21-2015 Include 13 03-15 12-21-2015 Include 13 2016-1  3- 7-2016 Include 14 2016-2  3-21-2016 Include 14 2016-3 10-17-2016 Include 14 2016-4 12- 5-2016 Include 14 2017-1  4- 3-2017 Include 15 2017-2  4-17-2017 Include 15  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Springfield, mindful of the ideals and labors of those who founded and developed this community, grateful for the blessings of freedom, peace, and justice in a free and democratic state and nation, and desirous of further securing these blessings to ourselves and our posterity, do hereby ordain and establish this charter for the City of Springfield. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein in this part is the Home Rule Charter of the city, which was approved at an election held on June 16, 1963. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Provisions which are obsolete are indicated by editor's notes. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to frame, adopt and amend charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; Home Rule Cities Act, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY 

Section 1.1. - Boundaries. 
    The following described territory, together with all territories that may be annexed thereto, shall be and remain a body corporate under the official name and title of "City of Springfield," shall constitute one ward, and shall be subject to the municipal control of said city: 
Commencing at the center post of Section 11 of Town 2 South, Range 8 West; thence north along the north and south quarter lines of Sections 11 and 2 to the north section line of Section 2; thence west along the north section lines of Sections 2, 3, 4, and 5 to the north and south one-eighth line in the northeast quarter of Section 5; thence south along the said one-eighth line to the south right-of-way line of Dickman Road; thence southeasterly and easterly along the south right-of-way line of Dickman Road to the intersection thereof with the west section line of Section 10; thence south along the said section line to the intersection thereof with the east and west quarter line of Section 10; thence east along the east and west quarter lines of Sections 10 and 11 to the place of beginning; all in Battle Creek Township (T2S,R8W), Calhoun County, Michigan. 
State Law reference- Alteration of boundaries, MCL 117.6 et seq. 
Section 1.2. - Composition of city. 
    The city shall be constituted of the persons residing or domiciled within the territorial boundaries herein specified; of all property, both real and personal, located or having a legal situs therein, and of the public facilities, improvements, and works thereof. 
CHAPTER 2. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for preservation of public peace, health and safety, MCL 117.3(j); charter provisions relative to ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 

Section 2.1. - General powers of the city. 
    The City of Springfield and its officers shall possess and be vested with each and all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan. It is the intent of the Charter Commission in framing this charter and of the people of the city in adopting it, to include all such powers, privileges, and immunities within the scope of the powers granted to the City of Springfield by the provisions of this chapter. The city and its officers shall have power to exercise each and all such municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether they be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and, through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the provisions of this charter. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the City of Springfield, under the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan, and those set forth in this charter, the city shall have power with respect to, and may, by ordinance or other appropriate and lawful acts, provide: 
(a)	For the use, regulation, improvement, and control of the surface of its streets, alleys, and public ways, and of the space above and below them; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1). 
(b)	For the use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys, and public places of the city in the operation of a public utility; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2). 
(c)	For a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for plan of streets and alleys within three miles of city, MCL 117.4h(3). 
(d)	For the acquisition, construction, and operation of parking facilities within the city, including the fixing, collection, and disposition of charges for the use thereof; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for parking facilities, MCL 117.4h(6). 
(e)	For the installation and connection of sewers and waterworks on and to property within the city; for assessing the cost thereof to the several properties and making the same a lien thereon; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for the installation and connection of sewers, MCL 117.4b(2). 
(f)	For maintaining the peace within the city, and preventing and punishing the disturbance of any meeting which is assembled for any lawful purpose; 
(g)	For requiring an owner of real property within the city to construct and maintain sidewalks in the streets abutting upon such property, and, if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or, if the owner is unknown, for constructing and maintaining such sidewalks and assessing the cost thereof against the abutting property; 
(h)	For the acquisition of the following improvements, including the necessary lands thereof, by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, viz.: City hall, police stations, fire stations, boulevards, streets, alleys, public parks, recreation grounds, municipal camps, public grounds, zoological gardens, museums, libraries, airports, cemeteries, public wharves and landings upon navigable waters, levees and embankments, watchhouses, city prisons and workhouses, penal farms, institutions, quarantine grounds, electric light and power plants and systems, gas plants and systems, waterworks plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and systems, city dumps, garbage disposal plants or facilities, pounds, community buildings, stadia, convention halls, auditoria, dormitories, hospitals, market houses and marketplaces, office buildings for city officers and employees, public works, and public buildings of all kinds; and for the cost and expenses thereof; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for acquisition of public buildings and grounds, MCL 117.4e(1). 
(i)	For the acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, or otherwise of private property, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, whether herein specifically mentioned or not. If condemnation proceedings are resorted to for the acquisition of private property outside the corporate limits of such city, such condemnation proceedings may be brought under the provisions of 1883 PA 124, as amended or as may be amended, entitled "An act to provide for the condemnation by state agencies and public corporations of private property for the use or benefit of the public and to define the terms 'public corporations,' 'state agencies' and 'private property' as used herein," being sections 213.71 to 213.94 inclusive of the Compiled Laws of 1948 or such other appropriate provisions therefor as exist or shall be made by law; 
Editor's note- Act. No. 124 of 1883 has been repealed. Current law is located in 1911 PA 149 (MCL 213.21 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for acquisition of public buildings and grounds, MCL 117.4e(2). 
(j)	For the maintenance, development, and operation of its property, and, upon the discontinuance thereof, to lease, sell, or dispose of the same subject to any restrictions placed thereupon by law; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for acquisition of public buildings and grounds, MCL 117.4e(3). 
(k)	For requiring an owner of real property within the city to abate public hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the city within a reasonable time after notification that such hazard or nuisance exists, and, if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, for abating such hazard or nuisance and assessing the cost thereof against such property; 
(l)	For enforcing all such local, police, sanitary, and other regulations as are not in conflict with general laws; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for police powers, MCL 117.4i(j). 
(m)	For regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and locations of oil and gasoline stations; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for the regulation of gas stations, MCL 117.4i(b). 
(n)	For establishing standards to govern the construction, alteration, equipment, or removal of buildings and structures within the city; the zoning of the city in the manner and for the purpose permitted by law; and, in any zoning ordinance passed or effective in the city, or independently thereof, to regulate and establish the line upon which buildings may be erected on any street, lane, or alley in said city, and to prevent such buildings being erected nearer the street than such line; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(c). 
(o)	For the regulation of trades, occupations, and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with state and Federal laws, and to prohibit such trades, occupations, and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for regulation of trades, MCL 117.4i(d). 
(p)	For preventing injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from anything which is dangerous, offensive, or unhealthful, and to prevent and abate nuisances and punish those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue, or remove the same; 
(q)	For licensing, regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the city; 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for regulation of billboards, MCL 117.4i(f). 
(r)	For establishing, acquiring, and operating airports, either within or without its corporate limits, and for regulating all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety, and welfare, for the control and regulation of the use of the air above the city by aircraft of all types, subject to any limitations imposed by law; 
(s)	For the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation, and parking of house trailers within the city, and the right of the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to[,] the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever. 
Section 2.2. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers granted to and possessed by the city shall be exercised as provided in this charter or by state law. Where no procedure is set forth in this charter or in the state law for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, the Council may provide a procedure for the exercise thereof by ordinance, or resort may be had to any applicable procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan which has been enacted for the government of any political subdivision of the state or for the exercise of such powers by the state itself. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
Section 2.3. - Intergovernmental contracts. 
    The city shall have power to join with any municipal corporation, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract, or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, for the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly, or by any one or more, on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
    The city shall have the right to contract with any person or with any other municipal corporation to furnish to property, outside the corporate limits of the city, for an adequate consideration, and within limitations imposed by law, any lawful municipal service which it is furnishing to property within its corporate limits. 
State Law reference- Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations, MCL 124.1 et seq.; intergovernmental transfers of functions and responsibilities, MCL 124.531 et seq. 
CHAPTER 3. - INTERPRETIVE AND LIMITING PROVISIONS 

Section 3.1. - City records. 
    All records of the city shall be public. 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 3.2. - Tense. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. 
Section 3.3. - Number and gender. 
    As used in this charter, every word importing the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural number and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. Every word importing the masculine gender only shall be extended and applied to the feminine as well as the masculine gender. 
Section 3.4. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this charter: 
(a)	The word "city" shall mean the City of Springfield; 
(b)	The word "Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Springfield; 
(c)	The word "constitution" shall denote the constitution of the State of Michigan, as it is in effect at the time the provision containing the word "constitution" is to be applied; 
(d)	The words "law" and "state law" shall denote the constitution and the statutes of Michigan, as herein defined and the applicable common law; 
(e)	The word "officer" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the Mayor and other members of the Council, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, and members of city boards and commissions which are created by or pursuant to this charter; 
(f)	The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(g)	The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, or any similar method; 
(h)	The word "statute" shall denote the Public Acts of the State of Michigan, as they are in effect at the time the provision containing the word "statute" is to be applied; 
(i)	Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(j)	All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein; 
(k)	The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter; 
(l)	All references to specific Local and Public Acts shall be to such Local or Public Acts of the State of Michigan, as they are in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied; 
(m)	All references to section and chapter numbers shall refer to the section and chapter numbers of this charter. 
Section 3.5. - Definition of publication; mailing of notices. 
    The requirement contained in this charter for the publishing or publication of notices, ordinances, or proceedings may be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper which is published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character, and which newspaper shall have a general circulation in the city. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance, or proceeding, taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the time of publication, shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. In the event that publication is permitted to be made by posting, and is so made, notice of such posting shall be published in a newspaper as herein prescribed, but such publication in a newspaper shall not be requisite for the validity of any publication which is made by posting. 
    In any case in which this charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing stating that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Section 3.6. - Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this charter. 
Section 3.7. - No estoppel by representation. 
    No official of the city shall have power to make any representation or recital of fact in, or which may be deemed to constitute a part of, any franchise, contract, document, or agreement, contrary to any public record of the city. Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the city. 
Section 3.8. - Effect of illegality of any part of charter. 
    Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any part of the charter, except that specifically affected by such holding. 
Section 3.9. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in 1909 PA 279 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended. Should any two or more amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to amend charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; revision of charter, MCL 117.18 et seq. 
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICERS, THEIR SELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE 

Section 4.1. - Officers to be elected. 
    The elective offices and officers of the city shall be a Mayor, six Councilmen, and one Justice of the Peace. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace was abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969. 
Section 4.2. - Officers to be appointed. 
    The appointive offices and officers of the city shall be a City Manager, a Clerk, a Treasurer, an Assessor, a City Attorney, a Police Chief, a Fire Chief, a Health Officer, one Constable, the members of the Board of Review, and the members of any boards or commissions of the city which are created by or under the authority of this charter or state law. Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, and to assure [ensure] the proper administration of city affairs, the Council may create additional appointive offices and officers of the city, or may combine any appointive offices, in any manner not inconsistent with state law, and prescribe the duties thereof:[;] provided, that no such combination of offices shall operate so as to diminish or interfere with the powers and functions of the City Manager, as set forth in this charter. The Council shall set the compensation of all appointive officers. 
Editor's note- The positions of health officer and constable are now obsolete. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for clerk, treasurer, assessor and other necessary officers, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 4.3. - City employees. 
    All personnel employed by the city, who are not elected officers, or declared to be appointive officers by or under authority of this charter, shall be deemed to be employees of the city. 
Section 4.4. - Eligibility for office in the city. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, an elector of the city shall be eligible to hold elective or appointive office, if he shall be and shall have been continuously, a resident of the city or of the area comprising the city for two years, and shall not be in default to the city or to any school district located within the city. In the case of appointive officers, the Council may, by a two-thirds vote, waive the requirement of residence in the city:[;] Provided, that the Council may require that each person for whom such requirement is waived shall become a resident of the city within ninety days following his appointment and shall remain a resident of the city during the entire time he shall hold office in the city government. Failure so to become a resident of the city and thereafter to be a resident of the city shall create a vacancy in the office to which any such person was appointed. 
    No person who has been an elective officer shall be eligible for appointment to any office or employment of the city, until one year has elapsed following the term for which he was elected or appointed to such office, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Editor's note- Two-year residency requirement for city officers held to violate of the equal protection clause. Green v. McKeon, 335 F. Supp. 630 (E.D. Mich. 1971), affirmed by 468 F.2d. 883 (6th cir. 1972). One-year residency requirement upheld. Joseph v. City of Birmingham, 510 F. Supp. 1319 (E.D. Mich. 1981). 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for qualifications of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 4.5. - Time of electing officers. 
(a)	At each regular city election[,] three members of the Council shall be elected by and from the city at large. The term of office of such members of the Council shall be for two years, commencing on and dating from the Monday next following the date of such election. 
(b)	At each regular city election held in odd-numbered years, there shall be elected a Mayor, who shall hold office for a term of two years, commencing on and dating from the Monday next following the date of such election. 
(c)	At each regular city election held in an odd-numbered year, following an even-numbered year which is divisible by four, one Justice of the Peace shall be elected by and from the city at large. He shall assume office on the fourth of July following his election. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace was abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969. 
Pursuant to MCL 168.644, Code § 14-2 supersedes the Charter by providing for four-year terms for all city councilmembers and the mayor. 
Section 4.6. - Regular city elections. 
    A nonpartisan regular city election shall be held on the first Monday in April in each year. 
Editor's note- Code § 14-1, pursuant to MCL 168.644a, supersedes the Charter by requiring odd-year general elections to be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year beginning with the November 1991 general election. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for time of holding election, MCL 117.3(c). 
Section 4.7. - Special elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council, adopted at least forty-five days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. Unless otherwise permitted by state law, no more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year. 
State Law reference- Special primaries and elections, MCL 168.631 et seq. 
Section 4.8. - Qualifications of electors. 
    Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next ensuing regular or special city election, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the City of Springfield in the election precinct in which he resides. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors, MCL 168.491 et seq. 
Section 4.9. - Election procedure. 
    All general city elections for the nomination and election of officers of the City of Springfield shall be nonpartisan. The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedures, or require more than one publication of notice as otherwise provided by this charter. The compensation of all election personnel shall be determined by the Council. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Section 4.10. - Election commission. 
    An election commission, consisting of the Clerk, the Mayor, and the City Attorney, is hereby created. The Clerk shall be chairman. The commission shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. 
State Law reference- Boards of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25. 
Section 4.11. - Notice of election. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any city election, of the officers to be elected, and the questions to be voted upon shall be given by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in the state election laws for the giving of notices by township clerks in the case of state elections, except that no second publication of notice of any such election shall be required. 
State Law reference- Notice of time and place of election, MCL 168.635a. 
Section 4.12. - Voting hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections. 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, hours, MCL 168.720. 
Section 4.13. - Nomination petitions. 
    Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any office under this charter shall file an official petition therefor with the Clerk. Such petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five nor more than fifty registered electors of the city. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 12 o'clock, noon, on the fourth Saturday prior to the date of the regular city election. Official blank petitions, in substantially the same form as required by state law or designated by the Secretary of State for nonpartisan judicial officers, shall be prepared and furnished by the Clerk. Before the Clerk shall furnish nomination petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon, in ink, the name of the person desiring to become a candidate for office in the city, or of the person in whose behalf the petition is to be circulated, and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the Clerk for filing under the provisions of this section. Nomination petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy shall so state in connection with the name of the office for which the petition is to be circulated. The Clerk shall publish notice of the last day, time, and place for filing nomination petitions at least one week before, and not more than three weeks before[,] that date. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office to be filled at the next regular city election than there will be persons elected to said office. Where any name appears on more than such number of petitions for any office, such name shall not be counted upon any petition for that office. 
Editor's note- Code § 14-4, pursuant to MCL 168.644f, supersedes the Charter by requiring that the nomination petitions of the mayor and city council be filed with the clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the 12th Tuesday prior to the odd-year general election. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); candidates for local offices, MCL 168.646a. 
Section 4.14. - Approval of petitions. 
    The Clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions which are on official blanks furnished by his office and which contain the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for elective city officers by this charter. When petitions are filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing only when accompanied by the written consent of the person in whose behalf the petition or petitions were circulated. The Clerk shall, within five days after the final filing date, determine the sufficiency of the signatures of each petition filed, and if he finds that any petition does not contain the required number of signatures of registered electors, he shall immediately notify the candidate, in writing, of the insufficiency of his petition. Each petition which is found by the Clerk to contain the required number of signatures of registered electors for candidates shall be marked "In Order," with the date thereof, and he shall immediately so notify the candidate whose name appears thereon, in writing. The name of each person whose petition is in order shall be entered on the ballot of the next city election under the heading of the office which he seeks. 
Section 4.15. - Public inspection of petitions. 
    All petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 4.16. - Form of ballots. 
    The form, printing, and numbering of ballots, used in any city election, shall conform, as nearly as may be, to that prescribed by or in accordance with state law, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear thereon. The names of qualified nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading for each office and shall be rotated on the ballots. 
State Law reference- Form of ballots, MCL 168.568 et seq.; preparation of ballots, MCL 168.323. 
Section 4.17. - Canvass of votes. 
    The members of the Council, the Clerk, and the City Attorney shall be the Board of Canvassers to canvass the votes cast at all elections:[;] provided, that if any of such persons are candidates for office at an election to be canvassed, such person shall not be a member of the Board of Canvassers at such election. A majority of the members of such board, as so constituted[,] shall be a quorum for the transaction of the business of the board. The Board of Canvassers shall meet on the first Wednesday after each city election, and publicly canvass the returns of such primary or election, and shall determine the vote upon all questions and propositions, and declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and which persons have been elected to office. 
Editor's note- See MCL 168.24a, Board of County Canvassers is to control the canvass of votes. 
Section 4.18. - Tie vote. 
    If, at any city election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes, then the Council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining election of one of such persons by lot, as provided by state law. Should any person or persons fail or refuse to appear, in person or by representative, to determine the result of any tie election at the time and place named by the Council, such determination shall be made by lot in his or their absence, at the direction and under the supervision of the Council. Such determination shall, in any event, be final. 
State Law reference- Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851. 
Section 4.19. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. The petition for such recount shall be filed within six days after the canvass of the votes of the election. In the event that a recount is held with respect to the election of any person who is a candidate for the office of Mayor, or member of the Council, and such person holds a city office, such person shall not serve as a member of the Board of Canvassers during such recount. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq. 
Section 4.20. - Appointive officers. 
    All officers of the city who are not designated as elective officers by section 4.1 of this chapter shall serve for indefinite terms. The Council shall appoint the City Attorney and the City Manager. The City Manager shall appoint all other appointive officers of the city, subject to the approval of the Council in each case. 
Section 4.21. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer, elective or appointive, and each of such employees as the Council shall designate, before entering upon his office or employment, shall take the oath prescribed by section 2 of Article VI of the constitution of the state and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond which he may be required by this charter or by the Council to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such office shall thereupon become vacant, unless the Council shall, by resolution extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Editor's note- The constitutional provision referred to in this section is to the 1908 Constitution. The same provision appears in Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1. 
Section 4.22. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Council may require any officer or employee to give or fulfill the requirements for a bond, to be approved by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the officer or employment concerned, in such sum as the Council shall determine. All such officers or employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible for the city funds shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, or the appointment of another person to such office or employment, shall not exonerate such officer or employee or any sureties of such officer or employee from any liability incurred by such officer, employee, or sureties. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. Bonds required by this section shall not be renewed upon the expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, new bonds shall be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding three years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that of the Clerk, himself, which shall be filed with the Treasurer. 
Section 4.23. - Termination of office-Elective officers. 
    The term of office of each elective officer of the city, except the Justice of the Peace, shall expire at twelve o'clock, noon, on the second Monday of April in the year in which his successor is elected. The term of office of the Justice of the Peace shall expire on the fourth day of July in the year in which his successor is elected. Each elective officer whose term of office has expired shall continue in office after the expiration of such term, until his successor has qualified and entered upon the duties of the office. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace was abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921). 
The Charter provision concerning termination of office, which calls for termination at 12:00 noon on the second Monday in April in the year in which the successor was elected, is superseded by state law. Office holders are now to vacate their offices no later than 12:00 noon, January 1 following the election. See MCL 168.644h. 
Section 4.24. - Termination of office-Appointive officers. 
    The City Manager shall have power to remove all appointive officers appointed by him. No such removal shall be effective until ten days after the City Manager has given notice of such removal to the Council at a regular or special meeting thereof and the removal of a Clerk shall not be effective until approved by the Council. The City Manager shall have power to suspend any such officer until the effective date of such removal. The Council shall determine whether such officer shall receive compensation during the period of such suspension. 
Section 4.25. - Creation of vacancies in office. 
    Any city office shall become vacant before the expiration of the term of such office for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)	The occurrence of any event or the doing of any act specified by state law to create a vacancy, 
(b)	Removal from office by the Governor of Michigan, 
(c)	The absence from the city of any officer continuously for more than sixty days without permission of the Council, 
(d)	In the case of the Mayor and Councilman, absence from four consecutive regular meetings of the Council or from twenty-five percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the Council at the time it occurred and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council, 
(e)	Assumption by the officer of any office which is incompatible with the city office held by him. 
State Law reference- Removal of city officers, effect of removal, MCL 168.327; recall, generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
Section 4.26. - Creation of vacancies through removals by council. 
    The Council may remove any elective officer of the city and create a vacancy in the office held by him for any one or both of the following reasons: 
(a)	When, after a hearing thereon, it shall be satisfied from sufficient evidence submitted to it that such officer has failed to perform the duties of his office for ninety days because of physical or mental disability; 
(b)	When it shall be satisfied from sufficient evidence submitted to it that such officer has been guilty of official misconduct, willful neglect of, or gross inefficiency in the performance of his duties as an officer of the city. The Council shall take no action under this provision upon any charges against any officer of the city, until certified copies of such charges and of all supporting affidavits and exhibits have been personally served upon such officer and an opportunity, after at least fifteen days notice, given him to be heard in his defense. No officer who has been removed from office under authority of this provision shall be eligible to election or appointment to any city office for a period of three years from the date of such removal. 
Section 4.27. - Creation of vacancies through resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers, and the City Attorney and City Manager, shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers, other than the City Manager and the City Attorney, shall be made in writing to the City Manager and shall be immediately acted upon by him. The City Manager shall announce the resignation of any such officer of the city to the Council at its next meeting subsequent to the receipt of such resignation by him and shall report his action thereon. 
Section 4.28. - Recall. 
    Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(g); recall, generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
Section 4.29. - Filling vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, other than that of Justice of the Peace, the Council shall, within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office to fill such vacancy and such appointee shall hold office by virtue of such appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term of such office. A vacancy in the office of Justice of the Peace shall be filled by the Council and such appointee shall hold office by virtue of such appointment only until the next succeeding election, at which time a Justice of the Peace shall be elected to hold such office for the remainder of the unexpired term thereof. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the Council within thirty days prior to a regular city election, such vacancy shall not be filled by the Council, until the first meeting after its organization meeting following such election. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, except the City Manager, such vacancy shall be filled within thirty days thereafter in the manner provided for making the original appointment. A vacancy in the office of City Manager shall be filled by the Council within ninety days after such vacancy occurs. During a vacancy in the office of the City Manager, the Council shall appoint an acting City Manager who shall perform the duties of that office. A member of the Council may be appointed as acting City Manager, but no member of the Council shall serve in such capacity for more than ninety days. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace was abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969. 
State Law reference- Vacancies, filling, MCL 201.37. 
Section 4.30. - Term of office cannot be shortened or extended. 
    Except by procedures provided in this charter, the terms of the elective officials of the city and of officers of the city appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of officers of the city may not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected or appointed except that an elective officer of the city shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected or appointed, and has qualified. 
State Law reference- Salaries, terms of office, MCL 117.5(d). 
Section 4.31. - Increase or decrease of compensation. 
    The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any city officer, elective or appointive, or to any employee, agent, or contractor, after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into, nor shall the salary of any officer, elective or appointive, be increased or decreased, after his election or appointment, during any fixed term of office for which he was elected or appointed. 
Section 4.32. - Business dealings with city. 
    An officer of the city, who intends to have business dealings with the city, either directly or indirectly, whereby he may acquire from the city an income or benefits other than that provided as remuneration for his official duties, shall file with the Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of his interest therein and that his participation therein is to the general welfare of the city; such statement shall be transmitted to the Council and shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and published in full therewith. Confirmation of such contract shall be made by a two-thirds vote of the Council, not including the interested officer, if he be a member of the Council. A member of the Council who has filed such a statement shall not vote upon the confirmation of the contract to which such statement relates. Any contract made with such person, other than as above provided, shall be void. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
Section 4.33. - Giving of surety forbidden. 
    No officer of the city shall give recognizance. No officer shall be the agent of any surety who or which furnishes any bond which is required by this charter, the ordinances of the city, or by state law where action of the Council is required by such state law for the granting of a license. Any officer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
Section 4.34. - Delivery of office and its effects by officer to his successor. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, or be removed from office, or the term of office for which he has been elected or appointed has expired, he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in the office or to his superior all books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody which were necessary to or which were obtained as a part of, or were necessary to the performance of his duties as such officer or employee. Any person violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted therefor in the same manner as public officers generally for the like offense under the general laws of the state. Every officer and employee of the city shall be deemed an officer within the meaning and provisions of such general laws of the state for the purpose of this section. 
CHAPTER 5. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 5.1. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter is the "Council-Manager" Government. 
Section 5.2. - Responsibility for city government. 
    Under the municipal government herein provided, the basic responsibility for the good government of the City of Springfield rests in the people of the city and is exercised by them through the election of members of the Council and of the judiciary of the city. 
Editor's note- Municipal courts were abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969, and supplanted by the state district court. The City of Springfield is in the tenth judicial district of Michigan. 
Section 5.3. - The City Council. 
(a)	The Council, composed of a Mayor and six Councilmen, is the governing body of the city and is responsible to the people of the city for the conduct of the governmental functions, business affairs, and services of the city. Pursuant to the provisions of this charter, and subject only to the limitations imposed by law, all the legislative power of the city shall be exclusively vested in and exercised by the Council. It shall determine all policies concerning the exercise and conduct of all municipal functions of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter. In all cases where the word Council is used in this charter, the same shall mean the City Council of the City of Springfield and shall be synonymous with any term employed in any state or Federal law referring to or denoting legislative or governing bodies of cities. 
(b)	At each regular city election[,] three Councilmen shall be elected, and at each regular city election held in odd-numbered years, beginning in the year 1955, a Mayor shall be elected. Such officers shall be elected, in each instance, by the electors of the city at large. 
Editor's note- Code § 14-1, pursuant to MCL 168.644a, supersedes the Charter by requiring odd-year general elections to be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year beginning with the November 1991 general election. Also, Code § 14-1, pursuant to MCL 168.644g, sets the mayor's term of office at four years instead of the two provided by the charter. 
(c)	The Mayor and each Councilman shall be elected to serve for a term of two years, which term shall, in each case, commence on and [the] date from the Monday next following the date of the regular city election at which he is elected. The Council shall be the judge of the eligibility and qualification of its own members, subject only to review by the courts. 
Editor's note- Code § 14-2, pursuant to MCL 168.644g, supersedes the Charter by requiring the mayor and all city councilmembers to serve a four-year term of office. Further, pursuant to state law, all persons elected at the odd-year general election shall take office at 12:00 noon on January 1 following the election. See MCL 168.644h. 
(d)	Each Councilman shall be compensated for his service to the city at the rate of five dollars per meeting of the Council, actually attended by him. The Mayor shall receive three hundred dollars per annum. Such compensation shall be paid semiannually in each case, and, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid to the Mayor and to members of the Council for the discharge by them of all official duties rendered for or on behalf of the city, during their terms of office. 
    Upon authorization of the Council, in each case, reasonable expenses may be allowed members of the Council when actually incurred on behalf of the city. 
(e)	The Council shall provide, by resolution, for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold not less than two regular meetings each month. No change shall be made in the time or place of the regular meetings of the Council, until after not less than ten days following publication of notice of such change. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
(f)	Special meetings of the Council shall be held at the regular meeting place of the Council. Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor or any two Councilmen, on at least six hours written notice to each member of the Council, designating the time and purpose of such meeting and served personally or left at his usual place of residence by the Clerk or someone designated by him. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement for the calling of special meetings, any special meeting of the Council shall be a legal meeting when all members of the Council are present. In the event that one or more of the members may be absent from any special meeting and such member or members have waived, in writing, the requirement that notice shall be given at least six hours prior to the time specified for the holding of such meeting, such shall be a legal meeting. No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to state law, special meetings of the council must be preceded by public notice stating the date, time and place of the meeting at least 18 hours before the meeting. See MCL 15.265. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
(g)	All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(h)	A majority of all members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Council, but in the absence of a quorum, any number of members less than a quorum may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. 
(i)	Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by state law or the provisions of this charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any appointment be made, nor any person removed from office, as required or permitted by this charter, except by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the Council. 
(j)	The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal, in the English language, of all its proceedings, which shall be signed by the Clerk, and by the Mayor after approval thereof by the Council. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" votes and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The public shall have access to the minutes and records of all regular [and] special meetings of the Council at all reasonable times. There shall be no standing committees of the Council after January 1, 1954. 
(k)	The Mayor and each Councilman shall be required to attend all meetings of the Council. The Council may compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its regular meetings, and may enforce such fines for nonattendance thereat, in such manner as it may, by ordinance, prescribe. Any member of the Council, or other officer of the city, who refuses to attend such meetings or conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The Police Chief, or such other person as the Council shall designate, shall serve as the Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section and subsection (a) of section 5.4 of this chapter. 
(l)	Except as otherwise provided in this charter, and specifically section 4.32 thereof, each member of the Council shall vote on each question before the Council for a determination, unless excused therefrom by a vote of at least a majority of the members of the Council, other than himself. 
(m)	Through the established departments and agencies of the city government, together with any such departments or agencies as may be created under authority of this charter, the Council shall provide for the public peace, health, and recreation, and for the safety of persons and property. 
(n)	The Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the city, and shall possess all powers, privileges, and immunities granted to boards of health by state law. The Mayor shall be chairman of the Board of Health, and the Health Officer shall be its executive officer and secretary. All actions taken by the Council in the exercise of the powers herein conferred shall be deemed to be actions in its capacity as the Board of Health. In the event and to the extent that the health functions of the city are merged with, absorbed by, or otherwise joined with a county health agency in any manner provided or permitted by law, the Council shall not be required to exercise the functions of a Board of Health, during the existence of such merger, absorption, or joining. 
Editor's note- The county now provides for all health services. 
(o)	The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may require and [sic] exact payment of such reasonable sums as it may deem proper for the granting and continuing of such licenses. 
(p)	The Council shall determine the method of publication of all notices, ordinances, and proceedings for which a mode of publication is not prescribed by this charter or by law. The Council may determine that such publication may be made in a newspaper which is circulated in the city, or that such publication may be made by posting in the office of the Clerk and in five other places in the city. In case publication is made by posting, a notice of such posting setting forth, by a description thereof, the purpose or nature of the notice, ordinance, or proceeding posted, and the location of the place where posted, shall be published at least once in a newspaper published or of general circulation in the city within seven days after such posting was done. 
(q)	The Council shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance, and protection of cemeteries, together with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the city either within or without its corporate limits. The Council shall have power to enact ordinances for the regulation of cemeteries within the city, both public and private. All such ordinances shall apply equally to cemeteries within the city belonging to[,] or under the control of, any church or religious society, or any corporation, company, or association. The Council may provide by ordinance that any bodies buried within the city in violation of any rule or ordinance made in respect to such burials to be taken up and reburied in such a manner as shall conform to the ordinances of the city. 
(r)	The city shall have and exercise the reasonable control of its streets, alleys, and public places. Except insofar as limited by state law and the provisions of this charter, the Council shall have power to establish, vacate, use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, whether such public places be located within or without the limits of the city, and the space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition, of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of such streets, alleys, and public places of the city; and the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in its streets, and alleys, and the sidewalks thereof, and all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. When the Council shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any public place, street, or alley, or any part thereof, it shall, by resolution so declare and, in such resolution, shall appoint a time, not less than thirty days thereafter, when the Council shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such hearing and of the purpose thereof shall be published not less than once in each of the three calendar weeks preceding such hearing in one of the newspapers published or of general circulation in the city. In lieu of publishing such notice in a newspaper, the Council may direct the publication of such notice by the posting of one copy thereof in a conspicuous place at each end of the street area proposed to be vacated. Such posting shall be done not less than three weeks prior to the date of such hearing. Objections to such proposed action of the Council shall be filed with the Clerk, in writing. If any such objection shall be filed, such public place, street, or alley, or part thereof, shall not be vacated, discontinued, or abolished, except by affirmative vote of five members of the Council. 
(s)	The Council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any gift or bequest made to the city or any officer, board, or department thereof for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same in accordance with the terms and conditions, if any, of such gift and may, by contract or otherwise, if permitted by or consistent with the terms of the gift or bequest, transfer any such gift or bequest to or permit such gift or bequest to remain in the hands of any person, group of persons, or corporation to administer the same for the benefit of the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of such gift or bequest. 
(t)	The Council shall have the power to acquire for the city by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction, or otherwise, either within or without the County of Calhoun, property of every type and nature which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes, powers, and duties of the city government established in this charter. 
(u)	The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Further, the Council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery, or any part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(v)	The Council, or any committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may summon witnesses to appear before the Council or such committee of the Council to give information under oath pertinent to such inquiry, administer oaths, and require the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Any officer or employee of the city who shall fail or refuse to obey such summons or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered or required to be produced under the provisions of this section, shall, on conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for election of city council, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 5.4. - Functional duties of the Mayor. 
(a)	Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be recognized as the executive head of the city and shall preside over all meetings of the Council and preserve order thereat and shall have and exercise all powers granted to mayors of cities by state law or by this charter. 
(b)	He shall be a conservator of the peace, and may, in the event of emergency or disaster, exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder, and shall have the power to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, and to suppress riot and disorderly conduct. 
(c)	He shall have an equal voice and vote with other members of the Council upon all matters before the Council for consideration, but shall not have the power of veto. 
(d)	He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council, this charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States shall require. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for the qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 5.5. - Selection of Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Council shall, at its first regular meeting following each regular city election, select one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor when, on account of absence from the city, disability, or otherwise, the Mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his office, and shall succeed to the office of Mayor in case of vacancy in that office. The Mayor Pro Tem shall preside over the meetings of the Council during the absence of the Mayor, and at the call of the Mayor. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, through advancement to the office of Mayor, or otherwise, the Council shall appoint one of its elected members to fill such vacancy. Until such time as the Council shall so appoint a Mayor Pro Tem, the line of succession of persons who shall act as Mayor, shall be the three senior Councilmen of the city according to the number of votes received by them at the time they were elected. 
Section 5.6. - The City Manager. 
(a)	The City Manager is the administrative agent of the Council. In such capacity, he is the chief administrative officer of the city and is accountable to the Council for the performance of all the administrative functions and services of the city and for the coordination of all administrative activities under his direction. He provides the Council with such information as the Council may desire to enable it to intelligently determine municipal policies. He places into effect and carries out the determinations of the Council. 
(b)	The Council shall look to the City Manager for, and through him secure, the proper administration of the administrative functions and services of the city. Except, for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the City Manager and shall not request the appointment of any person to or the removal of any person from any office or employment of the city by the City Manager or any of his subordinates. Neither shall the Council or [nor] any member or members thereof give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this charter. 
(c)	The City Manager shall carry out the policies formulated by the Council. In conformity with the provisions of this charter, he shall be charged with and be responsible to the Council for the supervision and management of all the services, works, and undertakings of the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter. He shall be responsible to the Council for: 
(1)	The administration of the affairs of the city; 
(2)	The coordination, supervision, and active control of the departments, institutions, and agencies of the city government created by or under authority of this charter; 
(3)	The enforcement and execution of the laws of the state and the ordinances and resolutions of the Council within the city and upon all public property owned or subject to the jurisdiction of the city, regardless of where located; 
(4)	The preservation and promotion of public health, safety, and welfare; the prevention, suppression, and abatement of public nuisances; and the enforcement of the police power of the city; 
(5)	The preparation of the annual budget proposal of the city and the administration of the annual budget adopted by the Council;[.] 
(d)	In order to carry out and perform the functions of his office, the City Manager shall have the following powers and duties, which powers and duties shall be exercised under the general supervision of the Council: 
(1)	To attend all meetings of the Council, unless otherwise directed by the Council, with the right to take part in all discussions, but without the right to vote, and to recommend to that body from time to time such measures as he shall deem necessary or expedient for it to adopt; 
(2)	To furnish the Council with any necessary information respecting the departments of the city government under his control; 
(3)	To prepare the annual budget document and administer the annual budget of the city in the manner and with such supporting schedules and data as may be required by this charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the Council; 
(4)	To keep the Council advised of the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(5)	To prepare and submit to the Council such reports as may be required by that body and to prepare and present to the Council an annual report, which shall consolidate the special reports of the several departments; 
(6)	To perform the duties and responsibilities as personnel director with respect to all city employees, subject to the provisions of this charter and general ordinances of the Council; 
(7)	To have responsible charge, management, and supervision of all public improvements, works, undertakings, utilities, and properties of the city; 
(8)	To see that the terms and conditions of all public utility franchises, of all contracts to which the city is a party, and of all trusts in favor of the city are faithfully kept and performed; 
(9)	To perform and assume such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the ordinances, resolutions, and directions of the Council. 
Section 5.7. - Responsibility of administrative officers to City Manager. 
    In order to carry out the responsibilities of the officers of the city, under the form of government established by this charter, each administrative officer of the city, except the City Attorney, shall be responsible to the City Manager for the performance of the duties of his office. The City Manager, in turn, shall be responsible therefor to the Council. In his capacity as Clerk of the Council in the recording of its proceedings and in his relationships with the Council arising out of the carrying out of such capacity, the Clerk shall be directly responsible to the Council. 
Section 5.8. - Functions of the Clerk. 
(a)	The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all its meetings and keep a permanent journal, in the English language, of every session of the Council; 
State Law reference- Keeping in the English language a written or printed journal of each session of the legislative body, MCL 117.3(m). 
(b)	He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the Council, which record shall be public; 
(c)	He shall have power to administer all oaths required for municipal purposes, by state law, this charter, and the ordinances of the city; 
(d)	He shall be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the City of Springfield, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this charter; 
(e)	He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal of the city, and shall attest the same; 
(f)	He shall give ample notice to the proper officials of the city of the expiration or termination of any franchise, contract, or agreement to which the city is a party, and to city officers personally of the expiration of any official bonds required of them; 
(g)	He shall certify, by his signature, all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council and perform any other duties required of him by state or Federal law, this charter, or the ordinances and resolutions of the Council; 
(h)	He shall issue all licenses which are required to be issued by the ordinances of the city; 
(i)	He shall be the chief elections officer of the city; 
(j)	He shall keep and shall be the custodian of the books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of all departments of the city; 
(k)	He shall prescribe a method of keeping accounts for all departments and offices of the city, which method shall be uniform, as near as practicable, and shall conform to the laws of the state; 
State Law reference- Mandatory charter provisions; a system of accounts and conforms to a uniform system of accounts as required by law, MCL 117.3(n). 
(l)	He shall examine and verify all books of account of the Treasurer and of the Municipal Court at least once each month and, at the end of each fiscal year, and at any other time upon the direction of the Council, he shall examine and verify all books of account kept by each officer, board, or department of the city. 
(As Amended, April 10, 1968) 
Editor's note- Municipal courts were abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), and supplanted by the state district court. The City of Springfield is in the tenth judicial district of Michigan. 
Section 5.9. - Functions of the Treasurer. 
(a)	The Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys of the city, and all evidences of value belonging to the city, or held in trust by the city; 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this charter, he shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the city, that may be collected by any officials or employees of the city, including license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city, and shall[,] in all cases, give a receipt therefor; 
(c)	He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds of the city in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the Clerk; 
(d)	He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by state or Federal law, this charter, and by the ordinances or resolutions of the Council; 
(e)	He shall examine and verify all accounts and claims against the city, except claims for unliquidated damages. He shall not sign any draft, check, or warrant, until he has verified the correctness of the account for which the same is issued. He shall not allow the payment of any account unless the money has been appropriated therefor; nor shall he sign any draft, check, or warrant for any account against the city, unless sufficient money is in the fund against which it is drawn. 
(As Amended, April 10, 1968) 
Section 5.10. - Deputies of the Clerk and Treasurer. 
    The Clerk and the Treasurer may appoint their own deputies, subject to confirmation by the City Manager. The Clerk and the Treasurer may terminate the status of their deputies at their pleasure, upon written notice to the City Manager. Such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers, except as the same may be limited, from time to time, by their superiors or by the Council. 
Section 5.11. - Functions of the Assessor. 
(a)	The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, [sic] assessing officers by state law. 
(b)	He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter, the ordinances of the city, or by state law. 
(c)	He shall create and maintain a card index of all lots and parcels of land in the city. Such index shall set forth, for each such lot or parcel of land, the legal description thereof and all information pertaining thereto and the improvements thereon which is pertinent to the valuation thereof, and shall be corrected annually to show the status thereof on tax day. 
(d)	He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by state law, this charter, or the ordinances of the city. 
State Law reference- Time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 5.12. - Functions of the City Attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be the corporate counsel of the city. He shall give his opinion in writing when requested to do so by the Council, or the City Manager. He shall act as attorney for the city in actions or hearings in all courts and before all legally constituted tribunals or commissions whenever the city is a party thereto or requires legal representation. He shall prepare or officially pass upon, in writing, before execution, all contracts, franchises, bonds, or other instruments in which the city is concerned. The salary, as set by the Council shall be in contemplation of such duties, which shall be the normal duties of the office of City Attorney. The Council may pay additional special compensation for extraordinary or special undertakings, provided the special compensation is agreed to by the Council and the City Attorney before the service for which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 5.13. - Special legal counsel. 
    The Council may retain and compensate special legal counsel in relation to any special project, undertaking, or litigation. Such counsel may be employed to work independently in the special matter or in cooperation with or as assistant to the City Attorney. 
Section 5.14. - Director of Public Services. 
    The Director of Public Services shall be responsible for all matters relating to the construction, management, maintenance, and operation of the physical properties and services of the city. He shall also be responsible for all planning in connection with any changes in, improvements of, or additions to such properties or services as are required to meet the needs of the city and its inhabitants. Until otherwise provided by the Council, the City Manager shall be the Director of Public Services. 
Section 5.15. - City police. 
    The police of the city shall have and exercise all the immunities, privileges, and powers of police officers, under the common law and statutes of the state, for the preservation of quiet, good order, and for the safety of persons and property in the city. They shall arrest, upon view and with or without process, any person found in the act of committing any offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city amounting to a breach of the peace and shall forthwith take such person before the proper magistrate or court for examination or trial. 
Section 5.16. - Firefighting and prevention. 
    The firefighting and prevention forces of the city shall be responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's firefighting apparatus and property and shall conduct such supervisory and educational programs within the city and with its inhabitants and industrial and business interests as will diminish the risk and potentiality of fires within the city. The Fire Chief, or any person lawfully acting in his stead, may command any person present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof and to assist in the protection of property thereat. If any person shall willfully disobey any such lawful requirement or other lawful order of any such officer, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter, which charter constitutes the governing law of the City of Springfield, and shall be subject to punishment therefor as in this charter provided. The chief executive officer of the fire forces of the city, or any person lawfully acting in his stead, with the concurrence of the Mayor, or any two Councilmen, may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to arrest the progress of fire. Reimbursement by the city for the cost of any such building to persons having an interest therein shall be made in the manner provided by Section 11 of Chapter XXIX of 1895 PA 215 [MCL 109.11], which section, insofar as it establishes the procedure for such reimbursement, is hereby adopted and made a part of this charter by reference. 
Section 5.17. - Purchasing agent. 
    The Council may designate any administrative officer as purchasing agent for the city. Such purchasing agent shall, under authority of the Council, sign all contracts and instruments required for the exercise of such function. 
Section 5.18. - Functions of other officers. 
    The duties of all officers of the city, which are not set forth in this charter, shall be those established by law and by ordinance or resolution of the Council. 
Section 5.19. - Merit system of personnel management. 
    The Council may provide, by ordinance, for a merit system of personnel management for the city. Such ordinance, when adopted[,] shall provide a professional and impartial approach to municipal personnel problems based solely upon the fitness, training, and experience of the individual with no discrimination on account of political or religious opinion. It is the intent of this section to secure, when enacted, the establishment of a merit system program as an integral part of the administrative service of the city, to the end that the handling of the personnel activities will be done in a manner equitable to the city employee, satisfying for the administrative officials to use, and, by increased efficiency and improved administration, economical to the citizens. 
Section 5.20. - Pension plan. 
    The Council may maintain for the benefit of the administrative officers and employees of the city, either with the State of Michigan, or by a plan of its own, a sound pension and retirement plan. No such plan, established by the city, shall contain pension and retirement benefits to such officers and employees which are less than the standards set by the statewide pension plan for municipal officers and employees established and administered by the State of Michigan. 
State Law reference- Municipal Employees Retirement Act of 1984, MCL 38.1501 et seq. 
Section 5.21. - Employees group benefits. 
    The Council shall have the power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments, boards, and agencies, Federal Social Security, if available, and recognized standard plans of group life, hospital, health, and accident insurance. 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to adopt ordinances relative to municipal concerns, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; charter to provide for adopting, amending and repealing ordinances and publication thereof, MCL 117.3(k). 

Section 6.1. - Status of charter. 
    This charter shall constitute the basic law of the City of Springfield, subject only to the Constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan and of the United States of America. 
Section 6.2. - City legislation defined. 
    All legislation of the City of Springfield, other than this charter, shall be by resolution or by ordinance. All legislation of the Council carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, and all acts required by this charter to be done by ordinance, shall be by ordinance. All other action taken by the Council may be by resolution, unless specifically required to be by resolution by this charter or by state or Federal law. 
Section 6.3. - Ordinance enacted. 
    Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the Council by one or more of its members in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances adopted by the Council shall be, "The City of Springfield Ordains:". Except in the case of any ordinance which the Council, with the approval of not less than six of its members, has voted to be an emergency ordinance, no ordinance shall be finally adopted by the Council until at least two weeks have elapsed following the submission thereof to it. Any ordinance of the city may be repealed by reference to its number and title. The section or sections of any ordinance which is revised, altered, or amended shall be reenacted, and published at length. All ordinances, when adopted[,] shall be immediately recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book"; and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures thereon. 
Section 6.4. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be published at least once after its adoption by the Council, before it shall become operative. The date upon which an ordinance shall become operative, shall be specifically provided in the ordinance itself. When the ordinance imposes a penalty, such operative date shall not be less than twenty-one days from the date of its passage, unless such ordinance be [is] declared to be an emergency ordinance by the Council. Publication of any ordinance, as required herein, may be accomplished by publication of such ordinance, after its final passage, as a part of the published proceedings of the Council. 
Editor's note- The Charter requirement of publication prior to operation is superseded by state statute. A city may publish a summary instead, provided that the summary includes the designation of a location in the city where a true copy of the ordinance can be inspected or obtained. See MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 6.5. - Penalties. 
    Each person who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be guilty of any violation of this charter or of misconduct in office shall be punished by a fine which shall not exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
    The Council may provide in ordinances passed by it for the punishment of violations thereof. No punishment for the violation of any ordinance shall exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
    Imprisonment for the violation of this charter, or of any city ordinance, or for misconduct in office, may be in the county jail or city prison, or in any workhouse of the state which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. 
Editor's note- The Charter maximum of a $500.00 fine and 90 days in prison is superseded by state law. An ordinance, unless otherwise provided by law, shall provide that a violation of the ordinance is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. See MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 6.6. - Time limit for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
    Prosecutions for violations of the ordinances of the city shall be commenced within two years after the commission of the offense. 
Section 6.7. - Proceedings for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
    Except as the same may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in this charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody, and trial of persons accused of violation of the provisions of the laws and ordinances of the city shall be governed by and conform to, as nearly as may be, the provisions of law relating to the proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by justices of the peace. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace was abolished by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969. 
Section 6.8. - Technical codes. 
    The Council may adopt, as a city ordinance, any provision of state law or any detailed technical code or set of regulations which has been promulgated by the State of Michigan, or by departments, boards, or agencies thereof, or by any organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of developing any such code or set of regulations, by reference thereto in any adopting ordinance and without publishing such technical code or set of regulations in full:[;] provided, that such code or set of regulations is fully identified in said ordinance and that the purpose of said code or set of regulations shall be published with the adopting ordinance and that printed copies thereof are kept in the office of the Clerk available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times. Such publication shall contain notice to the effect that a complete copy of said code or set of regulations is available for public use and inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 6.9. - Compilation or codification. 
(a)	Copies of all ordinances and amendments to the city charter which are adopted after the effective date of this charter shall be available to the public at the office of the Clerk. 
(b)	Within two years after the adoption of this charter, and at least once in every ten years thereafter, the Council shall direct and complete the codification and the publication of all ordinances of the city then in force, except franchise ordinances, in loose-leaf or pamphlet form, and may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. The placing of not less than two hundred printed copies of such code in the office of the Clerk for public inspection and distribution shall constitute publication of such code. No further publication of any such codification of the ordinances of the city shall be required for the validity thereof. In the event the ordinances of the city are codified from the beginning[,] no codification shall be made as herein required and in case such code shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any ten-year period, no recodification of the ordinances of the city shall be required during or at the end of such period. 
(c)	Copies of ordinances and of any code referred to in this chapter, and of any part or parts thereof, may be certified by the Clerk, and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matters contained therein. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Section 6.10. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Council may be had, by a petition as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- Permissible for charter to provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 
Section 6.11. - Petitions. 
    A petition initiating an ordinance, or requesting a referendum on an ordinance, shall be signed by not less than fifteen percent of the number of electors of the city who voted for governor of the State of Michigan at the last fall election held in the state and in no event shall any such petition be sufficient unless it contains one hundred or more such signatures. No such petition need be on one paper but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and place of his residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. On each petition paper there shall be, or there shall be attached thereto, a sworn affidavit that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. The Clerk shall not accept an initiatory or a referendary petition paper on which such affidavit does not appear. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall, within ten days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. No signature on any petition initiating an ordinance or requesting a referendum on an ordinance shall be counted in the canvass thereof which was signed more than ninety days prior to the date on which such petition was filed with the Clerk, or in case the date following such signature has been altered in any manner. If any such petitions shall be found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or to be improper as to form or not to be in compliance with the provisions of this section, the Clerk shall so notify the person filing such petition forthwith, and in the case of initiatory petitions, only, ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall certify such fact on the petition or not less than one paper thereof, indicating the date and time of such certification, and shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 6.12. - Council procedures. 
    Upon receiving from the Clerk, [sic] a petition initiating an ordinance or requesting a referendum on an ordinance, the Council shall, within thirty days, either: 
(a)	If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition, or determine to submit the proposal to adopt such ordinance to the electors of the city and provide for the holding of an election thereon; or 
(b)	If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to repeal such ordinance to the electors of the city and provide for the holding of an election thereon. 
Section 6.13. - Submission to electors. 
    In either case, should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, such proposal shall be submitted at an election to be held not less than forty days, nor more than ninety days, after the date of action thereon by the Council:[;] provided, that, if any election, other than a school election, is to be held in the city for any purpose whatsoever, within one hundred and twenty days after such action by the Council, such proposal shall be submitted to the electors of the city at such election. If such proposal must be submitted at a special election, and no such election may be held in the city because of any limitation thereof imposed by law, then such proposition shall be submitted to the electors of the city at the next election other than a school election, held in the city for any purpose whatsoever. The result of any such election shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
Section 6.14. - Ordinance suspended. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a petition for referendum, within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors, as the case may be. An ordinance which is adopted through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Thereafter, any such ordinance may be repealed or amended by the vote of five members of the Council. Should two or more ordinances which are adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote for the adoption thereof shall prevail as to those provisions. 
CHAPTER 7. - BUDGET PROCEDURE, GENERAL FINANCE AND TAXATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of city to levy taxes for public purposes, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; fiscal stabilization act, MCL 141.1001 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

Section 7.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each calendar year. 
Section 7.2. - Budget procedure. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of February in each year, each city officer and department head shall submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year, for the department or activities under his control. The City Manager shall prepare a complete itemized budget proposal for the next fiscal year of the city and shall submit it to the Council on or before the first day of April. 
Section 7.3. - Budget document. 
    The budget proposal shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information: 
(a)	Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the city, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and last preceding fiscal years, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the current year; 
(b)	Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)	Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years; 
(d)	A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)	An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)	Such other supporting schedules as the Council may deem necessary. 
Editor's note- MCL 141.435 supersedes this section's content with respect to certain minimum contents for a recommended budget. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h). 
Section 7.4. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption, at such time and place as the Council shall direct, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance thereof by the Clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public for inspection during office hours at the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
State Law reference- Public hearing required prior to adoption of budget, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 32. 
Section 7.5. - Adoption of budget, tax limit. 
    Not later than the first meeting of the Council in the month of May, the Council shall[,] by resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year. It shall, in such resolution, make an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes during the ensuing fiscal year of the city and provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. Such levy shall not exceed one and one-half percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city. Such tax rate limitation may be increased, from time to time, for one-year periods by a majority of the electors of the city voting at the election at which the proposition to do so shall be so submitted, but such increase shall be limited to an amount which will not cause the total levy for the city municipal purposes to exceed two percent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the city for the year in which such increase shall be authorized. The limitation on the rate of taxation fixed herein for municipal purposes shall be subject to the provisions of state law relative to the assessment and levy of taxes for the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city. 
(As Amended, April 10, 1968) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for taxation of real and personal property not to exceed two percent of value, MCL 117.3(g); property taxes, generally, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 7.6. - Power to tax. 
    In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of the city government, established by this charter, the city may assess, levy, and collect ad valorem taxes, rents, tolls, and excise or specific taxes. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for taxation, MCL 117.3(h). 
Section 7.7. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by state law. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for tax levy, collection and return procedure, MCL 117.3(i); charter to provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes are the same as for state, county and school purposes, MCL 117.3(f); property taxes, generally, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 7.8. - Exemptions. 
    No exemption from ad valorem taxation shall be allowed except that expressly required or permitted by law. 
(As Amended, April 10, 1968) 
State Law reference- Real estate exemptions, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Section 7.9. - Assessment. 
    The Assessor shall place a value, in accordance with law, upon all property, both real and personal, in the city, which is subject to taxation. Such valuation of property shall be in accordance with established assessment rules, techniques, and procedures. The Council shall provide, in each year, for the maintenance of the records and facilities of the office of the Assessor. 
State Law reference- Time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 7.10. - Time for making assessment rolls. 
    Prior to the first meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state. He shall notify the owners or persons to whom taxes are assessed, according to the records of his office of any increase or decrease in the assessed valuation of their real property as compared to such valuation for the previous year. Such notice shall be by first class mail, placed in the U.S. Post Office of the city not later than the day preceding the convening of the Board of Review to review such assessments. Neither the failure on the part of the Assessor to give such notice nor the failure of any person to receive such notice shall invalidate the assessment roll or any assessment thereon. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for the times of preparation and conformation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq. 
Section 7.11. - Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall be comprised of three persons who are taxpayers of the city and have been residents of the city for not less than three years. Such three members shall be appointed in the first instance, one to serve for a term of one year, one to serve for a term of two years, and one to serve for a term of three years. Annually thereafter, in the month of January, one member of the Board shall be appointed to serve for a full term of three years. The Council shall set the compensation of the Board of Review. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for board of review, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 7.12. - Meeting of Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall meet in each year on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in the second calendar month following the month in which tax day is established by statute, at such place as shall be designated by the Council, and shall continue in session from day to day, for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll, for two days, and as much longer as may be necessary. The Board shall remain in session during such hours as the Council may designate, but not less than six hours on each of said two days. The Board of Review shall hold a meeting on the fourth Monday of the month in which the first meeting of the Board is held and, at that meeting, shall complete the review of the assessment roll submitted to it and shall endorse and approve the same as provided and required by law. If, for any cause, a quorum of the Board of Review does not assemble, or in the event that such Board shall fail or refuse to act, during the days above-mentioned, the roll, as prepared by the Assessor, shall stand as if approved by the Board of Review. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for the times of preparation of the assessment roll, the meeting of the board of review, and the conformation of the assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); designation of tax day, MCL 211.2; board of review, meetings, MCL 211.30(1). 
Section 7.13. - Notice of meetings. 
    The Clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of the meeting of the Board of Review by publication, at least once, not less than two weeks immediately preceding such meeting. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 7.14. - Organization and functions of the Board of Review. 
    On the first day of its first meeting in each year, the Board of Review shall elect one of its members chairman. The Assessor shall be secretary of the Board and shall attend its meetings. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all the proceedings of the Board and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. The Assessor shall have the privilege of participating in all proceedings and discussions of the Board, but shall not have the right to vote upon any decisions of the Board. The members of said Board shall be officers of the city and shall take the constitutional oath of office which shall be filed with the Clerk. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are, by general tax law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, in reviewing assessments in townships for township, state, and county taxes. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it shall deem fit. In all cases, the assessment roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the assessment day of the year for which such roll is made and no change of the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon or additions or corrections to the assessment roll. 
Section 7.15. - Endorsement of roll-Validity. 
    After the Board shall have completed its review of the assessment roll, a majority of its members shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of said roll and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, the same shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school, and city taxes and for any other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Board of review, endorsement and signed statement, MCL 211.30(3); completed roll valid, conclusive presumption, MCL 211.31. 
Section 7.16. - Clerk to certify levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general tax, together with such other assessments and other lawful charges as the Council shall authorize to be spread against or charged to property and persons appearing upon such roll. 
Section 7.17. - City tax roll. 
    After the last day for the meeting of the Board of Review, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the amount to be raised, as provided in the preceding section, the Assessor shall proceed to spread the amounts of the general city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. For the purpose of avoiding fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by state law, which added amount, when collected shall be credited to the general funds of the city. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. For convenience, the city tax roll may be divided into volumes. Assessments and other lawful charges authorized by the Council to be spread against or charged to property or persons upon such roll shall be so spread and charged upon such roll as directed by the Council. 
State Law reference- Completion of assessment, avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39. 
Section 7.18. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the first day of June in each year, the Assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all the power and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes under the general laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Section 7.19. - Taxes lien on property. 
    The city taxes thus assessed against personal property shall become at once a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the first day of July become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the first day of July in each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal property taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 7.20. - Notification of taxes due. 
    The Treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but notice shall be given to the taxpayers of the city, by forwarding a statement of taxes due by first class mail, addressed to the several owners or occupiers of the property upon which taxes are assessed according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said roll. Neither the failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice, nor the failure of any person to receive such notice, shall invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release any person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of nonpayment of the same. 
Section 7.21. - Tax payment schedule. 
    City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the fiscal year when levied. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the method of payment of such taxes and charges and for fees, penalties, and interest, or any of them, for the late payment or nonpayment of same:[;] provided, that the total fees, penalties, and interest charged before March first of the following year shall not exceed five percent of such taxes. Such fees, penalties, and interest shall constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. The provision of any such ordinance shall not be amended between the first day of any tax collection period and the following March first. 
Section 7.22. - State, county, and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the city for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of state law relative to the collection of such taxes and fees to be paid therefor, the accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of taxes to the county treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof by the Treasurer, who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law. In the event that school taxes or any part thereof are collected at the same time as city taxes, they shall be collected subject to the same privileges and conditions as city taxes under the provisions of this charter. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for the levy, collection, and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i). 
Section 7.23. - Lien for taxes, assessments, and charges. 
    All taxes, assessments, charges, and fees levied, spread, or charged on any such tax rolls shall be and remain a lien upon the property until paid. 
Section 7.24. - Apportioning of tax on portion of taxed item. 
    Any person owning an undivided share or other part of any parcel of real property, assessed in one description, may pay the taxes assessed against such description or may pay the share or part owned by him by paying an amount having the same relation to the whole tax as the value of the part on which payment is made bears to the value of the whole description and the receipt given and the record of the receiving officer shall show that such payment was made and the claimed interest upon which it was made. 
Section 7.25. - Tax roll to county treasurer. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of February in each year, the Treasurer shall give notice, by first class mail, placed in the United States Post Office, to all persons who had not, on the first day of February, paid the taxes, assessments, and charges levied or spread against them or property owned by them on the tax roll of the city, that such taxes, assessments, and charges will be returned to the county treasurer on the delinquent tax roll of the city, unless paid on or before the last day of February. All taxes, special assessments, charges, and collection fees, on the city tax roll which remain unpaid on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by the Treasurer shall, on that date, become delinquent and shall be returned to the county treasurer at the time and in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges which shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes, assessments, charges, and fees, thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed, until paid. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq. 
Section 7.26. - Protection of a city lien. 
    The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the state, to acquire by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan, or the fee owner, when the purchase of such property is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and may hold, lease, or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. 
Section 7.27. - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for the city funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference- Designation of public fund depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq.; deposits of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 
Section 7.28. - Transfer of operating appropriations. 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, during the fiscal year to which such budget applies, except pursuant to the budget adopted by the Council. The Council may, however, transfer any unencumbered operating balance, or any portion thereof, from one city operating fund or account to another, upon the written recommendation of the City Manager, by a vote of not less than five members of the Council. The balance in any budget appropriation, except such as may be appropriated for the payment of any debt of the city, which has not been encumbered at the end of each fiscal year shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to the allocations made in the budget of the next fiscal year. 
Section 7.29. - Budget control [quarterly estimate of income and expenses]. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date. If it shall appear that the income of the city is less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the income of the city. 
Section 7.30. - Claims against city. 
    All claims against the city for materials, services, or for any other reason or purpose shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall verify the same and place such claims or a schedule thereof before the Council with supporting data concerning the authority for, or basis of, each such claim and the budget fund or account against which it is to be charged, if allowed. 
Section 7.31. - Notice to city of claim for injuries. 
    The city shall not be liable in damages for injury sustained by any person, either to his person or property, by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers or employees, or by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement, or facility of the city, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereon, unless, within sixty days after such injury shall have occurred, such person or his representative shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk, a notice in writing which shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of such injury as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time to the claimant, and a statement that the person receiving such injury intends to hold the city liable for such damage as may have been sustained by him. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period limited by law from the time such injury was sustained, nor unless he shall have first presented to the Clerk his claim in writing. Such claim shall be under oath, and set forth the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. Such claim shall be presented by the Clerk to the Council and the Council shall be given an opportunity to act thereon, either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city, under this section, that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in this section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
State Law reference- Liability for injuries, MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 7.32. - Budget control [only appropriated funds to be used; exceptions]. 
    Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council, only, by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members elect, may appropriate unappropriated funds in the hands of the Treasurer or transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from any account, department, or agency to another. 
    Expenditures shall not be charged directly to a contingent fund. Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation from the contingent fund shall be transferred to the appropriate budget fund or account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
    At least quarterly in each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and, if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may, by resolution, reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
    The balance in any budget appropriation, at the end of the fiscal year, shall revert to the unappropriated surplus of the general fund. Within thirty days following the end of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall file with the Council a schedule of all encumbrances upon the said budget appropriations, existing at the end of the fiscal year, with his recommendations as to whether such encumbrances shall be paid from such budget appropriations or from the budget of the next fiscal year. The Council shall determine from which appropriations such encumbrances shall be paid. 
Section 7.33. - Special funds. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, establish, and maintain, and may appropriate moneys to funds (a) for accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements of any type or for the purchase of equipment of any type, in each case either for a specific item or items or for future unspecified public improvements or equipment, or both:[;] provided, that the total amount of such fund shall not, at any time, exceed one percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city, as fixed by the Board of Review; and (b) for creating and maintaining a revolving or working capital fund or funds for local or special improvement projects:[;] provided, that the total amount of such fund or funds shall not, at any time, exceed one-half of one percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city, as fixed by the Board of Review. 
    Appropriations to such funds may be made by the Commission [Council] either in the annual appropriation ordinance or, from time to time during the fiscal year, from available funds from whatever source derived which are not required for other appropriations or obligations of the city. The balances in such funds at the end of the fiscal year shall not revert to the unappropriated surplus of the general fund but shall remain a part of such special fund created hereunder. 
    Moneys which are accumulated for the purposes set forth under item (a) above shall be used only at the direction of the Council and only for the purpose provided in the original ordinance establishing any such fund, unless their use for some other municipal purpose be authorized by a majority vote of the electors of the city who vote on the proposition to amend such ordinance to provide for a change of the use of such fund. 
    Moneys which are accumulated for the purposes set forth under item (b) above shall be expended only for the purposes provided in the ordinance establishing any such fund, or as such ordinance may be amended from time to time, and, when no longer required for such moneys or any part thereof[,] may be transferred to the general fund by ordinance adopted by a vote of not less than five of the members of the Council. 
Section 7.34. - Disbursement of city funds. 
    All city funds shall be disbursed by the Treasurer in accordance with provisions of statute, this charter, and procedures to be established by resolution or ordinance of the Council. Each city warrant or check which disburses city funds shall be signed by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, shall specify the budget fund or account against which it is to be charged, and shall be countersigned by the Treasurer. The City Manager, where necessary to expedite operation procedure, may authorize, in writing, other officers and employees of the city to make minor disbursements from petty cash accounts, which accounts shall be verified by the Treasurer at least quarterly in each fiscal year of the city. 
(As amended, April 10, 1968) 
Section 7.35. - Independent audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of the financial affairs of the city government at least annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants to be appointed by the Council and shall be completed within ninety days following the close of the fiscal year. The results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the Council may determine and a copy thereof shall be placed in the office of the Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time. 
State Law reference- Annual accounting for public funds, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 21. 
Section 7.36. - Annual report. 
    The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city after completion of the annual audit. The report shall include condensed financial statements showing the results of all city operations, including statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of such report shall be made available for public inspection and distribution at the office of the Clerk and by such other method as the Council and the City Manager may determine. At least one copy of such report shall be placed on file at the fire station of the city, until such time as city offices are regularly maintained. 
Section 7.37. - Municipal borrowing power. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the Council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize, from time to time, the borrowing of money on the credit of the city and the issuing of bonds therefor, for any purpose or purposes within the scope of its powers. The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten percent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city:[;] provided, that in case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the Council may borrow for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, a sum not to exceed three-eighths of one percent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, due in not more than five years, even if such loan would cause the indebtedness of the city to exceed the limit fixed in this charter. 
    In computing the net bonded indebtedness for the purpose hereof, the following shall not be included: 
(1)	Bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, even though they are also a general obligation of the city; 
(2)	Mortgage bonds, which are secured only by a mortgage on the property or franchise of the public utility; 
(3)	The principal and interest of revenue bonds which are payable solely from net revenues derived from the operation of the public improvement purchased, acquired, constructed, improved, enlarged, extended, or repaired, or any combination thereof, by the proceeds of such bonds; 
(4)	Bonds issued to refund moneys advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions. 
    The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness for the purpose of determining the net bonded indebtedness of the city. 
    The Council may borrow money and issue the bonds of the city therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, which bonds shall be either solely an obligation of the special assessment district, or both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city. All collections on special assessment rolls shall be set apart in a special fund and shall be used for the purpose for which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and interest on any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments. If there be any deficiency in the special assessment fund to meet the payment of any such principal and interest, moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in such general fund when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law, the Council may borrow money and issue bonds therefor, the principal and interest of which shall be paid solely from net revenues to be derived from the operation of the public improvement or improvements purchased, acquired, constructed, improved, enlarged, extended, or repaired by the use of the money so borrowed. 
    The city may issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limit of indebtedness prescribed by law, for the purpose of acquiring, extending, or improving any public utility, for supplying water, light, heat, or power, owned or operated by it, or which it is authorized to acquire:[;] provided, that such mortgage bonds, issued beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law, shall not impose any liability upon the city, but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including extended, or repaired. 
    The city may issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limit of indebtedness prescribed by law, for the purpose of acquiring, extending, or improving any public utility, for supplying water, light, heat, or power, owned or operated by it, or which it is authorized to acquire:[;] provided, that such mortgage bonds, issued beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law, shall not impose any liability upon the city, but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise or foreclosure. Such mortgage bonds shall be sold to yield not to exceed six percent per annum. In the event that any such mortgage bonds are sold by the city, there shall be created a sinking fund by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage at maturity. 
    The Council may also borrow money on the faith and credit of the city, to provide for the refunding, from time to time, of moneys advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions as buildings shall be connected with such water main extensions, and for the issuance of bonds therefor due in not more than thirty years in the amount not to exceed fifty thousand dollars. 
    No bond of the city, regardless of type or purpose, shall bear interest at a rate to exceed six percent per annum. 
State Law reference- Municipal power to borrow money and contract debts, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; charter may provide for city borrowing, MCL 117.4a. 
Section 7.38. - Unissued bonds. 
    No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if any such bonds are not issued or sold within three years after authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void. 
CHAPTER 10. - UTILITY FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Restrictions on municipal utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 

Section 10.1. - Public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)	To repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)	To require proper and adequate extension of plant[s] and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)	To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)	To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)	To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(f)	To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city, by the city, and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor:[;] provided, that in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor; 
(g)	To pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, as shall arise from its use thereof and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. 
Section 10.2. - Granting of franchises. 
    Every ordinance or resolution granting any franchise or right to occupy or use the streets, highways, bridges, or public places in the city for any purpose shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed, and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least thirty days before the final passage or adoption thereof, or approval for referral to the electorate. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No irrevocable franchise shall be granted by the city, unless such proposition shall have first received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special election. No such franchise ordinance, or resolution shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Council, unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
    A franchise ordinance, or ordinance granting or authorizing the granting of a license to use or occupy the streets of the city for public utility purposes, which is subject to revocation at the will of the city, may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted nor become operative, unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks before the final enactment thereof. 
State Law reference- Franchises, licenses limited to a term of thirty years, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 30. 
Section 10.3. - General powers respecting municipal utilities and services. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, airports, landing fields, and aeronautical facilities, hospitals, and public utilities, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for treating and supplying water, and for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the city and its inhabitants; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, and other public utility services, without its corporate limits to an amount not exceeding the limitations set by the state constitution. The power to supply, as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract and process water, electricity, or gas from natural resources, to manufacture the same, or to purchase the same from others. 
Section 10.4. - Management of utilities of the city. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the management, maintenance, improvement, and operation of the utilities of the city, which management and operation shall be under the general supervision and responsibility of an officer of the city who shall be designated by the Council. 
Section 10.5. - Utility charges. 
    The Council shall fix the rates to be charged for all public utility services under its control. When any person shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, the service upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued by the proper authority or department of the city and suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 10.6. - Lien for delinquent utility charges. 
    Except as otherwise provided or limited by state law, the city shall have as security for the collection of all charges for utility services, a lien upon the premises to which such utility services were supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution or supplying of such utility service or services to such premises. 
    Except as otherwise provided by state law, all unpaid charges for utility services furnished to any such premises, which, on the 31st day of March of each year, have remained unpaid for a period of three months, or more, shall be reported by the Clerk to the Council at the first meeting thereof in the month of April. The Council thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper published in the city, of notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid utility charges which have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more prior to the 31st day of March, and which have not been paid by the 30th day of April, shall be assessed upon the city's tax roll against the premises to which the utility services, for which the unpaid charges accrued, were supplied or furnished; and that such charges shall be collected in the same manner as the city taxes on said tax roll. If the same have remained delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the Treasurer's warrant for the collection of taxes levied in said tax roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer to be collected in the same manner as the city taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. 
    In the event that any provision of this section shall prove to be incomplete or inadequate for the carrying out of the purposes thereof, the Council shall provide by ordinance such additional procedures as may be required for the collection of public utility charges, and, for such purpose, shall have all the powers granted to cities by 1939 PA 178 (MCL 123.161 et seq.), as amended. 
Section 10.7. - Disposal of plants. 
    Except for purposes permitted by law, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any other way alienate or dispose of the property, easements, income, equipment, privileges, or assets belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may own or acquire, unless and except such proposition shall first have been submitted to the qualified electors of the city at a special city election called for that purpose in the manner provided in this charter, and approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors of the city voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no effect. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any article of equipment of any city-owned utility which is worn out or useless, or which is being or has been replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
CHAPTER 11. - CONTRACTS-PURCHASING-LEASES-PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 11.1. - Contracts. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of state law, this charter, and rules of the Council which are adopted in accordance therewith. 
    Any contract or agreement, in an amount of one thousand dollars or more, made under any form or terms other than the standard city purchase order form, shall, before execution, be submitted to the Attorney for his opinion with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk, together with a copy of the opinion. 
    Before any contract or agreement, including purchase orders, obligating the city to pay an amount of one thousand dollars or more is executed, the Clerk shall first endorse thereon a certification that an appropriation has been made for the payment thereof, or that sufficient funds will be available or that provision has been made for obtaining such funds if it be for a purpose to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement, obligating the city for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property for use by the city, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement. 
    No contract, purchase, or sale shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this section. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor, except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
    No contract shall be made with any person in default to the city. 
    The Council, in its discretion[,] shall have the right to reject any and all bids for work or materials proposed to be furnished or sold to or by the city. 
Section 11.2. - Purchases and sales. 
    Comparative or competitive prices shall be obtained, and a record kept thereof, for the purchase or sale of all materials, property, supplies, public improvements, and services where the amount involved is in excess of one hundred dollars and less than five hundred dollars. Competitive bids shall be secured therefor when the amount involved is five hundred dollars or more. Such prices need not be obtained when the Council determines, by ordinance or resolution, that it would not be advantageous to the city to obtain such prices. Such prices need not be obtained when the work is to be performed by a city department or agency. No purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
    Any purchase or sale of real property, or lease to the city of real property, shall be approved, in advance, by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elect of the Council. 
    Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless the Council shall adopt a resolution stating the reason for not accepting the same. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. 
    All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. 
    Detailed purchasing, sale, and contract procedures shall be established by ordinance. Such ordinance may provide for a petty cash account to be administered by the Clerk. Such petty cash account shall not exceed the sum of one hundred dollars and such ordinance shall prescribe for the accounting for expenditures therefrom. No disbursements shall be made from the petty cash account, nor shall it be committed for any purpose, except in accordance with the ordinance creating it and unless there be therein sufficient funds to pay each such commitment in full. 
Section 11.3. - Longterm contracts. 
    The city shall not have power to enter into any contract for a period exceeding three years, unless so permitted by this charter or by state law, or, unless such contract be with one or more other governmental units, or, unless approved by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election. 
Section 11.4. - General power relative to special assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property in special districts especially benefited, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
Section 11.5. - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, notices and hearings, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, collection of assessments, refunds, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method. 
    Such ordinance shall be subject to the following specific provisions, as well as to the other provisions of this chapter: 
(a)	No public improvement, to be financed in whole or part by special assessment, shall be undertaken, or any contract let therefor, before adoption by the Council of a resolution finally determining to proceed with such improvement and establishing a special assessment district therefor. 
(b)	No resolution, finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district therefor, shall be adopted, until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(c)	No resolution finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district therefor, shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council if, prior to such adoption written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed either by the owners of property in the district which, according to estimates, will be required to bear more than fifty percent of the amount of such special assessment or by more than fifty percent of the number of owners of property in such district. 
(d)	No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed by the Council, until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such rolls, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
    For the purposes of subsection (c) of this section, only: (1) in the case of tenancies by the entirety or joint tenancies, any one tenant shall be considered an owner entitled to file objections; (2) in the case of tenancies in common, objections shall be valid only if signed by all the common tenants; and (3) in the case of property being sold under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation shall be deemed to be the owner. 
Editor's note- State law sets mandatory procedures for special assessment notices and hearings which supersede the Charter. See MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Section 11.6. - Additional assessments; correction of invalid special assessments. 
    Additional pro rata assessments may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll. No such additional pro rata assessment shall exceed twenty-five percent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for an original assessment and, whenever any sum or part therefor, levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment, or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
    No judgment or decree, nor any act of the Council, vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitable charged against the same or which by regular mode of proceeding, might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Section 11.7. - Limitation on suits and actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment (a) unless, within sixty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (b) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within ninety days after confirmation of the roll. 
Section 11.8. - Lien and collection of special assessments. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid[,] shall be a lien upon the property assessed, for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. 
    The Council may provide, by ordinance, for fees, penalties, and interest for late payment or nonpayment of special assessments, which fees, penalties, and interest shall be a lien and shall be collectable as are similar charges upon city taxes. The Council may provide that delinquent special assessments be placed upon the tax roll, together with any accrued fees, penalties, and interest thereon, to be collected in all respects as are city taxes on such roll, or may make other provision for the enforcement of the lien created by such special assessments. 
Section 11.9. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments. 
Section 11.10. - Assessments for sidewalks, hazards, etc. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to subsection (g) or (k), section 2.1, or for any similar assessment, against an individual or property, shall be made by resolution of the Council. Notice of the time at which the Council will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the city, except that no notice shall be required in the case of assessments for the removal of weeds or any hazard. For the purposes of collection of such assessment, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt to the city, upon the adoption of such resolution, and shall be subject to the collection fees and become a lien as provided in section 11.6. 
Section 11.11. - Exemptions from special assessments. 
    The Council may provide for exemptions from special assessments for persons who, in the opinion of the Assessor and Council, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to such exemption, a trust deed or assignment to the city of all or any part of the real property of the beneficiary of such exemption shall be required in a manner as near as may be to that provided in section 7.8. 
State Law reference- Deferment of special assessments for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq. 
Section 11.12. - Failure to mail notice. 
    The requirement for mailing any notice required to be so sent by this charter or by ordinance, respecting any step, in the special assessment procedure, shall not be a jurisdictional requirement and shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
Editor's note- The Charter provides that the failure to give notice according to the Charter itself or subsequent ordinance shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. State law prohibits assessments against property owners who have not received notice. See MCL 211.744. 
SCHEDULE 

Section 1. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    This schedule chapter is to inaugurate a government of the City of Springfield and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. 
Section 2. - Election on charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the City of Springfield for adoption at a special election to be held on Monday, December 1st, 1952. All provisions for such election shall be made and such election shall be conducted in the manner provided by law. Proper and sufficient notice of registration and of such special election shall be given by the said officers of Battle Creek Township by publication and posting in the manner prescribed by law. If, at said election, a majority of the electors shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, then the Clerk of the Charter Commission, [sic] shall perform all other acts required by law to carry this charter into effect and to consummate the incorporation of the city. 
Section 3. - Form of ballot. 
    The form of the ballot on submission of this charter shall be as follows: 
(Proper Instructions) 
*   *   *   *   *   *   * 
    Shall the proposed charter of the City of Springfield, framed by the Charter Commission which was elected June 17, 1952, and which has been approved by the Governor of the State of Michigan, be adopted? 
YES NO 
Section 4. - Election of officers. 
    At the election upon the adoption of this charter, the first elective officers of the city under this charter, viz.: a Mayor, six Councilmen, and a Justice of the Peace shall be elected. The nomination and election of such first elective officers shall be conducted, as nearly as may be, in the manner prescribed for the election of officers in this charter. Candidates therefor shall be nominated by the filing of petitions signed by not less than twenty-five nor more than fifty of the qualified electors of such city and filed with the Clerk of the Charter Commission not later than twelve o'clock noon Eastern Standard Time Saturday, November 8, 1952. 
Section 5. - Canvass of votes. 
    The Charter Commission shall appoint three electors of the area constituting the city who shall canvass the vote on the adoption of the charter and the election of the first elective officers thereunder and determine the result of the vote at such election in each case at a meeting of such persons to be held at 7:30 p.m., in the Springfield School Building, on the Thursday following the election on the adoption of this charter. 
Section 6. - Terms of office of first city officers elected. 
    The term of office of each officer of the city elected at such election shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on December 30, 1952, and each such officer shall hold office to which he has been elected for the term therein designated and until his successor has been elected and has qualified for the office in accordance with the provisions of this charter. The three Councilmen elected and receiving the lesser number of votes shall hold office until the election and qualification of their successors following the regular city election held in April, 1954. The three Councilmen receiving the highest number of votes, and the Mayor, shall hold office until the election and qualification of their successors following the regular city election in April, 1955. The Justice of the Peace shall hold office until the election and qualification of his successor following the regular city election in April, 1957. Thereafter, the successors of all such officers shall be elected at the regular city elections provided by this charter, and shall hold office for the terms established thereby. 
Section 7. - First meeting of first city officers. 
    The Council first elected under this charter shall assemble at 7:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on Tuesday, December 30, 1952. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission. At this meeting[,] each elective officer of the city shall take and subscribe to his oath of office and shall thereupon be qualified for and shall assume the office to which he was elected. At the time the elective officers of the City of Springfield qualify for and assume the offices to which they were elected, as hereinbefore provided, the control of the officers of the Township of Battle Creek over that part of the township included within the city shall cease and be superseded by that of the officers of the City of Springfield. 
Section 8. - First administrative officers of the city. 
    At such meeting, or as soon thereafter as may be, the Council shall appoint a Clerk, a Treasurer, an Assessor and such other of the administrative officers of the city as the Council shall deem necessary for the functioning of the city government. Each such appointive officer shall hold his office subject to the provisions of this charter. Until a Clerk and a Treasurer are appointed and have assumed their respective offices, members of the Council may be appointed as acting Clerk and as acting Treasurer, respectively. Until a City Manager is appointed, the Mayor shall perform the duties of that office:[;] provided, that the Mayor shall not perform such duties after May 1, 1953. 
Section 9. - Financing interim period before collection of first taxes. 
    The first Council shall have the power to provide for the financing of the operation of the city government from the 30th day of December, 1952, to June 30th, 1953, and for defraying expenses incurred by the County of Calhoun, the Charter Commission and its members, and by the Township of Battle Creek for the holding of elections as provided and required by section 26 of 1909 PA 279 (MCL 117.26), providing such action is undertaken by the said township, in the incorporation of the city. For such purpose, the Council shall have power to borrow money and issue its notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes for the next succeeding fiscal year in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of 1943 PA 202 (MCL 134.1 et seq.). For the purpose of so permitting the city to borrow for the operating of the city government[,] the Council shall, in the year 1953, determine the operating tax levy for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1953, on or before April 1, 1953. The Council shall also proceed expeditiously to make a settlement with the Township Board of Battle Creek Township of the division of properties and liabilities of the township in the manner provided by section 14 of 1909 PA 279 (MCL 117.14). 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date  Section 
this Charter June 16, 1963 1.1-11.12, 
Scheds. 1-9 April 10, 1968 5.8 5.9 7.5 7.8  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Michigan," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1972, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 6.9. 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances authorized, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Alley. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from property. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean and refer to the Home Rule Charter of the City of Springfield, as amended. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Springfield, Michigan. 
    City council. The terms "city council" and "council" shall mean the council of the City of Springfield, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, MCL 8.6. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. Whenever the terms "the county" or "this county" are used, they shall refer to Calhoun County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males, unless the context clearly requires a literal construction. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers sitting as a body unless otherwise specifically provided. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" shall stand for the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Municipal civil infraction. An act or omission that is prohibited by an ordinance enumerated herein, or any ordinance of the city but which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions including but not limited to fines, costs, damages, and expenses may be ordered as authorized by chapter 87 of 1961 PA 236 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.). A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Name or title of officer, board, commission, department, department head, employee or agency. The name or title of any officer, board, commission, department, department head, employee or agency, when appearing alone herein, shall be construed as if the words "of Springfield, Michigan," followed it. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing, unless the context requires a literal construction. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such buildings or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes any individual, copartnership, association, unincorporated club, joint adventure and corporation; and any other group or combination of persons, acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting the same and the fiduciary of any estate or trust. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidence of debt. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" includes both real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to 1931 PA 285 is a reference to Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title is a reference to the act as amended. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any public way, park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to the use of the public in general. 
    Real estate and real property. The terms "real estate" and "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto, and interests therein, equitable as well as legal. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark, the name being written near the mark and witnessed. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street and highway. The terms "street" and "highway" shall mean all property which is subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or which is owned in fee and devoted to such purpose by the city, county or state. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing, typesetting, engraving, lithography, electronic and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines; history notes; references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references, charter references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4 et seq. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new city code by the city council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:..." The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which such section reads as follows:..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-31. 
(Code 1972, § 1-7) 
State Law reference- Forging, MCL 750.248. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(3)	Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
(4)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinances of the city. 
(5)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)	Any appropriation ordinances. 
(7)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)	Any rezoning ordinance. 
(9)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(10)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(12)	Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(13)	Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
(14)	Any ordinance declaring certain property to be a public nuisance and authorizing procedures for the demolition of such public nuisance. 
(15)	Any ordinance or resolution prescribing specific parking restrictions; no-parking zones; specific speed zones; parking meter zones; specific stop or yield intersections; and truck routes. 
(Ord. No. 1972-2, § 3, 11-20-1972) 
Secs. 1-10-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-31. - General penalties and sanctions for municipal civil infractions; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)	Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)	The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution), and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code or any ordinance; provided, however, that a violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or imprisonment not exceeding 93 days, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. 
(c)	The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions as expressly authorized under chapter 87 of 1961 PA 236 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws. Civil fines shall be as follows: 
(1)	Unless otherwise specifically provided for by this section or any ordinance, the civil fine for a municipal civil infraction violation shall be $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)	Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be less than $250.00, plus costs; 
b.	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall not be less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(d)	A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(e)	Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance constitutes a separate offense shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(f)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 2, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 1-8) 
Charter reference- Limitation of actions for ordinance violations, § 6.6. 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, MCL 117.4i(k). 
Secs. 1-32-1-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION 

Sec. 1-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means 1961 PA 236 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
    Authorized city official means a public safety officer, the city building inspector, the city code enforcement officer, or other personnel of the city authorized by this division to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Authorized local official means a city public safety officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the City of Springfield Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by this division. 
    Citation means a written complaint or notice to appear in court upon which an authorized local official records the occurrence or existence of one or more municipal civil infractions by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 1-52. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of (i) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (ii) a municipal civil infraction notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(b)	Except as to persons under the age of 17 years at the time of the occurrence of the violation, the district court has jurisdiction over municipal civil infraction actions. For persons cited for a municipal civil infraction under the age of 17 years at the time of the occurrence of the violation, the juvenile division of the probate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over the proceedings and shall proceed to hear and dispose of the case as provided by chapter XII.A of 1939 PA 288 (MCL 712A.1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-2) 
Sec. 1-53. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)	An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible, and as completely as possible, an original and three copies of a citation, unless the official elects to proceed with a municipal civil infraction violation notice as provided in section 1-55. 
(2)	An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person violate an ordinance, a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act (MCL 600.8705). 
(4)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(5)	The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(6)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: 
"I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(7)	Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.	Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator; 
b.	If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use of occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. A citation served under this subsection shall be processed in the same manner as a citation personally served upon a defendant. 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-3) 
Sec. 1-54. - Municipal civil infraction citations; contents. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that such violator may do one of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.	Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)	That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)	That at an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	That at a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-4) 
Sec. 1-55. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)	Authority to issue municipal civil infraction notice. An authorized city official may issue and serve a municipal civil infraction violation notice, instead of a citation, under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided in section 1-54. 
(b)	Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and to collect and retain civil fines and costs pursuant to a schedule as prescribed by this division. 
(c)	Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall be located at the city offices, 601 Avenue A, Springfield, Michigan 49015, and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operations of the municipal ordinance violations bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(d)	Disposition of violations. The municipal ordinance violations bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice, as compared with a citation, has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the municipal ordinance violations bureau. Nothing in this division shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The willingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection according to law. 
(e)	Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the municipal ordinance violations bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(f)	Municipal civil infraction violation notice. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in subsections 1-53(2) and (7). In addition to any other information required by this division or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(g)	Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(h)	Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid to the municipal ordinance violations bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-5) 
Sec. 1-56. - Schedule of civil fines established. 
(a)	A schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established. The fines for the violations listed in this subsection shall be as follows: 
Code Section(s) Offense (Violation) Fine (1) 4-31 Failure to comply with the provisions of section 4-31 (Number of dogs and cats restricted) $ 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (2) 4-52 Failure to comply with any provision of section 4-52 (Dogs to be controlled) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (3) 4-53 Failure to comply with any provision of section 4-53 (Harboring vicious, rabid or noisy dogs) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (4) 6-102 Violation of the International Property Maintenance Code 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (5) 6-131 through 6-135 and 6-151 through 6-156 Failure to comply with any provision of 6-131 through 6-135 and 6-151 through 6-156 (Demolition and moving of buildings) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (6) 8-32 Failure to comply with any provision of section 8-32 (License required) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (7) 18-32 Failure to comply with any provision of section 18-32 (Storage of dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicles) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (8) 18-62 Failure to comply with any provision of section 18-62 (Duty of property owner to abate noxious weeds) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (9) 28-35-28-39 Failure to comply with any provisions of sections 28-35 through 28-39 (Trailers, including without limitation, using a trailer for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes in any residence district of this city except as otherwise specifically provided in the article; parking any trailer overnight on any street, alley, highway or other public place in the city; parking any trailer at any time between any setback line established in the city zoning ordinance and the curbline of any lot; using trailers at places other than licensed trailer parks; removing wheels or tires except for purposes of repair; occupying a trailer for sleeping purposes by a greater number of persons than the vehicle is designed to accommodate) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (10) 36-86 through 36-92 Failure to comply with any provision of sections 36-86 through 36-92 (Garbage and refuse, prohibited practices) including, without limitation, failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (11) 48-99 Failure to comply with any provision of section 48-99 (Tampering with water meters and seals prohibited) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (12) 48-100 Failure to comply with any provision of section 48-100 (Bypassing water meter prohibited) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (13) Chapter 50 Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 50 (zoning) including, without limitation, failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (14) 50-501 through 50-518 Failure to comply with any provision of sections 50-501 through 50-518 (sign ordinance) including, without limitation, failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00  
(b)	A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 2, 11-15-1999; Code 1972, § 19-6) 
Sec. 1-57. - Authorized city official. 
    The city building inspector, code enforcement officer, and any city public safety officers are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the city ordinance violations bureau) as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-7) 
Sec. 1-58. - Municipal civil infraction; penalties and sanctions. 
(a)	Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this division is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to a payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(b)	Costs. If a defendant is ordered to pay a civil fine under subsection (a) of this section, the judge or district court magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs of the action, which are not limited to the costs taxable under ordinance civil actions and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the plaintiff has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction, up to the entry of judgment. Costs of not less than $9.00 or more than $500.00 may be ordered. Except as otherwise provided by law, costs shall be payable to the general fund of the plaintiff. 
(c)	Equitable writ or order. In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs, and damages and expenses, the judge or district court magistrate may issue a writ or order under section 8302 of the Act (MCL 600.8302), if expressly authorized by the chief judge. 
(d)	Failure to answer citation. A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and/or 90 days in jail. 
(e)	Lien against land, buildings or structures. If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or an installment ordered following a determination of responsibility within 30 days after the date on which payment is due in a municipal civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the use or occupation of land or a building or other structure, the plaintiff may obtain a lien against the land, building, or structure involved in the violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of the fine and costs with the register of deeds for the county. The court order shall not be recorded unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or attached to the court order. The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the court order with the register of deeds. In addition, a written notice of the lien shall be sent by the plaintiff by first class mail to the owner of record of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. Such lien may be enforced and discharged in the manner described in section 8731 of the Act (MCL 600.8731). 
(f)	Motion to show cause. If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or if applicable, damages or expenses as provided in section 8733(2) of the act, if applicable, or any installment, as ordered pursuant to section 8727 of the act, the court, upon the motion of the plaintiff or upon its own motion, may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause, or a bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
(g)	Corporation or association in contempt. If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursement shall pay the fine, costs, or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this section. 
(h)	Failure to show cause. Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payments, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid. 
(i)	Order for additional time. If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs, or damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of payment or of each installment, or revoking the fine, costs, or damages or expenses. 
(j)	Term of imprisonment for contempt for nonpayment. The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of commitment, and shall not exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30.00 per day. 
(k)	Required for discharge. A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall not be discharged from custody until one of the following occurs: 
(1)	The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to subsection (j); 
(2)	The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise; 
(3)	The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(l)	Removal of civil contempt upon discharge. The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant pursuant to subsection (k). 
(Ord. No. 1997-7, § 1, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 19-8; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General powers of the city, § 2.1; selection of officers of city, § 4.1 et seq.; form of government, § 5.1 et seq.; city legislation, § 6.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code saved from repeal, § 1-9(3); community development, ch. 12; human relations, ch. 24; administration of subdivision regulations, § 26-64; special assessments and public improvements, ch. 38; taxation, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 48; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 50-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (RESERVED)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith saved from repeal, § 1-9(13). 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; conflicts of interests as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public employees, MCL 691.1408; incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102. 

Secs. 2-61-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- AMSA board of appeals, § 6-51 et seq.; tax increment finance authority, § 12-61 et seq.; zoning commission, § 50-38; zoning board of appeals, § 50-56 et seq. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-3, adopted January 4, 2010, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-116-2-119, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Ord. No. 1957-3; Code of 1972, §§ 2-26-2-28 and Ord. No. 2006-5, adopted August 21, 2006. 
State Law reference- City planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

Sec. 2-116. - Creation. 
    There shall be a City of Springfield Planning Commission pursuant to P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, M.C.L. 125.3801 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the commission with the powers and duties as therein set forth and as hereinafter provided and staffed planning department. This division shall be officially known and described as the "the City of Springfield Planning Commission Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 1, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-117. - Membership. 
(a)	The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by city council. To be qualified to be a member and remain a member of the commission, the individual shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)	Shall be a qualified elector of the city, except two non-qualified electors may be members of the commission; 
(2)	Shall not be a declared candidate for any political office, except this condition shall not apply to the city council representatives to the commission; 
(3)	After an individual's first appointment, and before reappointment, said member shall have attended training for commission members, pursuant to section 2-119 of this division; 
(4)	Shall meet the conditions provided for each individual member in subsections (b), (d), (e), and (f) of this section, except the geographical location of the individual's residency may be considered optional. 
(b)	The membership shall be representative of the important geographic and interest segments of the city as follows. 
(c)	Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. However when first appointed, a number of members shall be appointed to one-year, two-year, or three-year terms such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all commission members will expire each year. If a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all commission members continue to expire each year. 
(d)	Ex officio members shall include the chief administrative official, or a person designated by him or her. 
(e)	The membership shall be representative of the important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the city in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city as follows: 
(1)	Agriculture; 
(2)	Natural resources; 
(3)	Recreation; 
(4)	Education; 
(5)	Public health; 
(6)	Government; 
(7)	Transportation; 
(8)	Industry; 
(9)	Commerce; 
(f)	The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent practicable, and as a secondary consideration to the representation of the major interests. 
(g)	A member of the city council, chief administrative officer, person designated by the chief administrative officer, and chief elected official of The city shall not be chair of the commission. 
(h)	Not more than one-third of the total membership of the commission shall consist of, collectively, a member of the city council, chief administrative officer, person designated by the chief elected officer, or chief elected official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 2, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-118. - Liaisons. 
    The commission, in its bylaws, may name "liaisons" to the commission. The purpose of liaisons is to provide certain city and quasi-city officials the ability to participate in discussion with the commission in addition to speaking in public participation, and nothing else. At a minimum, liaisons shall include: 
(1)	Planning department staff, and their agents and consultants. 
(2)	The city manager. 
(3)	The city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 3, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-119. - Training. 
    Appointed members of the commission shall attend educational programs designed for training members of Michigan Planning Commissions if the adopted city budget for that fiscal year includes funds to pay for tuition, registration, and travel expenses for the training. Nothing in this paragraph shall deem a member who has not had training from finishing his term of office unless the member resigns or is removed by action of the city council. The member shall be ineligible for reappointment at the conclusion of the term of office if they did not attend training. The commission shall include in its bylaws what training programs qualify to meet this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 4, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-120. - Members, appointment and terms. 
(a)	In January of each year he city clerk shall determine which members' terms of office expire, shall determine what organizations qualify to nominate members, and shall contact, by first class mail, those organizations to solicit nominations. 
(b)	In March of each year if the clerk has not received at least two nominations for each office, then the clerk shall discard those applications and shall place an advertisement(s) in a newspaper with paid circulation in the city to seek different applications. 
(c)	In May of each year, the city council shall consider the applications and nominations received, and appoint members to the commission by a majority vote for a three year term of office, which shall end May 1, at 9:00 a.m. of the respective year. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 5, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-121. - Removal from office. 
(a)	The city council may remove a member of the commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be considered malfeasance in office. Failure to repeatedly attend commission meetings shall be considered nonfeasance in office. 
(b)	The secretary of the planning commission shall report any member who has missed three regular meetings in a row to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 6, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-122. - Membership; vacancies. 
    The city council shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the commission for the unexpired terms in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 7, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-123. - Membership; transition. 
(a)	The transition from the previous city planning commission and the commission established in this division shall be gradual and shall take place over the next three years. The city council shall continue to make annual appointments, appointing approximately one-third of the membership of the commission as specified in this division, so that three years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, the membership, membership representation, and number of members have completed the transition to fully comply with this division. 
(b)	All other aspects of this division shall have immediate effect. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 8, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-124. - Membership; compensation. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 9, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-125. - Meetings. 
(a)	The commission shall meet at least once every quarter, and a majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of said commission, and all questions which shall arise at their meetings shall be determined by a vote of the majority of the members of the planning commission. 
(b)	The affirmative vote of ? of the total number of seats for members of the commission, regardless if vacancies or absences exist or not, shall be necessary for the adoption, or recommendation for adoption, of any plan or amendment to a plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 10, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-125.1. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have their powers and duties as set forth in P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, M.C.L. 125.3801 et seq.; and P.A. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, (M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 11, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-125.2. - Meetings; records. 
    The commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which records shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 12, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 2-125.3. - Approval, ratification, and reconfirmation. 
    All official actions taken by all planning commissions preceding the commission created by this division are hereby approved, ratified and reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall continue with the commission created by this division, subject to the requirements of this division, and shall be deemed a continuation of any previous city planning commission. This division shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 2010-3, § 13, 1-4-2010) 
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-126. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by M.C.L.A. 117.5c, the city hereby establishes a local officers compensation commission for the purpose of determining the salaries of elected officials. The local officers compensation commission shall be known as the Springfield Local Officers Compensation Commission and its members shall be called compensation commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 1, 9-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-127. - Membership. 
(a)	The local officers compensation commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be registered electors of the City of Springfield and who shall not be city council members or employees of the City of Springfield or the immediate family of a city council member or employee of the City of Springfield. 
(b)	Members of the compensation commission shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be confirmed by the city council by resolution. 
(c)	The regular terms for compensation commissioners shall be five years. Members of the first Compensation Commission shall be appointed for terms so that one each shall be appointed for one, two, three, four, and five-year terms. 
(d)	The Mayor shall appoint the first members of the compensation commission within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. The first members shall take office upon confirmation by the city council. After the first members are appointed, subsequent members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. 
(e)	Vacancies occurring in the office of compensation commissioner shall be filled by the mayor and shall be confirmed by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(f)	Compensation commissioners shall not receive compensation for serving as members of the compensation commission but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 2, 9-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-128. - Meetings. 
(a)	The local officers compensation commission shall meet for at least one and not more than 15 session days in each even-numbered year. "Session day" means a calendar day on which the commission meets and for which a quorum is present. 
(b)	The compensation commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. 
(c)	The term of office of the chairperson shall be two years, but shall continue until a successor is elected. 
(d)	A majority of the members of the compensation commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. No action or determination on salaries may be made without an affirmative vote of a majority of compensation commissioners appointed and serving. 
(e)	All business of the commission shall be conducted at a public meeting in compliance with the Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 3, 9-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-129. - Determination of salaries and expense allowances. 
(a)	The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salary and expense allowances or reimbursement of each elected official of the City of Springfield and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting in each even-numbered year. 
(b)	The determination of salary shall become the salary of each elected official unless the city council, by two-thirds vote of the members elected and serving, adopts a resolution rejecting the determination. 
(c)	The effective date of the determination of salary shall be 30 days following the filing of the determination of salary with the city clerk unless rejected under subsection (b) hereof. If the determination is rejected by the city council within 30 days of filing with the city clerk, the existing salary of each elected official so rejected shall prevail. 
(d)	The expense allowance or reimbursement allowed by a determination and paid to elected officials shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and shall be accounted for by the elected official to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 4, 9-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-130. - Freedom of information. 
    Any writing prepared, owned, used or retained by, or in the possession of, the local officers compensation commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act 42 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 5, 9-12-2008) 
Secs. 2-131-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(2); taxation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-141-2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING, CONTRACTING AND BUILDING PROCEDURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Contracts, purchasing, leases, and public improvements, ch. 11. 

Sec. 2-156. - Wage and fringe standards for city contracts established. 
    No contract, agreement, understanding or other arrangement, whether oral or written, for the performance of service or work for and on behalf of the city, involving craftworkers, mechanics and laborers employed directly upon the site of the work shall be entered into, approved or executed unless such contract, agreement, understanding or arrangement shall provide and require that all craftworkers, mechanics and laborers so employed shall receive at least the prevailing wages and fringe benefits of the building trades department for corresponding classes of craftworkers, mechanics and laborers, as determined and published by the Davis-Bacon Division of the United States Department of Labor for the greater Battle Creek area. In addition, such contract, agreement, understanding or arrangement shall provide that all subcontracts entered into by the contractor shall contain the provisions set forth in this section with respect to the contractor, and all such contracts, agreements, understandings or arrangements shall provide that all contractors and subcontractors engaged in the performance of services or work for the city to which this section of this division applies shall, at the request of the city, furnish proof satisfactory to the city that the provisions of such contract or subcontract are being complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 1; Code 1972, § 2-51) 
State Law reference- Wages of persons working on state project, MCL 408.551 et seq. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, adopted March 19, 2012, in effect repealed the former Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-4 and 4-31-4-41, and enacted a new Ch. 4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1972, §§ 21/2-4-21/2-8, 21/2-25-21/2-36; Ord. No. 1982-6; Ord. No. 1997-5 and Ord. No. 2011-5, adopted November 4, 2011. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Designation of animal control officer. 
    The county animal control officer is hereby designated and appointed as the animal control officer for the city. The county animal control officer shall hold the office of animal control officer for the city at the pleasure of the city manager, but the animal control officer shall be paid no salary by the city. The city manager shall have authority to discharge the county animal control officer from duties as city animal control officer, and to designate and appoint any other person as city animal control officer or deputy animal control officer. The persons so appointed shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be paid such salary as shall be determined and fixed by the city council. The county animal control officer, or such other person as shall be appointed animal control officer for the city, shall be referred to as the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-2. - Prohibited animals; exceptions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Exotic animal means an animal that is not domestic or any cross of any animal not domestic to North America. 
    Naturally feral means an animal that may be indigenous to North America but which has not lived under the husbandry of humans and is generally non-domesticated. Feral animal includes any wolf, bear, badger, coyote, and similar animal. 
(b)	No person shall keep or display a live cow, horse, pig, or similar farm animal or domestic fowl except within one parcel of land regularly devoted to, and zoned for, agricultural purposes, now or in the future. 
(c)	No person shall own, possess, harbor or otherwise maintain any dangerous or vicious animal within the city. A dangerous or vicious animal is any animal, bird, insect or fish that is known to have attacked, injured or destroyed persons or property, or one which, due to its dangerous disposition or due to its species or breed, may, without provocation, endanger persons or property. 
(d)	No person shall keep or display a live exotic or feral animal except within a zoo or zoological garden or other place where wild animals are kept for public showing in compliance with the city zoning ordinance. 
(e)	A person shall not own, possess, keep use, or prepare any bull, bear, dog, cock or other animal or fowl or bird for the purpose of fighting, baiting or as a target to be shot at as a test of skill and marksmanship; and a person who is a party to, or who causes such fighting, baiting or shooting of any bear, dog, cock or other animal or fowl or bird; and a person who shall rent or otherwise obtain the use of a building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for the purpose of fighting, baiting or shooting any animal, fowl or bird, or shall knowingly suffer or permit the use of a building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises belonging to him or under his control for any of the purposes described in this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-3. - Number of dogs and cats restricted; exceptions. 
    No owner of dogs and/or cats shall suffer, allow or permit to remain on the same or adjacent premises within the city more than three dogs or three cats or a combination of dogs and cats to exceed three in number, unless the owner operates a commercial kennel, pursuant to state, county and local laws; except, the owner of a female dog which has given birth to puppies, or the owner of a female cat which has given birth to kittens, may keep such female dog and puppies or such cat and kittens for a period not to exceed four months from the date of birth of the litter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-4. - Sanitation; disposal of refuse. 
    All animals and fowl kept and housed in the city shall be kept and housed in a clean and sanitary manner, and all refuse resulting from their keeping or housing shall be disposed of in such manner as to prevent any nuisance or any unsanitary, odorous or offensive condition which might otherwise arise from such refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-5. - Endangering animals or birds prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall cruelly treat any animal or bird. 
(b)	No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place, where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(c)	No person, except a public safety officer acting in official capacity, and acting from necessity, shall molest, injure, kill, or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb and wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-6. - Penalty. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Each day on which any violation of this section continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
Secs. 4-7-4-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-30. - License required; fee. 
(a)	No person shall own, keep, possess, harbor, or have the care or charge of any dog, male or female, aged four months or over within the city, unless such dog shall wear a collar to which is attached the license provided for by the laws of the state. Provided, this section shall not apply to any person transporting a dog through the city, such dog being taxed at the residence of the owner. 
(b)	The cost for licensing such god shall be fixed by the city council and adjusted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-31. - Responsibility of owners for violations. 
    An owner of a dog or cat shall be deemed to be prima facie responsible for a violation of any of the provisions of this article committed by such dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-32. - Rabies. 
    No person shall own or keep a dog or cat that has been bitten by an animal to have been, or reasonably suspected of having been, afflicted with rabies at the time such dog or cat was bitten, unless such dog or cat has been surrendered to the police department or an animal control officer and held for observation and released by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-33. - Running at large. 
    No person owning, possessing or having charge of any dog or cat shall: 
(1)	Permit any vicious dog or cat of which he is the owner to be unconfined, unless securely muzzled or led by a leash not exceeding three feet in length. 
(2)	Permit any dog or cat he owns, whether licensed or unlicensed, to go beyond the premises of such owner, or upon the premises of another, unless given permission by the owner or occupant thereof, or unless the dog or cat is held securely on a leash that is not longer than eight feet in length. 
(3)	Permit any female dog or cat to go beyond the premises of such owner when such dog or cat is in season. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-34. - Parks, schools, playgrounds, beaches, cemeteries and posted areas. 
    No person shall permit a dog or cat owned by him, or in his custody and control, to be in a playground, schoolyard, beach, cemetery or posted area, without the express permission of the authority in charge. This section shall not apply to police owned dogs, certified leader or hearing dogs or guard dogs, when accompanied by their owner or his authorized agent while actively engaged in activity for which such dogs are certified as trained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-35. - Noise. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat which, by loud or frequent habitual barking, yelping, howling, or screeching causes annoyance to other persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-36. - Destroying property or trespassing. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat, either licensed or unlicensed, that, by the destruction of property or trespassing on the property of others, becomes a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-37. - Unrestrained animals. 
    No person shall allow a dog or cat to be unrestrained when outdoors on private property, unless a person capable of controlling the dog or cat is in attendance with the dog or cat or unless adequate measures have been taken to prevent the dog or cat from leaving the property. As used in this section, "adequate measures" include, but are not limited to, confining the dog or cat to a fenced area which may include all or a portion of the property; confinement on a chain, rope or tether which is sufficiently strong and secure considering the size of the dog or cat confined; or use of an electronically activated collar which prevents the dog's or cat's escape from the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-38. - Seizure and impoundment. 
    Any dog or cat found in the city which is doing any of the acts enumerated in this article may be seized and impounded by an animal control officer or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-39. - Attack causing injury. 
    Any animal which has attacked a person, causing serious injury or death, or any animal which, when found, is not on the premises of the owner and has attacked a person and caused an injury that is not a serious injury, may be seized and impounded by an animal control officer or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 4-40. - Penalty. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Each day on which any violation of this section continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-19-2012) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to establish standards to govern construction, alteration and removal of buildings, § 2.1(n). 
Cross reference- Any ordinance declaring certain property to be a public nuisance and authorizing procedures for the demolition of such public nuisance saved from repeal, § 1-9(14); community development, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 36; construction waste, § 36-32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50; accessory buildings, § 50-404; signs, § 50-501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SINGLE STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Single state construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Enforcement. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), the building department/permits and code enforcement department of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under such act. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the act and of the single state construction code throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 1998-3, § 1, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 6-32. - Fees. 
    All fees under the single state construction code board of appeals shall be as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
Sec. 6-33. - Registration of state contractor licenses. 
    Any person who holds a state contractor's license of any kind and who desires to do business in the city shall register such license with the city and pay a registration fee to the city as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
Secs. 6-34-6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMSA BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 6-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AMSA means the area metropolitan services agency authorized under the urban cooperation act, 1967 PA 7 (MCL 124.501 et seq.). 
    AMSA area means the Townships of Leroy, Newton, Pennfield, the Charter Townships of Bedford and Emmett, and the Cities of Battle Creek and Springfield. 
    Citizen of the jurisdiction means a citizen of the AMSA area. 
    Inspection official means the person, department or division designated by the city to perform construction code inspections within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, § 3; Code 1972, § 81/2-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-52. - Established; membership. 
(a)	There is hereby established the AMSA board of appeals for the participating municipalities of the area metropolitan service agency to act as the construction code board of appeals. The AMSA board of appeals shall consist of six members. 
(b)	The members shall be proposed by the AMSA council and confirmed by the city council. One member shall be appointed for six years, one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year; thereafter, each new member shall serve for six years or until a successor has been appointed. 
(c)	During the absence of a member of the AMSA board of appeals by reason of disability or disqualification, the appointing officer shall designate a qualified substitute. The AMSA board of appeals shall select one of its members to serve as chair, and shall designate a clerk from the department of building inspection to serve as secretary to the board, who shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings on file in the department. A member of the AMSA board of appeals shall not pass on any question in which that member is engaged as a contractor or material dealer, or in the preparation of plans or specifications, or in which that member has a personal interest. Appointed members of the AMSA board of appeals shall serve on a voluntary basis and shall receive no compensation for such service. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 81/2-5) 
Sec. 6-53. - Duties generally. 
    The AMSA board of appeals shall: 
(1)	Administer and enforce the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, as amended; 
(2)	Administer and enforce the most current edition of the single state construction code; and 
(3)	Hear appeals from the decisions of the inspection official. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, § 5; Code 1972, § 81/2-6) 
Sec. 6-54. - Appeals. 
(a)	The owner of a building or structure or any other person may appeal to the AMSA board of appeals a decision of the inspection official refusing to grant a modification of the provisions of the single state construction code covering the matter of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of the code or the rules legally adopted under this article have been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of the code do not fully apply, or that an equally good or better form of construction can be used. 
(b)	When five qualified members are not present to consider a specific appeal, either the appellant, the inspection official or their representative may request a postponement of the hearing. The AMSA board of appeals shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the inspection official by a concurring vote of three members. Every action of the AMSA board of appeals shall be by resolution, and certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the inspection official; except that the appellant shall be entitled to a further hearing before a full board if there were not five qualified members present when the vote was taken. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, § 6; Code 1972, § 81/2-7) 
Sec. 6-55. - Court review. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the AMSA board of appeals, whether or not a previous party to the decision, or any officer of the official board of the jurisdiction, may apply to the appropriate court to the jurisdiction for relief. Application for review shall be made to the proper court of the jurisdiction within 15 days after the filing of the board's decision in the office of the inspection official. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, § 7; Code 1972, § 81/2-8) 
Secs. 6-56-6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-61. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 6-62. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 6-63. - Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled Calhoun County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions) and dated 4/4/11 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26025C; 0159C, 0178C, 0179C, 0186C, and 0187C and dated 4/4/11 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, 4-4-2011) 
Secs. 6-64-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING LAW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Housing Law, MCL 125.401 et seq.; ordinances or regulations of city relative to dwellings, MCL 125.408; power of city to regulate buildings, MCL 125.582. 

Sec. 6-81. - Housing code adopted; intent. 
    The state housing law, being 1917 PA 167 (MCL 125.538-125.542) (125.401 et seq.), as last amended, is hereby adopted and readopted as the housing code of the city. This adoption is intended to include all amendments to sections 138 through 142 of 1917 PA 167 (MCL 125.538-125.542) as they stand on June 21, 1980, as a specific part of the housing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1954-3; Ord. No. 1980-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-18) 
State Law reference- Housing Law, MCL 125.401 et seq. 
Sec. 6-82. - Building inspector to make annual report on changes in code. 
    The building inspector shall annually submit to the code official a report of all changes in the housing code adopted by this article and in documents related to such code and shall submit written suggestions regarding such changes and a recommendation as to whether this article should be amended to conform with such changes. 
(Ord. No. 1954-3; Code 1972, § 3-26) 
Secs. 6-83-6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 6-101. - Adoption. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code of the city, in the State of Michigan, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code of Ordinances, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6-102 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1980-7, § 3; Ord. No. 1982-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1986-4, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-2, § 2; Ord. No. 1995-6, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1998-3, § 3(B), 6-1-1998; Code 1972, § 3-28; Ord. No. 2004-2, § 1, 7-19-2004) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes, § 6-8. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 6-102. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
    Section 101.1 Insert "City of Springfield". 
    Section 103.5 Insert the following fee schedule: 
Noxious Weeds Mowing $150.00/hr* Labor Rate + $75.00 Administration Fee + $50.00/hr* Equipment Rate Boarding/Securing $150.00/hr* Labor Rate + $75.00 Administration Fee + $50.00/hr* Equipment Rate Temporary Safeguards $150.00/hr* Labor Rate + $75.00 Administration Fee + $50.00/hr* Equipment Rate Rubbish/Garbage Removal $150.00/hr* Labor Rate + $75.00 Administration Fee + $50.00/hr* Equipment Rate Demolition $150.00/hr* Labor Rate + $75.00 Administration Fee + $50.00/hr* Equipment Rate *1 hour minimum on all  
    Section 106.4 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Code shall be responsible for a civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction as provided in the Springfield Code of Ordinances, Section 1-31. 
    Section 302.4 Insert "6 inches". 
    Section 304.14 Insert "March 1 and December 1" two times. 
    Section 602.3 Insert "October 1 and May 15" two times. 
    Section 602.4 Insert "October 1 and May 15" two times. 
(Ord. No. 1975-13, § 1; Ord. No. 1980-7, § 3; Ord. No. 1982-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1986-4, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-2, § 2; Ord. No. 1995-6, § 3; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 11-15-1999; Code 1972, § 3-29; Ord. No. 2004-2, § 1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 2008-3, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 2013-4, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 6-103. - Conflicts between existing structure code and housing code. 
    If there shall be an inconsistency or conflict between the property maintenance code and the housing law adopted in section 6-81, the provisions of the housing law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1975-13, § 1; Ord. No. 1982-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1986-4, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 3-31) 
Secs. 6-104-6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-131. - Wrecking operations and procedures. 
(a)	The wrecking of buildings or structures shall be done in a safe, workmanlike manner. Willful or continued performance of work in an unsafe, shoddy, dangerous or unworkmanlike manner shall be cause for the cancellation of the wrecking permit. 
(b)	Barricades subject to the approval, and meeting the requirements, of the building inspection department shall be erected as required to protect the public. Where encroachments are made upon public property or ways, permission therefor shall be obtained in advance from the appropriate department. Trucks and machinery shall be operated in such a manner as not to create a traffic hazard and in accordance with any instructions or directions of the public safety department. Materials shall be disposed of and removed systematically, as the building or structure is wrecked, to prevent the creation of a fire hazard, danger to the public or interference with the use of public property. Proper protection shall be provided in all public utilities, during the operation, to prevent damage or interruption of service. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-110) 
Sec. 6-132. - General regulations. 
(a)	Permits for wrecking or moving shall not be assigned. 
(b)	All work shall be performed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and as described in the application for the permit. 
(c)	No person shall burn any materials on the premises without first obtaining permission from the public safety department. If permission is obtained, burning shall be done in strict accordance with the public safety department's stipulations. 
(d)	No permit shall be issued for the moving or wrecking of buildings or structures if the mover or wrecker has uncompleted work on which the authorized completion date has been exceeded. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-112) 
Sec. 6-133. - Failure of performance; remedy of city. 
    Every permit shall provide, and each permittee shall agree, that on a failure of performance, pursuant to the terms of the application and permit issued under this article, the city may forthwith and without notice complete the moving or wrecking and the costs thereof may be charged, paid and collected as in the manner provided for special assessments. This section shall not preclude suit, for the amount of costs, by the city against the owner or person responsible for the wrecking or moving, in the district court or the circuit court of the county or such other court as may have jurisdiction over actions of this nature. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-113) 
Sec. 6-134. - Variances. 
    The board of building and zoning appeals may grant variances to the provisions of this article in cases where there are unusual, practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships; provided that such a variation will not affect the general health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-114) 
Sec. 6-135. - Penalties and sanctions; municipal civil infraction. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided by section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Ord. No. 1997-5, § 3, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 3-115) 
Secs. 6-136-6-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-151. - Wrecking permits-Required; conditions for issuance; exceptions. 
(a)	Wrecking permits may be issued to wreckers or property owners as follows: 
(1)	To a wrecker, except as prohibited by subsection 6-132(d); and 
(2)	To a property owner intending to wreck a residential building or structure upon the property owner's own premises; provided that the building or structure is not more than a one-story masonry not exceeding 2,000 square feet in size, or a two-story frame, with or without masonry veneer, not exceeding 1,000 square feet of first floor area; and provided, further, that the property owner shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
(b)	Wrecking permits shall not be required for minor work which is incidental to, and/or in connection with, the repair or alteration of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-104) 
Sec. 6-152. - Same-Application. 
(a)	No person shall commence wrecking a building or structure in the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspection department. 
(b)	The application for a wrecking permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The street number, property description and number and classification of all structures; 
(2)	The names of all owners of the premises; 
(3)	Written consent to the wrecking by all owners; 
(4)	A complete description of all work to be done and precautions to be taken, including filling, leveling and barricading; 
(5)	Specific starting and completion dates of the operation; 
(6)	A provision for severing existing water, sewer and gas services; and 
(7)	Such other information as the building inspection department deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-105) 
Sec. 6-153. - Moving permits. 
(a)	Required. No person shall commence moving a building or structure without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspection department. 
(b)	Approval conditions. The application for the moving of a building or structure shall be approved by the building inspection, the public works, the public safety department of the city, by the city treasurer, and by the private utilities affected by the move. If the moving, in all its phases, conforms with this Code and is approved by all interested officials, the permit shall be granted. These departments and the city treasurer may stipulate conditions for the moving and may also require deposits to be made with the city treasurer to cover the cost of services rendered by the city during the moving operation. Such deposits shall not be construed as the maximum charge for such services. 
(c)	Building permit. No moving permit shall be issued until a building permit has been issued for the new location, if such location is within the city limits. The building permit shall include a plot plan and all alterations and improvements contemplated. 
(d)	Application. Application for a moving permit shall be filed with the building inspection department at least one week before the moving and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The street number of the building or structure to be moved; 
(2)	The property description of the unit to be moved; 
(3)	The names of all owners of the premises; 
(4)	Written consent to the moving by all owners; 
(5)	A detailed description of the route to be used; 
(6)	The width, length and height of the building or structure, when loaded; height measurements being from the ground to the highest portion of the building or structure after being loaded; 
(7)	The property description and street number to which the building or structure is to be moved, when located within the city limits; 
(8)	The names of all owners of the property to which the building or structure is to be moved, when the property is within the city limits; 
(9)	A plot plan showing the location of the building on its new site, when located within the city limits; and 
(10)	Such other information as the building inspection department official may deem necessary. 
(e)	Fee exemption. No fee shall be charged for moving a building or structure which is not moved on public property. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-106) 
Sec. 6-154. - Restrictions upon permits. 
(a)	Moving. The following restrictions shall be placed upon moving permits: 
(1)	All moving of buildings or structures shall be fully completed within 30 days from the date of issuance of a permit therefor; 
(2)	The premises from which the building or structure is moved shall be cleared of all debris, filled and leveled within seven days, in accordance with accepted standards, except where the excavation is needed or desired for new construction on the premises and a building permit therefor has been issued; 
(3)	An adequate fence or barricade shall be erected completely around open basements or cellars on the same day that the building or structure is moved off the foundation walls and shall be maintained until the filling and leveling off has been completed or new construction has been started; 
(4)	If, in the moving of a building or structure, it becomes necessary to leave the building or structure sitting on the streets or other public thoroughfares after sundown, the contractor shall be responsible for the adequate lighting of the building or structure and all equipment used in connection with the moving process, from sundown to sunrise. 
(b)	Wrecking. The following restrictions shall be placed upon wrecking permits: 
(1)	All work covered by the wrecking permit shall be fully completed within 45 calendar days from the date of issue, unless excepted in the following manner: 
a.	Upon the receipt of a written request, not later than five days prior to the expiration date noted on the approved application, the code official may grant a maximum of 15 days extension of time to complete the wrecking and cleanup of the site if, in the code official's opinion, the size and type of structure, or extremely inclement weather conditions warrant additional time; 
b.	A request for further extension of time shall be acted upon by the building code board of appeals, upon submission of a written request seven days prior to the expiration of the time extension granted by the code official; 
c.	A fee equal to the original fee shall be assessed to the person securing the original permit when wrecking exceeds 60 days, unless such fee is waived by the building code board of appeals. 
(2)	Material may be sold from the premises only during the wrecking period. No materials shall be brought in for sale. Material shall not be sold or stored on the curb, lawn or other public property or property generally used by the public; 
(3)	Removal and disposal of debris; filling and leveling premises: 
a.	The premises on which a building or structure is wrecked shall be cleared of all debris and filled and leveled within ten days after the wrecking operation is completed, except where the excavation is needed or desired for new construction on the premises and a building permit therefor has been applied for or issued. The final six inches of fill shall consist of clean soil, sand or gravel, free of large stones, block, brick, concrete or other such unacceptable materials and shall be left in a neatly graded condition. The ten-day period specified in this subsection (b)(3)a of this section may be extended by the building official, if inclement weather has prohibited the filling and leveling of the premises; 
b.	There shall be no lath, wood or other organic matter used for fill in connection with the wrecking or moving of any building or structure; 
c.	It shall be the obligation of the building wrecker or mover to provide or obtain suitable locations for the disposal of debris resulting from the wrecking or moving operation. The location shall be a state-approved and state-licensed landfill; 
d.	An adequate fence or barricade shall be erected completely around open basements or cellars prior to the removal of the first floor construction and shall be maintained until the filling and leveling off has been completed or new construction has been started. 
(4)	All basement floor slabs which are not to be removed for new construction, when a building is wrecked or moved, shall be thoroughly broken up to permit drainage; 
(5)	All basement walls or foundations which are not to be removed for new construction, when a building is wrecked or moved, shall be broken up and removed to a point one foot below the existing ground surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, §§ 3-107, 3-111) 
Sec. 6-155. - Permit fees. 
    A fee for the moving or wrecking of buildings or structures shall accompany each application and shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-108) 
Sec. 6-156. - Double fees. 
    Whenever a permit is required under this article and such permit is not obtained by the person required to obtain the permit, prior to the commencement of any work, installation or other activity for which the permit is required, the building inspection department shall charge double the normal fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 3-109) 
Secs. 6-157-6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-1, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2007, repealed Art. VI, §§ 6-181-6-184, which pertained to electrical work and derived from Ord. No. 1981-1, § 3, Ord. No. 1986-3, § 2, Code 1972, §§ 5-3, 5-12, 5-22, 5-23. 

Secs. 6-181-6-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 50. 

Sec. 6-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used by this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private swimming pool means a swimming pool that is not open to the public, is not publicly owned or is not regulated by the state either by statute or by rules or regulations of one of its administrative bodies. 
    Swimming pool means any artificially constructed, nonportable pool capable of being used for swimming or bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-212. - Permit required for construction of private swimming pool. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction on any swimming pool without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-17) 
Sec. 6-213. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 15-18) 
Sec. 6-214. - Plans and specifications to accompany application for permit. 
    Application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a complete and detailed set of plans and specifications of the private swimming pool to be constructed under the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-19) 
Sec. 6-215. - Approval of plans and specifications. 
    Before any permit required by this article shall be issued, the plans and specifications shall be approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-20) 
Sec. 6-216. - Final inspection and approval required prior to use. 
    Before any private swimming pool shall be used, a final inspection shall be made and approval given by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-21) 
Sec. 6-217. - Right of entry of county health department and building inspector. 
    The county health department and the building inspector shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any private swimming pool for the purposes of determining that all provisions of this article are fulfilled and complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-22) 
Sec. 6-218. - Drainage requirements when connected to sewer system. 
    The drain line for a private swimming pool may be connected to the city sewer system if the following provisions are complied with: 
(1)	The pool drain shall be connected to the storm sewer if one is available. 
(2)	Where a storm sewer is not available, the pool drain may be connected to a sanitary sewer subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
(3)	There shall be no direct connection between the pool drain and the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-26) 
Sec. 6-219. - Pool to be constructed to prevent deck water from returning directly to pool. 
    The construction of all private swimming pools shall be made in such a manner that all scum, splash and deck water shall not return to the pool except through a filter system. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-27) 
Sec. 6-220. - Scum controller required; location. 
    All private swimming pools shall be kept free of all floating material, sediment and debris either by an automatic surface skimmer, scum gutter or by some other means approved by the county health department. However, no scum controller shall be extended beyond the inside edge of the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-28) 
Sec. 6-221. - Recirculating system requirements. 
    The entire recirculating system of every private swimming pool shall be capable of filtering and recirculating the entire volume content of the pool during a 12-hour period. The rate of application of pool water on the filters shall not be greater than three gallons per minute per square foot of filter area, unless the county health department shall approve other rates of recirculation or rates of application of water on the filters. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-29) 
Sec. 6-222. - Germ and bacteria control. 
    Provision shall be made for each private swimming pool for positive germ or bacteria control by the use of chlorine, bromine or other disinfecting agents as may be approved by the county health department. Such disinfecting agents shall be applied to the pool water at a uniform rate. Provisions shall be made for adjusting the application thereof so as to keep the germ or bacteria protection of the water in the pool equal to a standard of five-tenths parts per million to 1.0 parts per million chlorine residual. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring such residual shall be provided by the owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-30) 
Sec. 6-223. - Violations to constitute nuisance. 
    Any improper or incorrect installation, operation, maintenance or use of any private swimming pool shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated by means of an appropriate court action. 
(Ord. No. 1959-3; Code 1972, § 15-32) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate trades, businesses, § 2.1(o). 
Cross reference- Community development, ch. 12; emergency services, ch. 16; secondhand goods, ch. 34; commercial refuse, § 36-33; taxation, ch. 42; telecommunications, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 48; OS-1 office service districts, § 50-186 et seq.; B-1 local business districts, § 50-206 et seq.; B-2 community business districts, § 50-226 et seq.; B-3 general business districts, § 50-246 et seq.; I-1 light industrial districts, § 50-266 et seq.; I-2 general industrial districts, § 50-286 et seq.; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide, in its charter, for the regulation of trades, occupations and amusements, MCL 117.4i(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Contract, licensing, § 36-136 et seq. 

Sec. 8-31. - "Licensee" defined. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the term "licensee" shall mean any person to whom a license has been issued under any provision of this Code and the employees or agents of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-32. - When license is required. 
    No person shall engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any section of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city, in the manner and from the city officer required by this article or other provisions of this Code pertaining to a particular license. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-2) 
Sec. 8-33. - Conditions to be met prior to issuance of license. 
    No license shall be granted or delivered until the applicant has complied with all the required conditions precedent to issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-3) 
Sec. 8-34. - Statements of fact in applications to be under oath or affirmation. 
    All statements of fact in any application for a license required by this Code shall be made upon oath or affirmation. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-4) 
Sec. 8-35. - City clerk to be licensing authority; applications to be made to clerk; forms. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the city clerk shall be the licensing authority of the city and applications for licenses from the city shall be made to the city clerk, upon forms provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-5) 
Sec. 8-36. - Investigations; fingerprinting; proof of identity. 
    The city clerk may refer any application for a license to the director of public safety, building inspector or county health officer, or to any two or more of them, for an investigation and recommendation on matters pertaining to the public safety, health or welfare which are or may be involved in the exercise of the license applied for and the city clerk may require the giving of fingerprints, and such other information as may be necessary to establish the identity of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-6) 
Sec. 8-37. - License year; term of licenses. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the license year of the city shall begin on July 1 in each year and terminate on June 30 of the following year. However, any annual license issued between April 31 and June 30 of any year shall expire on June 30 of the calendar year next following its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-7) 
Sec. 8-38. - License by state as prerequisite to city license. 
    No license required by any provision of this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence that such person has secured or has made application for such state license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-8) 
Sec. 8-39. - License certificates property of city; altering and defacing. 
    Each license or permit certificate issued by the city shall be the property of the city and no person shall alter or deface the license or permit certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-9) 
Sec. 8-40. - Acceptance of license constitutes permission for city to enter and inspect premises. 
    Acceptance by any person of a license granted by the city under this Code shall constitute permission by the licensee for any officer of the city, within the authority granted such officer by this Code, to enter upon and inspect the licensed premises at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-10) 
Sec. 8-41. - Applications for renewal to be treated as original applications. 
    Applications for the renewal of any license required by this Code shall be considered to be and shall be treated in the same manner as an original application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-11) 
Sec. 8-42. - Fee to be paid prior to issuance of license; persons exempt from fee. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued prior to payment of the required fee. No license or permit fee shall be required from any person who is exempt from such fee by any provision of state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-12) 
Sec. 8-43. - Refunds upon denial of license or permit. 
    If a license or permit is denied to any applicant, the license or permit fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-13) 
Sec. 8-44. - Display of expired or duplicated licenses. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-14) 
Sec. 8-45. - Nontransferability. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, licenses issued by the city shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-15) 
Sec. 8-46. - Use of license by others. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, no person shall permit by lease or otherwise any other person to use or employ any license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-16) 
Sec. 8-47. - Licenses to be carried on person or posted. 
    Except for a reasonable time after loss or destruction, no person to whom a license has been granted under any provision of this Code shall fail to carry such license upon their person when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted, except that where the trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, or from or in a vehicle, such license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in such place, establishment or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-17) 
Sec. 8-48. - License to be shown on demand of city officials. 
    No person shall fail to produce any license granted by the city when requested to do so by any city public safety officer, county health officer or city inspector or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-18) 
Sec. 8-49. - When duplicate licenses may be obtained; return of original or affidavit. 
(a)	Any person holding a license under any provision of this Code may obtain a duplicate copy of the license in case the original has been lost, destroyed or so worn or soiled as to be partially or wholly illegible. 
(b)	No duplicate copy of a license shall be issued until the licensee shall return the original to the city clerk, or file an affidavit with the city clerk to the effect that such license has been 
destroyed or lost. Any duplicate issued shall be plainly marked on its face "Duplicate." 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-19) 
Sec. 8-50. - Records to be kept. 
    The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications for licenses filed with him, indicating thereon whether the license applied for in each case has been granted or withheld, and, if withheld, the reason therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-21) 
Sec. 8-51. - Suspension and revocation procedure generally. 
(a)	Any license required by this Code may be suspended, or the renewal thereof refused, by the issuing officer for misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the license. Any license may be suspended by the officer who is responsible for the enforcement thereof for good cause. Such officer shall notify the issuing officer of each such suspension and of the reinstatement of such license upon the termination of such suspension. 
(b)	Any license required by this Code may be revoked by the city council for good cause. No license fee shall be refunded upon revocation or suspension of a license for good cause. 
(c)	The term "good cause," as used in this section, shall mean any act, omission or the permitting of a condition to exist with respect to the license in question which is: 
(1)	Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)	Unlawful or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)	A violation of the provisions of this Code under which the license was granted; 
(4)	Beyond the scope of the license issued; 
(5)	A fact, circumstance or condition, which, had it existed or been known to the issuing authority at the time the license was granted, would have been sufficient grounds for the refusal thereof. 
(d)	The good moral character of the licensee shall be determined by the standards set out in 1974 PA 381 (MCL 338.41 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-22) 
Sec. 8-52. - Hearing on revocation; notice. 
    No license under this Code shall be revoked except after a hearing before the city council following not less than ten days' written notice to the licensee stating the time and place of such hearing and setting forth the reasons for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-23) 
Sec. 8-53. - Appeal to city council when license is refused. 
    An applicant for any license who has been refused a license or the renewal of a license for any reason by the authorized issuing officer, unless an appeal is provided to another agency by this Code or by state law, may appeal such refusal to the city council by setting forth all the facts in a written petition and filing the appeal with the city clerk within five days after such refusal. The city council shall grant a hearing to the applicant, upon not less than ten days' written notice thereof to the applicant. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-24) 
Sec. 8-54. - Reapplication upon refusal to issue license or revocation of license. 
    No person to whom a license has been refused or whose license has been revoked by the city shall make further application for a license for at least six months after such last previous rejection or revocation, unless the applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the city clerk, that the reason for such rejection or revocation no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 1954-9; Code 1972, § 8-25) 
Sec. 8-55. - Penalties and sanctions; municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as set out in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, § 5, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 8-26) 
Secs. 8-56-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMOBILE DEALERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle dealers, distributors and manufacturers, MCL 445.1561 et seq. 

Sec. 8-81. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of selling new or used automobiles without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Code 1972, § 8-36) 
Sec. 8-82. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-37) 
Sec. 8-83. - Adoption of state laws by reference. 
    All statutes of the state relating to new and used automobile dealers are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference and no person shall violate any rule, law or regulation contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Code 1972, § 8-38) 
Sec. 8-84. - Automobiles to be in safe condition prior to sale. 
    No person shall sell or expose for sale any automobile under the provisions of this article unless such automobile is safe to operate, conforms in every way to the uniform traffic code adopted by the city and its brakes, lights, horn, tires and other component parts are in good and safe working order. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Code 1972, § 8-39) 
Sec. 8-85. - Allowing unlicensed drivers to test drive vehicles prohibited. 
    No person who is the owner or operator of a new or used car business shall permit any person to drive from the licensed premises any motor vehicle for the purpose of test driving the motor vehicle unless the person shall exhibit to the owner or operator of the business a valid driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Code 1972, § 8-41) 
Secs. 8-86-8-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEASONAL BUSINESSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Transient merchants generally, MCL 445.371 et seq. 

Sec. 8-111. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, a "seasonal business" is defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of this city or not, who engages in the business of leasing or letting for rent or hire any personal property, or selling or delivering goods, wares or merchandise within the city for a period of less than eight months of any calendar year, and who, in furtherance of such business, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vehicle, tent, boat, public room in a hotel, lodginghouse or apartment, or any street, alley or other place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-112. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a seasonal business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-72) 
Sec. 8-113. - License fee. 
    The fee for a license required by this article for any portion of a year shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 3; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-73) 
Sec. 8-114. - Expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire when the business ceases operation, but not later than June 1 of the year following issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-74) 
Sec. 8-115. - Application; contents. 
    The application for a license required by this article shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, and by the president or executive officer if a corporation, showing the following: 
(1)	The full name, permanent residence and local address of the applicant; 
(2)	The name of the firm or corporation represented, if any, together with the address of the central or district office of such firm or corporation; 
(3)	The address or location of the places within the city at which the applicant proposes to engage in business; 
(4)	If a corporation, the state of incorporation; 
(5)	The length of time for which the license is desired; 
(6)	Whether the business has previously been licensed under this article and if so, the date of the last license, and whether this application is a renewal; 
(7)	The general description of the type of business to be operated; 
(8)	Such other information as to the identity or character of the persons managing the business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article and the protection of the public good; 
(9)	If the business of the applicant requires the use of weighing or measuring devices, the application shall be accompanied by a certificate from the city clerk stating that the devices have been examined and approved; 
(10)	An affidavit of the applicant to the truth of the statements in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 4; Code 1972, § 8-75) 
Sec. 8-116. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of the application for a license required by this article and payment of the required fee, the city clerk shall issue a license to operate as a seasonal business. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 5; Code 1972, § 8-76) 
Sec. 8-117. - Contents of license. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this article shall contain the following: 
(1)	The date of issuance; 
(2)	The nature of the business to be conducted under the license; 
(3)	The amount of fee paid; 
(4)	The expiration date; 
(5)	The place where the business may be conducted; 
(6)	The name of the person authorized to conduct the business. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 5; Code 1972, § 8-77) 
Sec. 8-118. - Posting license. 
    Every license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named on the license, where it shall remain in plain sight during the entire time in which the business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 6; Code 1972, § 8-78) 
Sec. 8-119. - Separate licenses required for multiple locations. 
    A separate license shall be required for any seasonal business which expects to operate in more than one location, as if each location were a completely separate and distinct business. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 7; Code 1972, § 8-79) 
Sec. 8-120. - Transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferred without the written consent of the city clerk as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the license by the city clerk showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 8; Code 1972, § 8-80) 
Sec. 8-121. - Deceptive representations as to origin of goods; affidavit as to origin. 
    No person licensed under this article shall advertise or hold out that any sale is an insurance, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, mortgagee's, receiver's or closing-out sale, or a sale of mortgaged goods, or of goods, wares and merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or that the samples which such licensee is advertising or exposing for sale are samples of any goods described heretofore, either as to their condition or the method of conducting the sale, unless such person shall, at the time of applying for such license, make and file with the city clerk an affidavit showing all the facts in regard to the sale which such person proposes to conduct, including a true statement of the names of the persons from whom the goods to be sold were obtained, the date of delivery of the goods to the licensee, the place from which the goods were brought, and all the details necessary to fully identify the goods. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 10; Code 1972, § 8-82) 
State Law reference- Fire sales, MCL 442.211 et seq. 
Sec. 8-122. - Duty of public safety officers to examine business; enforce article. 
    It shall be the duty of the public safety officers of the city to examine all places of business and persons subject to the provisions of this article to determine if the provisions of this article have been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 11; Code 1972, § 8-83) 
Secs. 8-123-8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS 

Sec. 8-151. - Definitions. 
    The definitions as used in 1981 PA 95 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-201) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-152. - Certificate of registration required; issuance; fee; required information. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of a precious metal and gem dealer without first obtaining a certificate of registration therefor as required by 1981 PA 95 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), and paying the fee for such certificate as prescribed by resolution of the city council. Upon payment of the fee, in accordance with the provisions of 1981 PA 95 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), the certificate shall be issued by the public safety department. 
(b)	Any dealer required to be registered under 1981 PA 95 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), shall provide the public safety department with the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and thumbprint of the applicant; 
(2)	The name and address under which the applicant does business; 
(3)	The name, address and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the public safety department the name, address and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(c)	The applicant shall inform the public safety department of any changes in the information required by this section within 24 hours of the change, except that any change in the dealer's name or address under which the dealer does business shall be provided to the public safety department ten days before the change. No person shall falsify information provided to the public safety department pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-202) 
Secs. 8-153-8-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 8-181. - Purposes. 
    In the development and execution of this article, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious operational characteristics, particularly when one or more of them are located in near proximity to residential zones, thereby having a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Regulation of these uses through location is necessary to ensure that the adverse effects of such uses will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The provisions of this article are intended to prevent deterioration or blighting of residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, § 1, 5-18-1992; Code 1972, app. A-4, § A-4.1) 
Sec. 8-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment which has a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade for sale or rent, which stock-in-trade consists of books, magazines, newspapers, videotapes, video discs and motion pictures which are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or which establishment excludes admission to minors by virtue of age. 
    Adult business means, but it not limited to, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult personal service businesses, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, massage parlors, nude modeling studios and tattoo parlors. 
    Adult cabaret means a cafe, restaurant or bar where patrons are entertained by dancers, strippers or male or female impersonators, whether accompanied by music or not, whose conduct is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult novelty business means a business which has as a principle activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Adult personal service business means a business having as its principle activity a person, while nude or while displaying specified anatomical areas, providing personal services for another person. Such businesses include, but are not limited to, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, conversation parlors and theatrical performances or entertainment. 
    Adult video store means an establishment which has in excess of 50 percent of its stock-in-trade for sale or rental to the public or patrons, videocassettes or videotapes, having as a dominant theme an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Buttock means the anus and perineum of any person. 
    Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating, through the use of a physical, mechanical or other device, of the body of another, for a fee. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment wherein private massage is practiced, used or made available as a principle use of the premises. 
    Nude modeling studio means any building, structure, premises or part thereof used primarily as a place which offers as its principal activity the providing of models to display specified anatomical areas for artists and photographers for a fee. 
    Protected use means a church, school or public park. 
    Public park means any park owned and maintained by the city. 
    School means a public or private school offering education to students enrolled in kindergarten or one or more grades of one through 12. 
    Sexual intercourse means fellatio, cunnilingus, anal intercourse and any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a person's body, or of any object into the genital or anal openings of another's body. 
    Sodomy means sexual bestiality. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.	Human genitalia and pubic region; 
b.	Buttock; or 
c.	Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)	The stimulation or arousal of human genitalia; 
(2)	Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
    Tattoo parlor means a business having as its principal activity the application or placing, by any method, of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the human skin with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, § 2, 5-18-1992; Code 1972, app. A-4, § A-4.2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-183. - Restrictions on location. 
    An adult business may be located in the city only in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)	All such businesses shall be limited to the area within the city more specifically described as follows: 
The west 52.1 rods (859.65 feet ) of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Town 2 South, Range 8 west, City of Springfield, Calhoun County, Michigan, lying north of the Penn Central Railroad. 
(2)	No adult business shall be located within 500 feet of a preexisting protected use. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, § 3, 5-18-1992; Code 1972, app. A-4, § A-4.3) 
Sec. 8-184. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)	The height, yard, lot area, lot width, building coverage, sign and parking requirements of an adult business shall conform to the requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
(b)	The distance between an adult business and a protected use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the adult business or building containing an adult business to the nearest property line of the protected use. 
(c)	No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of an adult business. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, § 4, 5-18-1992; Code 1972, app. A-4, § A-4.4) 
Sec. 8-185. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article regarding massage parlors shall not apply to hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or medical clinics, or to the offices of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist, duly licensed by the state, or to barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders of patrons. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, § 5, 5-18-1992; Code 1972, app. A-4, § A-4.5) 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1, adopted April 3, 2017, repealed article VII, §§ 8-186-8-208, which pertained to medical marihuana and derived from Ord. No. 2011-3, adopted May 9, 2011; Ord. No. 2014-1, adopted April 21, 2014 and Ord. No. 2015-2, adopted September 21, 2015. 

Secs. 8-186-8-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITIES 

Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automotive repair facilities means a place of business that, for compensation, is engaged in the business of performing, or employs individuals who perform maintenance, diagnosis, vehicle body work, repair service, or BAIID service on a motor vehicle for compensation. The term does not include any of the following: 
(1)	An individual who engages only in the business of repairing the motor vehicles of a single commercial or industrial establishment or governmental agency. 
(2)	An individual who is repairing his or her own or a family member's car. 
(3)	A business that does not diagnosis the operation of a motor vehicle, does not remove parts from a motor vehicle to be re-machined and does not install finished machined or re-machined parts on a motor vehicle, not including a motor vehicle repair facility that engages in the business of performing or employing persons who perform vehicle body work. 
(4)	A BAIID facility described in Section 625k(14)(d) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.625k. 
    BAIID service means the installation, removal, repair, or other servicing of breath alcohol ignition interlock devices. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-302. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in business as an automotive repair facility without first having obtained a license from the city under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-303. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for a licensed required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and a copy of such resolution shall be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-304. - Adoption of state laws by reference. 
    All statutes of the state relating to automotive or motor vehicle service and repair, including specifically the Michigan Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Act, 1974 PA 300, as amended, MCL 257.1301 et seq. are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference, and no person shall violate any rule, law, or regulation contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-305. - Name or address change. 
    If a name or address of the automotive repair facility changes, not involving a change of ownership, the facility shall notify the city clerk in writing of the change. A new license must be obtained from the city clerk at that time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-306. - Inspection of the premises. 
    A licensed facility or a facility required to be licensed under this article shall be open to inspection by the city manager and/or the city manager's designee during reasonable business hours. During reasonable business hours, the city manager and/or the city manager's designee may make periodic unannounced inspections of the premises, parts records, and parts inventories of facilities. A person who hinders, obstructs, or otherwise prevents an inspection is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-307. - Injunctions. 
    If it appears that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in with the operation of an automotive repair facility in violation of this article, the city may, with or without prior administrative proceedings having occurred under section 8-52 of this Code, bring an action to enjoin that operation. The action shall be brought in Calhoun County Circuit Court. The city shall not be required to post a bond in a court proceeding. In addition, the court may suspend or revoke a license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 8-308. - Penalties and sanctions; municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction as set out in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to acquire cemeteries, § 2.1(h); power of council to enact ordinances relative to cemeteries, § 5.3(q). 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- For cemeteries generally, MCL 128.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - City cemeteries to be only public burial grounds; burials restricted to public burial grounds. 
    All cemeteries now owned or which may hereafter be acquired by the city are hereby declared to be public burial grounds, and no person or organization of persons shall establish any other cemetery within the city. No person shall bury any body in any place in the city other than the public burial grounds. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 1; Code 1972, § 4-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - City cemetery designated. 
    The cemetery now owned by the city shall be known as "The Reese Cemetery." 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 2; Code 1972, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Director of public works to promulgate rules and regulations. 
    The director of public works shall make rules and regulations to promote the general objects of this chapter and for the general improvement of the public burial grounds, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 8; Code 1972, § 4-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Establishment of grades. 
    The director of public works shall establish grade levels at which all graves in a given area shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 5; Code 1972, § 4-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Approval of monuments and plants. 
    The material and manner of erecting monuments, headstones and markers, the type, location and trimming of trees and shrubs, and the manner in which they are planted shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 5; Code 1972, § 4-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Enclosures prohibited. 
    No person shall erect any enclosure in the nature of a fence, hedge or curbing upon any lot or plot. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 5; Code 1972, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Director to plant trees and shrubs. 
    No trees or shrubs shall be planted or placed in the cemeteries of the city except by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 5; Code 1972, § 4-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Trespassing; damaging cemetery property. 
    No person shall cut, remove, injure or carry away any tree, flower or other decorative planting; nor deface, injure, remove or displace any monument, marker or ornamental equipment; nor carry away, remove, destroy or injure any flowerpot, vase, flowers or other ornamentation; nor shall any person traverse any portion of the cemetery except upon ways provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 6; Code 1972, § 4-8) 
State Law reference- Willfully destroying or injuring tombs of the dead, MCL 750.387. 
Sec. 10-9. - Removal of ornamentation. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the director of public works, any tree, plant, shrub or ornamentation of any kind has become unsightly, dangerous or detrimental to the adjacent lot owners, or the public use of the cemetery, the director of public works may remove the tree, plant, shrub or ornamentation. 
(Ord. No. 1053-15, § 7; Code 1972, § 4-9) 
Secs. 10-10-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BURIALS 

Sec. 10-31. - Burials to be in accordance with state law and county health department regulations. 
    No person shall bury any body in the public burial grounds except in accordance with state law and the regulations of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 3; Code 1972, § 4-21) 
State Law reference- Interment or other disposition, authorization required, duty of person in charge of premises, record, contents, MCL 333.2850. 
Sec. 10-32. - Only human bodies to be buried in public burial grounds. 
    No person shall bury any body except a human body in any public burial ground. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 3; Code 1972, § 4-22) 
Sec. 10-33. - Burials restricted to one body per grave; exception for infants. 
    No person shall bury more than one body in a single grave except in the case of infants, and then only in a single grave space. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 3; Code 1972, § 4-23) 
Sec. 10-34. - Approved underground vaults required for burials. 
    No burial shall be made except in underground vaults of construction approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 5; Code 1972, § 4-24) 
Sec. 10-35. - Burial right required. 
    No person shall bury any body in the public burial grounds without having purchased and paid for a burial right. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 3; Code 1972, § 4-25) 
Sec. 10-36. - Burials restricted to lot owner or family; exception. 
    Burial in any burial plot shall be restricted to the owner of such plot and the owner of the plot's immediate family, unless written authorization is obtained from the owner or the owner's heirs. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-26) 
Secs. 10-37-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOTS AND SERVICES 

Sec. 10-61. - Rates to be established by city council. 
    Lots and graves in the public burial grounds shall be sold and services shall be paid for at the rates established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-37) 
Sec. 10-62. - Burial rights certificate form. 
    Burial rights certificates shall be issued in such form as the director of public works shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-38) 
Sec. 10-63. - Issuance of burial rights certificate to vest full ownership rights; transferability. 
    A burial rights certificate shall entitle the person to whom it is issued to full ownership and control of the plot for which it was issued with the right to convey, or to transmit to such person's heirs and devisees in accordance with the state law. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-40) 
Sec. 10-64. - Inter vivos transfers to be made only upon full payment. 
    No inter vivos transfer shall be made of any burial rights certificate unless payment therefor has been made in full. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-41) 
Sec. 10-65. - Installment purchases; minimum terms; defaults. 
    Whenever any lot or plot in the public burial grounds is purchased on terms, the purchaser shall pay not less than 25 percent of the purchase price at the time of making the contract. The balance due on the contract shall be paid in monthly installments of not less than five percent of the total purchase price. In case of default, the entire balance shall become due and payable and interest shall be added on the unpaid balance at the rate of seven percent per annum, unless a new agreement of purchase shall be agreed upon between the purchaser and the public works director. In the event of default, the public works director may declare the contract forfeited and resell the unused portion of the lot or plot. 
(Ord. No. 1953-15, § 4; Code 1972, § 4-42) 
Sec. 10-66. - Maintenance of lots and plots generally. 
    The director of public works shall maintain the cemetery for the use and benefit of the lots and plots therein and for the use and benefit of the city in a manner conforming to all regulations of the city and state law. 
(Code 1972, § 4-43) 
Chapter 12 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 8; environment, ch. 18; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; special assessments and public improvements, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference- Housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

Sec. 12-31. - Application approved; article of incorporation. 
    The application of Harold D. Gestring and others dated November 7, 1983, and proposed articles of incorporation attached thereto are amended by changing the name of the corporation to The Economic Development Corporation of the City of Springfield, 1931 PA 327 (MCL 450.62 et seq.), by fixing the number of members of the board of directors at nine, and terms of office for six years, except of the directors first appointed, four shall be appointed for six years, one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one for one year, establishing the date upon which the corporation shall become effective, setting forth the name of the newspaper in which these articles shall be published, setting forth the manner of adopting bylaws, and by amending the business address of Robert G. Peevers to read 1400 East Columbia Avenue, Battle Creek, Michigan, 49017, and as amended are hereby approved and shall read as follows: 
PROPOSED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION 
NONPROFIT ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION FOR THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, MICHIGAN 
    These articles of incorporation are signed and acknowledged by the incorporators for the purpose of forming a nonprofit corporation under the provisions of 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), as follows: 
ARTICLE I. 
    The name of the corporation is the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Springfield. 
ARTICLE II. 
    The corporation is organized pursuant to 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.). Its purposes will be to alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment, to assist and retain local industries and commercial enterprises, to strengthen and revitalize the economy of the City of Springfield, to provide means and methods for the encouragement and assistance of industrial and commercial enterprises in locating and expanding in the City of Springfield, to encourage the location and expansion of commercial enterprises in the City of Springfield, more conveniently to provide needed services and facilities of the commercial enterprises of the City of Springfield and its residents and to accomplish the foregoing to do the following: 
(a)	To take, accept, hold and acquire by bequest, devise, gift, purchase, loan or lease any property, real, personal or mixed, whether tangible or intangible, without limitation as to kind, amount or value; 
(b)	To sell, convey, lease, rent, or make loans, grants or pledges of any such property, or any interest therein or proceeds therefrom, and to invest and reinvest the principal thereof and receipts therefrom, if any; 
(c)	To borrow money and to issue, sell or pledge its obligations and evidences of indebtedness and to mortgage its property to secure the payment thereof; 
(d)	To aid, assist and participate in clearing, rebuilding and rehabilitating blighted, or deteriorated areas or structures; 
(e)	To encourage, assist and participate in the preparation of plans, services, studies and recommendations; 
(f)	To guarantee undertakings, contracts or performances of others; 
(g)	To encourage citizen participation in housing and community improvements and improvement programs, and to disseminate information to the general public concerning the objectives and purposes of the corporation; 
(h)	To hold, improve by construction or otherwise, and to develop, clear, prepare and dispose of real property; 
(i)	To aid, assist and participate in the acquisition, rehabilitation or construction of improvements upon real estate, dwelling units or other structures or matters incident thereto; 
(j)	To enter into contracts with public authorities, individuals, corporations and other organizations in connection therewith; 
(k)	To carry on any activity for the purposes above stated, either directly or as agent, for or with public authorities, individuals, corporations or other organizations, or in whole or in part through or by means of public authorities, individuals, corporations or other organizations; 
(l)	In general, and subject to such limitations and conditions as are or may be prescribed by law, to exercise such other powers which now are or hereafter may be conferred by law upon a corporation organized under the above statutes and for the above purposes. 
ARTICLE III. 
    Location of the first registered office is: 601 Avenue A, Springfield, Michigan 49015. 
    The post office address of the first registered office is: 601 Avenue A, Springfield, Michigan 49015. 
ARTICLE IV. 
    The name of the first resident agent is: Carlene DeMaso, 601 Avenue A, Springfield, Michigan, 49015. 
ARTICLE V. 
    Said corporation is organized upon a nonstock basis. The amount of assets which said corporation possesses is: 
(1)	Real property: None 
(2)	Personal property: None 
    The corporation will be financed from donations, gifts, grants and devices, either solicited or unsolicited, obtained from public authorities, individuals, corporations and other organizations, by earnings from its activities, borrowings, and issuance of revenue bonds. 
ARTICLE VI. 
    The names and places of business of each of the incorporators are as follows: Adelbert E. Bishop, City of Springfield; Milford A. Mellon, City of Springfield; B. Carol Hinton, 309 North 20th Street, Springfield, Michigan, 49015; Robert G. Peevers, 1400 East Columbia Avenue, Battle Creek, Michigan, 49017; and Harold D. Gestring, 426 North 20th Street, Springfield, Michigan 49015. 
ARTICLE VII. 
    The board of directors shall consist of nine persons and shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Springfield, with the advice and consent of the city council of the City of Springfield. These directors shall be appointed for six years, except of the directors first appointed, four shall be appointed for six years, one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one for one year. 
ARTICLE VIII. 
    This corporation shall become effective on June 1, 1984. 
ARTICLE IX. 
    The term of the corporate existence is perpetual. 
ARTICLE X. 
    The regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation, including the distribution of assets on dissolution or final liquidation, is placed entirely with the board of directors or its successors, as provided in the bylaws of this corporation, subject, however, to the provisions of 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.). 
ARTICLE XI. 
    At the first meeting of the corporate board of directors, it shall adopt bylaws by corporate resolution. A majority of five members shall be necessary to adopt any bylaw or amended bylaw. Bylaws may thereafter be amended in the same manner. 
ARTICLE XII. 
    No part of the net earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of any member, trustee, officer or director of the corporation, or any private individual (except that reasonable compensation may be paid for services rendered to or for the corporation affecting one or more of its purposes), and no member, trustee, officer or director of the corporation or any private individual shall be entitled to share in the distribution of any of the corporate assets on dissolution of the corporation. No substantial part of the activities of the corporation shall be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence legislation, and the corporation shall not participate in or intervene in (including the publication or distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. Upon the dissolution of the corporation or the winding up of its affairs, all property and assets of the corporation shall be distributed exclusively to the City of Springfield, Michigan, or its successor. 
ARTICLE XIII. 
    These articles of incorporation shall be published in the Battle Creek Enquirer on adoption by resolution of the city council. 
    We, the incorporators, sign our names this 7th day of November, 1983. 
_____
Harold D. Gestring _____
Robert G. Peevers _____
B. Carol Hinton _____
Milford A. Mellon _____
Adelbert E. Bishop  
STATE OF MICHIGAN ) ) ss COUNTY OF CALHOUN )  
    On this 7th day of November, 1983, before me personally appeared Harold D. Gestring, Robert G. Peevers, B. Carol Hinton, Milford A. Mellon and Adelbert E. Bishop, to me known to be the persons described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged that they executed same as their free act and deed. 
_____
Carlene I. DeMaso 
Notary Public 
Calhoun County, Michigan 
My commission expires: 1/11/84  
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 43/4-11) 
Sec. 12-32. - Incorporation authorized. 
    After the city approves a resolution approving the application to incorporate the economic development corporation and the resolution is in effect and is filed with the secretary of state pursuant to section 5 of the 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1605), the clerk shall incorporate the Economic Development Corporation pursuant to sections 28 to 36 of 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1628-125.1636). 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 43/4-12) 
Sec. 12-33. - Time limitation for corporation. 
    So far as permitted by the laws and statutes of the state, the term of existence of the economic development corporation shall be perpetual. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 43/4-13) 
Sec. 12-34. - Limitation of action; right to question incorporation. 
    In accordance with section 31 of 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1631), the validity of the incorporation shall be conclusively presumed unless questioned in a court of competent jurisdiction within 60 days after filing of a certified copy with the secretary of state. The right exists to question the incorporation of the economic development corporation of the city as provided in section 31 of 1974 PA 338 (MCL 125.1631) and as stated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 3; Code 1972, § 43/4-14) 
Secs. 12-35-12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCE AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq. 
State Law reference- The tax increment finance authority act, MCL 125.1801 et seq. 

Sec. 12-61. - Adoption of 1980 PA 450 by reference. 
    A tax increment finance authority is hereby created and established pursuant to the terms and provisions of 1980 PA 450 (MCL 125.1801 et seq.), which Act is adopted by reference thereto by the city as this article, as herein modified. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-21) 
Sec. 12-62. - Reference to terms in Act. 
    Reference in 1980 PA 450 (MCL 125.1801 et seq.) to "chief executive officer" shall mean the mayor of the city. References to "governing body of a municipality" shall mean the city council of the city. References to "municipality" shall mean the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-22) 
Sec. 12-63. - Boundaries of the district. 
(a)	The boundaries of the tax increment finance district within which the authority shall exercise its powers are as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Carl Street and the easterly extension of the southern right-of-way of Betterly Road; thence north along the eastern limits of the City of Springfield to the centerline of Lafayette Street; thence northwesterly to the center of the intersection of Lafayette Street and 17th Street; thence north to the southern bank (high water mark) of the Kalamazoo River; thence northwesterly along the southern bank of the Kalamazoo River to the northern corporate limits of the City of Springfield; thence west to the centerline of Helmer Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Helmer Road to the center of the intersection of Helmer Road and Lewis Parrott Lane; thence west along the centerline of Lewis Parrott Lane to the center of the intersection of Lewis Parrott Lane and Harmony Lane; thence south along the centerline of Harmony Lane to the center of the intersection of Harmony Lane and Avenue A; thence west along the centerline of Avenue A to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of the eastern lot line of tax assessment parcel #13-54-004-044-00 (owned by the City of Springfield); thence south to the north right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad; thence in a southwesterly direction along the north right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad to the point of intersection with the east lot line of tax assessment parcel #13-54-004-046-00; thence north to the south lot line of tax assessment parcel #13-54-004-045-00; thence west to the point of intersection with the west lot line of tax assessment parcel #13-54-004-045-00; thence north to the south right-of-way line of Avenue A; thence east along the south right-of-way line of Avenue A to the southerly extension of the east right-of-way line of Easy Street; thence north to the north right-of-way line of Avenue A; thence in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way of Avenue A to the point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of Evergreen Road; thence north to the centerline of Harmonia Road; thence west to the northerly extension of the west right-of-way line of Evergreen Road; thence north along the city boundary line to the northernmost termination of the city limits; thence in a southwesterly direction along the city boundary line to east right-of-way line of the abandoned Tecumseh Road; thence southeast along the east right-of-way line of abandoned Tecumseh Road to the point of intersection with the centerline of General Street; thence south along the centerline of General Street for 320 feet; thence west 250 feet to the point of intersection with the western boundary of the City of Springfield; thence south along the west boundary of the City of Springfield to the point of intersection with the south boundary of the City of Springfield; thence east to the south right-of-way of Dickman Road; thence along the south right-of-way of Dickman Road to the southerly extension of the centerline of Helmer Road; thence south along the boundary line of the City of Springfield to the point of intersection with the westerly extension of the centerline of Goguac Street; thence east along the centerline of Goguac Street to the point of intersection with the southerly extension of the centerline of 28th Street; thence north to the point of intersection with the westerly extension of the north right-of-way line of Kirkwood Avenue; thence east to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad spur; thence in a northeasterly direction along the south right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad spur to the point of intersection with the westerly extension of the south right-of-way line of Betterly Road; thence east along the south right-of-way of Betterly Road to the point of beginning. 
(b)	The areas bounded by the following descriptions are excluded from the proposed tax increment finance district: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of Upton Avenue and 12th Street; thence north along the west right-of-way line of 12th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of Avenue C; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Avenue C to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of the west lot line of Lot #12, Block 10, Merrill Park Addition; thence in a southwesterly direction along the west lot line of Lot #12, Block 10, Merrill Park Addition to the south lot line of lot #12; thence southeasterly to the point of intersection with the west lot line of Lot #8, Block 10, Merrill Park Addition; thence southwesterly to the centerline of Avenue B; thence east along the centerline of Avenue B to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of the east lot line of Lot #10, Block 3, Merrill Park Addition; thence in a southwesterly direction to the centerline of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of the east lot line of assessment parcel #13-54-110-014-00; thence south to the north right-of-way of Upton Avenue; thence east to the point of beginning. Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of the right-of-way of Dickman Road and 24th Street; thence north along the west right-of-way of 24th Street to the northwest corner of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of 24th Street and Upton Avenue; thence in a southeasterly direction to the point of intersection with the west lot line of Lot #30, Post Land Co. Plat #3; thence north to the point of intersection with the southwesterly extension of the west lot line of Lot #6, Post Land Co. Plat #1, Block #5; thence northeasterly along the west lot line of Lot #6, Post Land Co. Plat #1, Block #5 to the point of intersection with the southerly extension of the centerline of the alley located between 20th Street and 21st Street; thence north along the centerline of the alley located between 20th Street and 21st Street to the point of intersection with the southwesterly extension of the west lot line of Lot #4, Post Land Co. Plat #1, Block #1; thence northeasterly along the west lot line of Lot #4, Post Land Co. Plat #1, Block #1 to the south right-of-way line of Avenue C; thence in a northwesterly direction along the south right-of-way line of Avenue C to the point of intersection with the centerline of 26th Street; thence in a southerly direction to the point of intersection with the easterly extension of the southern lot line of Lot #142, Springfield Place; thence west to the centerline of 28th Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of 28th Street to the south right-of-way line of Avenue C; thence west along the south right-of-way line of Avenue C to the centerline of 30th Street; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of 30th Street to the south right-of-way line of Avenue A; thence in a northwesterly direction along the south right-of-way line of Avenue A to the centerline of Helmer Road; thence south along the centerline of Helmer Road to the center of the intersection of Helmer Road and Shetler Street; thence east along the centerline of Shetler Street to the center of the intersection of Shetler Street and North 34th Street; thence south along the centerline of North 34th Street to the center of the intersection of North 34th Street and abandoned Crestwood Street; thence east along the centerline of abandoned Crestwood Street to the west right-of-way of 28th Street; thence south along the west right-of-way of 28th Street to the north right-of-way of Dickman Road; thence in a northeasterly direction to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-23) 
Sec. 12-64. - Director of board; bond. 
    The board, which is the governing body of the city tax increment finance authority, shall have a director as provided by 1980 PA 450 (MCL 125.1801 et seq.), and the director shall furnish bond, by posting a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00, under the provisions of such Act. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-24) 
Sec. 12-65. - Director of board to report to city council. 
    The board's director shall render to the board and to the city council regular reports covering the activities and financial condition of the authority, which reports shall be made at least quarterly during the first year of operation of the authority, and at least annually every year thereafter, unless more frequent reports are requested by the board or city council. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-25) 
Sec. 12-66. - Attorney for board. 
    The board, when requiring legal counsel, may seek the services available from the city attorney, or any other attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 4; Code 1972, § 43/4-26) 
State Law reference- Director, duties, treasurer, secretary, legal council, personnel and employees, MCL 125.1805(4). 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - General election. 
    Notwithstanding section 4.6 of the Charter of the city and pursuant to 1970 PA 239 (MCL 168.644a), after August 16, 1990, general elections for city offices of the city shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year beginning with the November 1991 general election; and, thereafter, such elections shall be held every two years in November of odd-numbered years pursuant to 1954 PA 116 (MCL 168.1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office of all city councilmembers and mayor shall be for a period of four years beginning with those officers elected at the general election held in November of 1991 and for all subsequent officers elected in the general November election of biennial odd years thereafter. The mayor and three councilmembers shall be elected for a term of office of four years in the general November election of 1991, and three councilmembers shall be elected for four-year terms of office in the November general election of 1993. Thereafter, their respective successors shall be elected to four-year terms of office in all biennial odd years following. The terms of office for mayor and all city councilmembers elected hereunder shall commence and date from the Monday next following the date of election as provided by the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 2; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -2) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter terms of office, MCL 168.644g. 
Sec. 14-3. - Extension of existing terms. 
    The mayor and incumbent city councilmembers whose terms of office expire under the city Charter in April of 1991 shall hold over in office until their successors are elected and qualified in the general election of November of 1991. Incumbent city councilmembers whose terms of office expire in April of 1992 under the city Charter shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified in the general election of November of 1993. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -3) 
State Law reference- Authority to extend terms of office, MCL 168.644g. 
Sec. 14-4. - Nominating petitions. 
    The method of nomination of mayor and city councilmembers for election shall be by petition as prescribed by the Charter of the city except that such petitions for the four-year terms of office created by this chapter must be filed with the clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the 12th Tuesday prior to the odd-year general election pursuant to 1990 PA 7 (MCL 168.644f). 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 4; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Rescission of prior resolution. 
    This chapter shall rescind Resolution No. 264-71 of the city council by which the city opted not to hold elections in the fall of odd-numbered years as provided by 1970 PA 239 (MCL 168.644a). 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 5; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -5) 
State Law reference- Authority for this rescission, MCL 168.644l. 
Sec. 14-6. - Charter provisions and state laws preserved. 
    All Charter provisions of the city relating to the election of officers not inconsistent with this chapter, 1970 PA 239 (MCL 168.644a), 1954 PA 116 (MCL 168.1 et seq.) and 1990 PA 7 (MCL 168.644f), are hereby preserved and remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 6; Code 1972, § 4 7/8 -6) 
Charter reference- Officers, their selection and terms of office, ch. 4. 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, MCL 333.20901 et seq.; private security guard act, MCL 338.1051 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Private security guards and alarm systems, MCL 338.1051 et seq.; fire alarm contractors and technicians, MCL 338.883f et seq; fire suppression systems, MCL 29.26 et seq. 

Sec. 16-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means a fire detection system, intrusion or holdup device designed or arranged to signal the presence of any fire hazard, intrusion or holdup of any residential, commercial or business property. Excluded from this definition are single-family residence battery-operated smoke or heat detectors. 
    Alarm system agent means a person employed by an alarm system contractor, whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing and responding to, or causing others to respond to, an alarm system. 
    Alarm system contractor means a person engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or who responds to an alarm system. The term "alarm system contractor" does not include a business which only sells or manufactures alarm systems, unless the business services alarm systems, installs alarm systems or monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
    Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons, within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
    AMSA means the Battle Creek Area Metropolitan Services Agency authorized under the urban cooperation act, 1967 PA 7 (MCL 124.501 et seq.). 
    AMSA area means the geographical area encompassing those municipalities who are members of AMSA. 
    Connection fee means the fee paid for the privilege of making a connection directly to the public safety department or dispatch center which mechanically, electronically or by other means initiates the automatic calling or dialing of a connection directly to the public safety department or dispatch center for the purpose of delivering a message. 
    Dialer alarm means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system was designed to detect and which is connected to and received by an agency maintained by the local government. 
    Dispatch center means an agency maintained by the local government to receive requests for and dispatch police or fire service. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence or the intentional activation of the alarm system without reasonable and legitimate need or cause by the person or such person's employees and agents using an alarm system. The term "false alarm" does not include an alarm caused by meteorological or geological conditions or act of war. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-114) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-32. - Installation and registration. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of an alarm system contractor, alarm system agent or become an agency furnishing those services, notwithstanding the name or title used in describing the agency and notwithstanding that other functions and services may also be performed for fee, hire or reward, nor shall any person advertise such business, without having first obtained a license to do so, as provided in 1968 PA 330 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.) and 1956 PA 217 (MCL 338.881 et seq.), for each bureau, agency, subagency, office and branch office to be owned, conducted, managed or maintained for the conduct of that business or the case of required fire alarm systems and required fire suppression systems having secured certification, pursuant to 1982 PA 144 (MCL 29.26 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the state fire safety board. 
(b)	No person shall sell, operate, adjust, arrange for a contract to provide a device which, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of or makes a connection directly to the public safety department. In addition to other information deemed necessary by the public safety department or the city attorney's office to implement the provisions of the article, each applicant shall furnish their name, their agent's name and their residence and business address and telephone number on forms furnished by the public safety department. No person shall provide inaccurate information on the registration form, fail to provide the information required by this article or fail to notify the public safety department of any change of registration information within 48 hours of the change and paying a connection fee, as provided by resolution of the council. Such connection fee shall be payable within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived by all persons presently maintaining such a connection described in this subsection. The failure to pay such connection fee shall result in the disconnection of the dial alarm. 
(c)	In addition to the fees required under this article, an alarm user shall be responsible for securing any additional permits as may be required by city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-115) 
Sec. 16-33. - Contractor required for installation; minimum installation standards. 
(a)	No alarm system shall be installed or operated in the city, unless the system is installed by an alarm system contractor licensed under 1968 PA 330 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.) and 1956 PA 217 (MCL 338.881 et seq.); or in the case of a required fire alarm system, unless certified pursuant to 1982 PA 144 (MCL 29.26 et seq.), and the rules promulgated by the state fire safety board; provided, however, that an owner or occupant of a residence for their own use may install and operate an alarm system. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as to relieve any person from the registration requirements of section 16-32 or the permit requirements of section 16-34. 
(b)	An alarm system installed in a commercial or public building shall utilize equipment and methods of installation equivalent to or exceeding minimum Underwriters Laboratories, American National Standards Institution, National Fire Protection Association or any other nationally recognized testing laboratory requirements for the appropriate installation. 
(c)	An alarm system installed in a residence shall utilize equipment equivalent to or exceeding minimum applicable Underwriters Laboratories or American National Standards Institute requirements for a household burglar or fire alarm system. 
(d)	Any alarm system designed to emit an audible siren, noise, flashing light, beacon or other sound or light annunciation so as to signal persons outside the premises shall be equipped to automatically terminate the local annunciation of the alarm system within five minutes from the initial light or sound emission. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-116) 
Sec. 16-34. - Alarm user permits. 
(a)	Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, every alarm user in the city shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm system operated within the city from the public safety department. This section does not require alarm system agents or alarm system contractors to obtain a permit when leasing or providing services to alarm system users. If, however, an alarm system agent or alarm system contractor uses an alarm system to protect their own premises, such agent or contractor shall obtain a permit. 
(b)	An alarm user applying for a permit shall pay a registration and inspection fee, as provided by resolution of the council, and complete a permit application form with the following information: 
(1)	The alarm user's name. 
(2)	The address of the residence or business in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed. 
(3)	The alarm user's home and business telephone numbers. 
(4)	The type and purpose of the alarm system. 
(5)	The alarm system agent or alarm system contractor selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system. 
(6)	The name and telephone number of at least three persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to promptly respond to an alarm system and who can open the premises in which the system is installed and who live 15 miles or less from the premises. The inability of the public safety department to contact an individual named in this subsection or the failure of such individual to promptly respond to a public safety inquiry shall relieve the public safety department of any obligation for the safekeeping of property and premises. 
(c)	Any alarm system designed to detect the presence of fire or smoke shall also be registered with the public safety department. An alarm user applying for a permit under this subsection shall pay a registration and inspection fee, as provided by resolution or the council; however, such fee is waived if payment has been made pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and the alarm user completes a permit application with the following information: 
(1)	The alarm user's name. 
(2)	The address of the residence or business in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed. 
(3)	The alarm user's home and business telephone numbers. 
(4)	The alarm system agent or alarm system contractor selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system. 
(5)	The location of the annunciation panel. 
(d)	Any change in the information listed in subsection (c) of this section shall be communicated to the public safety department within 48 hours of the change. 
(e)	Any alarm system designed to emit an audible siren, noise, flashing light, beacon or other sound or light annunciation, so as to signal persons outside the premises, shall be equipped to automatically terminate the local annunciation of the alarm system within five minutes from the initial light or sound emission. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-117) 
Sec. 16-35. - False alarms; fees. 
(a)	An alarm user shall be required to pay to the city a fee of $10.00 for the first false alarm, $25.00 for a second false alarm and $50.00 for each additional false alarm. The failure to pay such fees shall be cause for revocation of the alarm user permit, and unpaid fees may be assessed against the real property tax for the premises and become a lien thereon. 
(b)	Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be charged by the city: 
(1)	Alarm system malfunctions, if occurring within a 30-day period from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for all alarm systems currently in use or 30 days after the installation of an alarm system, whichever is later, if made for the purpose of evaluating the alarm system and making necessary adjustments to eliminate false alarms and if corrective measures have been instituted. The term "corrective measures" means the alarm user has had the system inspected by an alarm system contractor who shall cause a written report containing the results of the inspection, the probable cause for the false alarm, the nature of any repairs undertaken or performed to remedy the malfunction and the contractor's recommendation for limiting false alarms to be filed with the public safety department within five days of inspection. 
(2)	Meteorological or geological conditions when a large number of alarms or area of the city are affected. 
(3)	Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone or other communication systems or motor vehicle utility pole accidents. 
(4)	Alarm conditions being activated by persons either working on the alarm system or fire alarm systems with prior notification to the public safety department. 
(5)	In subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3) of this section, it shall be the responsibility of the alarm or fire alarm system user to notify the public safety department by filling out an alarm notification card and returning it to the public safety department within five business days. The timely return of an alarm notification card, which indicates the cause of the alarm was for one of the reasons enumerated in this subsection, shall result in no false alarm fee notice being sent to the alarm user. Failure to notify the public safety department will result in an automatic billing to the user. 
(c)	Within five business days following the response of a public safety officer to an alarm call, a representative of the director of public safety, or within five business days following the response of public safety officers to an alarm call, a representative of the director of public safety shall mail an alarm notification card to the alarm user as named on the permit in section 16-34. 
(d)	Within five business days of the date of receipt of the alarm notification card, the alarm user shall return the completed card to the public safety department. Failure by the alarm user to return the card shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm user. 
(e)	If, upon receiving a false alarm fee notice, the alarm user wishes to request a waiver due to extenuating circumstances, the alarm user may do so in writing within ten business days of the assessment date. The waiver request to the public safety department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within 30 days of receipt of the waiver request by the public safety department, the director of public safety or the director's designated agent shall make a determination of the waiver request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(f)	If the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the director of public safety or the designated agent thereof, an additional request for waiver may be filed within five business days of the decision by the director of public safety or the designated agent thereof for appeal to the alarm safety board. At its next regularly scheduled meeting after the receipt of the waiver request and documentation of extenuating circumstances, the alarm safety board shall review the request, make a determination on the waiver and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(g)	There is hereby created an alarm safety board. The alarm safety board shall consist of seven members. The members of the alarm safety board and their initial terms of office shall be proposed by the AMSA council and confirmed by the city council. The alarm safety board shall include one director of public safety, one elected governmental official and four members at large. The terms of members of the alarm safety board shall be three years (initial terms may be shorter), and the members shall receive no compensation. Members of the alarm safety board shall be residents of the AMSA area. A quorum of the alarm safety board shall consist of three members of the board. A member of the alarm safety board shall not pass on any question in which that member has an interest. 
(h)	An alarm system charged with more than four false alarm fee notices in a calendar year period is deemed defective and, upon written notice to the owner or lessee of the alarm system at the address listed in the registration of the alarm system by the public safety department, the owner or lessee of the alarm system may appear before the alarm safety board to show cause why the alarm user permit should not be revoked. The alarm user shall have up to ten minutes to make an oral presentation, and the director of public safety or the representative thereof shall have up to ten minutes in rebuttal. At such hearing, the alarm safety board may order the owner or lessee of the alarm system to correct the system or may order the revocation of the alarm user permit. The decision of the alarm safety board shall be final. 
(i)	Notwithstanding other provisions contained in this article, light or sound annunciation alarm systems which malfunction twice within a 30-day period or four times within a calendar year are deemed defective and shall be put out of service until inspected by an alarm service contractor who shall, within 15 days after inspection, file a written report to the director of public safety of the results of director's inspection of the system. Upon receipt of the report, the director of public safety shall forward the report to the alarm user, giving written notice that the alarm user may appear before the alarm safety board to show cause why the alarm user permit should not be revoked, pursuant to the procedures in subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)	Failure to comply with any provision or order in this section shall result, after due notice, in the revocation of the registration or permit provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-118) 
Sec. 16-36. - Inspections. 
(a)	The director of public safety or a person designated by the director of public safety shall have the right to inspect the design and installation of any proposed intrusion or holdup alarm system and reject those which do not conform to the national standards adopted in section 16-33. 
(b)	The director of public safety or a person designated by the director of public safety shall have the right to inspect the design and installation of any proposed fire hazard alarm system and reject those which do not conform to the national standards adopted in section 16-33. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-119) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; demolition and moving of buildings, § 6-131 et seq.; community development, ch. 12; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; parks and recreation, ch. 32; solid waste, ch. 36; hazardous waste, § 36-35; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Natural resource and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INOPERABLE AND DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dismantled and partially dismantled motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which any parts which ordinarily are components of such motor vehicle have been removed or are missing. If any part or accessory required by the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), has been removed from any motor vehicle or is missing therefrom, such motor vehicle shall be deemed to be partially dismantled. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)	A motor vehicle which is dismantled or partially dismantled. 
(2)	A motor vehicle which is in a state of disrepair. 
(3)	A motor vehicle which does not comply with the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), and have attached thereto and displayed thereon a valid registration certificate and valid registration plates issued by the state for the current registration year. 
(4)	A motor vehicle which for any other reason is incapable of being operated under its own power upon a public street or road. 
    Motor vehicle means any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled. 
    Motor vehicle parts means the components of a motor vehicle including but not limited to tires, bumpers, chassis, engine blocks, and body parts. 
(Ord. No. 1970-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1992-2, § 2; Code 1972, § 9-31) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Storage of dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)	No person shall store, or permit to be stored, or allowed to remain, any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts as defined in section 18-31 in any area, lot or yard in the city without being lawfully authorized to conduct business as an automobile repair facility, automobile maintenance facility, automobile sales facility, junkyard or salvage yard unless the motor vehicle shall be kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. 
(b)	Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(c)	If a person has received a civil infraction citation for a violation of this article, the court shall waive a civil fine and costs upon receipt of certification by the city public safety department that the defendant, before the appearance date on the citation, has repaired or removed the offending vehicles or vehicles such that defendant is no longer in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1973-2, § 1; Ord. No. 1992-2, § 3; Ord. No. 1997-5, § 6, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 9-32) 
Secs. 18-33-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS WEEDS AND FEMALE BOX ELDER TREES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, adopted July 3, 2006, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 18-61-18-67, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1958-6, §§ 1-4; Code 1972, §§ 17-16, 17-21-17-26; Ord. No. 1987-1, § 2; Ord. No. 1997-5, § 8, adopted December 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-8, § 1, adopted December 1, 1997. 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.; municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq.; box elders, nuisance ordinance for destruction, MCL 124.151. 

Sec. 18-61. - Definition of noxious weeds and weeds; prohibition. 
(a)	Definition . For the purposes of this article, term "noxious weeds" shall include Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other noxious plant growth in excess of eight inches. The term "weeds" shall include all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(b)	Prohibition . All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Duty of property owner to abate. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any lot or land whether occupied or unoccupied, including the area between said lot or land and the traveled portion of any alley, street, or road which adjoins said lot or land on which noxious weeds are found growing to destroy such weeds before they reach a seed-bearing stage and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves. It shall be the duty of the owner of every lot or parcel of and on which female box elder trees are found to destroy the female box elder trees. Likewise, it shall be the duty of the owner of every lot or parcel of land to cut weeds in excess of six inches. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006; Ord. No. 2013-4, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 18-63. - Notice to property owner to abate; service; posting on premises. 
    If the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any property on which weeds, noxious weeds or female box elder trees are growing shall fail or neglect to destroy the weeds or female box elder trees on such property, lot or parcel of land whether occupied or unoccupied, including the area between said lot or land and the traveled portion of any alley, street, or road which adjoins said lot or land, the code official shall cause a written notice to be served on the owner or occupant of such property requiring the destruction of such weeds or female box elder trees within five days after service of notice. If service of such notice cannot be had upon the owner or occupant, it shall be sufficient to post the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises. The notice shall contain a summary of the provisions of this article. Failure to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for a debt created under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006; Ord. No. 2013-4, § 2, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 18-64. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city. 
    If any owner, agent or occupant of property upon which weeds, noxious weeds or female box elder trees are growing shall refuse or neglect to destroy said weeds or female box elder trees with ten days after receiving notice to do so, the official may cause the destruction of such weeds or female box elder trees to be done. Expenses incurred in the destruction or cutting of weeds or female box elder trees shall be paid by the owner of the lot. The city shall have a lien upon the lot for the amount of the expense. The lien shall be enforced in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State of Michigan providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Sec. 18-65. - Manner of destroying weeds. 
    The city shall, so far as is practicable, apply the best methods for the destruction of noxious weeds or female box elder trees which are calculated to prevent their spread and to eradicate the noxious weeds or female box elder trees. The destruction of noxious weeds or female box elder trees on any lot or parcel of land shall be performed in such a manner as to leave the lot or parcel of land in a neat and orderly condition. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Sec. 18-66. - Penalties and sanctions; municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a blight violation punishable as a municipal civil infraction, and subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided for in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Sec. 18-67. - Notice to owner/occupant of property; newspaper publication. 
    The city clerk may during the month of March of each year, give notice of the provisions of this chapter by publishing a notice thereof once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. Such notice by publication shall conform to MCL 247.64a and obviate any requirement on the part of the city to notify the owner, occupant or person in control of a lot or parcel of land by certified mail with return receipt requested on which nuisance vegetation is found growing. Such published notice shall state that nuisance vegetation not abated by May 1 of that year will be abated by the city as many times as necessary between May 1 and October 31 and that the owner of the property shall be charged with the costs incurred by the city pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Sec. 18-68. - Responsibility of property owners of undeveloped land. 
    Residential, commercial and industrial undeveloped land owners shall cut or otherwise destroy weeds and noxious weeds in the manner described in this article at a distance of not less than 50 feet from the traveled portion of any street, alley or road. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Sec. 18-69. - Cost. 
(a)	The city shall keep an accurate account of all costs incurred for the preparation, cutting and other abatement procedures undertaken, with respect to each lot or parcel of land, in carrying out the provisions of this article. Such cost shall constitute a lien upon the lot or land. A copy of the account of all costs incurred under section 18-64 shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for collection. That portion of the account remaining unpaid as of June 1 and December 1 of the year of services rendered shall then be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for in property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act 1893 PA 206 of, as amended, being MCL 211.1 et seq. 
(b)	Any owner who shall fail to destroy such weeds, noxious weeds or female box elder trees as provided for in this article shall be subject to costs and the penalties prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-4, § 1, 7-3-2006) 
Secs. 18-70-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE 

Sec. 18-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Decibel means a unit used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity. The difference in decibels between two sound pressures is 20 times the common logarithm of their ratio. In sound press measurements, the sound pressure level of a given sound as defined to be 20 times the common logarithm of the ratio of that sound pressure to a reference pressure of 2 × 10 5 N/m 2 (Newtons per meter squared). As an example of the effect of this formula, a three-decibel change in the sound pressure level corresponds to a doubling or halving of the sound intensity, and a ten-decibel change corresponds to a tenfold increase or decrease to one-tenth the former intensity. 
    dB(A) means the sound pressure level in decibels measured on the "A" scale of a standard sound level meter having characteristics defined by the American National Standards Institute, Publication ANSI s1.4-1971. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-92. - Antinoise regulations. 
(a)	General regulation. No person shall cause or create any unreasonable or unnecessarily loud noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace, or quiet of the residents and property owners of the city. 
(b)	Specific violations. The following noises and disturbances are hereby declared to be a violation of this article; provided, however, that the specification of the violation is not thereby to be construed to exclude other violations of this article not specifically enumerated: 
(1)	The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, or other electronic or mechanical sound-producing device, including any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(2)	Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or other place so as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(3)	The emission or creation of any excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church, hospital or court. 
(4)	The keeping of any animal, bird or kind, which emanates frequent or extended noise which shall unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; such as allowing or permitting any dog to bark repeatedly in an area where such barking can be clearly heard from nearby residential property. 
(5)	The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle or other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other unreasonable noise including the noise resulting from exhaust, which is clearly audible from nearby properties and unreasonably disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. The modification of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or engine, or the failure to maintain the motor vehicle or engine so that the noise emitted by such vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by such vehicle as originally manufactured, shall be in violation of this section. 
(6)	The sounding of any horn or other device on any motor vehicle unless necessary to operate such vehicle safely or as required by the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(7)	While operating or in control of a parked or moving vehicle, including motorcycles and mopeds, the operation or permitting the operation of an electronically amplified sound system in or on the vehicle so as to produce sound that is plainly audible more than 50 feet from the vehicle, except when a specific permit is first granted by the city council. The term "plainly audible" shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person using unaided hearing faculties. 
(8)	The discharging outside of any enclosed building of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motor boat engine except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. 
(9)	The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or premises in any part of the city, including the streets and highways, in such a manner as to emanate noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sundown on any day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety. In such case, a permit shall be obtained from the building inspector or code official, which permit shall limit the periods that the activity may continue. 
(10)	The creation of loud or excessive noise unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity in connection with the operation, loading or unloading of any vehicle, trailer, railroad car, or other carrier or in connection with the repairing of any such vehicle in or near residential areas. 
(11)	The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display or other commercial purpose which, by the creation of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity. 
(12)	The operation of any loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device upon any vehicle on the streets of the city with the purpose of advertising, where such vehicle, speaker or sound amplifying device emits loud raucous noises easily heard from nearby adjoining residential property. 
(13)	The operation of any machinery, equipment or mechanical device so as to emit unreasonably loud noise which is disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of any person. 
(14)	The operation of any racetrack, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course for motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area of the city where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and upsetting to other persons in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall any racetrack, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course operate after 11:00 p.m. on any evening. 
(c)	Exceptions. None of the prohibitions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the following: 
(1)	Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
(2)	Excavation or repair of bridges, streets or highways or other property by or on behalf of the city or county between sundown and 7:00 a.m. when the public welfare, safety and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during other hours. 
(3)	Warning devices emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1964-2, § 9; Code 1972, § 8-81) 
Sec. 18-93. - Antinoise regulations based upon dB(A) criteria. 
    In order to regulate and prove violations occurring under section 18-92, any noise in excess of the maximum decibel limits according to the following stated regulations is deemed to be in violation of this article: 
(1)	Regulations for decibel measurement of noise originating from private properties. Noise radiating from all properties or buildings, as measured at the boundaries of the property, which is in excess of the dB(A) established for the districts and times listed in this subsection shall constitute prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area and is therefore in violation of this article. Violations shall exist when the sources of noise are identifiable and the levels emanating from the sources exceed the following limitations. As an example, such noise shall include that emitting from the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repairing and manufacturing of materials, goods or products, including vehicles. 
Zoning Districts Limitations 
7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Limitations 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. Residential (and any area within 500 feet of a hospital regardless of zoning district) 55 dB(A) 50 dB(A) Commercial 65 dB(A) 55 dB(A)  
Harmonic or pure tones, and periodic or repetitive impulse sound shall be in violation when such sounds are at a sound level of five dB(A) less than those listed in this subsection. 
Where property is partly in two zoning districts or adjoins the boundary of a zoning district, the dB(A) levels of the zoning district of the property where the noise is emanating shall control. 
The following exceptions shall apply to the regulations under this subsection: 
a.	Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise levels specified for industrial districts as long as a valid building permit has been issued by the city and is currently in effect. 
b.	All railroad operations shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise levels allowed in industrial districts, regardless of the zone where they are located. 
c.	Noises occurring between 7:00 a.m. and sundown caused by home or building repairs or from maintenance of grounds are excluded, provided such noise does not exceed the limitations specified in this subsection by more than 20 dB(A). 
d.	Noises emanating from the discharge of firearms are excluded, provided the discharge of the firearm was authorized under state law and all local ordinances. 
e.	Any commercial or industrial use of property which exists now or in the future as a legal nonconforming use (as defined in chapter 50 of this Code) in a higher zoning classification shall be allowed to emit noise in excess of these limitations for the particular zoning classification where such use is located, providing that such noise does not exceed either of the following limitations: 
1.	The noise level emitted by such use at the time it became a legal nonconforming use as a result of the enactment of an amendment of the zoning ordinance, if available. 
2.	The limitations contained in this subsection based upon such a use being located in the highest zoning district (either commercial or industrial) where such a use is specifically allowed as a permissible use. 
(2)	Regulations for decibel measurement of motor-driven vehicles on public roads. All noise emitted from motor-driven vehicles upon public roads shall be measured whenever possible at a distance of a least 50 feet (or 15 meters) from a noise source located within the public right-of-way. If measurement at 50 feet (15 meters) is not feasible, measurement may be made at 25 feet (71/2 meters) and if this is done, six dB(A) shall be added to the limits provided in this subsection. All such noises in excess of the dB(A) as provided in this subsection shall be prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area and is therefore in violation of this article. 
_____ 
Vehicle Weight Maximum Limitation 
dB(A) Trucks and buses Over 10,000 pounds gross weight 82 Trucks and buses Under 10,000 pounds gross weight 74 Passenger cars Any weight 74 Motorcycles, snowmobiles and mini-bikes Any weight 82 All other self-propelled motor vehicles Any weight 74  
_____ 
(3)	Measurement of noise. All measurements of dB(A) according to subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be made by using a sound level meter of standard design and operated on the "A" weight scale, with "slow" meter response. 
Secs. 18-94-18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BLIGHT NUISANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly entitled blight; accumulation of garbage, rubbish, etc., §§ 18-111-18-116. 

Sec. 18-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to limit and restrict the outdoor storage and unreasonable accumulation of garbage, rubbish or litter, junk, unused items, vehicle parts; to thereby avoid devaluation of property values and the psychological ill effect of the presence of such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-101. - Definitions. 
    Building material means, but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumber materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, insulation, mortar, nails, screws, or any other materials used in construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on houses, commercial or industrial buildings, or other structures. 
    Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Junk means parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused appliances and furniture stored in the open, remnants of woods, metal or other material or cast-off material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
    Rubbish means waste paper, metals, cardboard, glass, straw, barrels, rags, wood, rubber, leather, tin cans, tree branches, and yard trimmings. 
    Trash means garbage, refuse or litter specifically including but not limited to containers once containing edible, drinkable or usable materials and discarded edible or drinkable items. 
    Wholly enclosed means having four adjoining walls and a roof. In order to meet the definition of "wholly enclosed" any window or door opening in a wall shall be capable of being completely closed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-102. - Blight nuisance. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following types of blight upon any property owned, rented, or occupied by such person, firm or corporation within the City of Springfield of Calhoun County. 
(1)	Outdoor storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind unless kept in a closely covered can or other metal, plastic, or rubber container designed for such purposes and sufficient to protect against entry or access by rats, mice and other vermin, and removed within a period of not more than seven days. Nonorganic junk or rubbish, such as machinery parts, appliances, etc., need not be so contained, but must be removed within a period of seven days. 
(2)	Outdoor storage of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the Springfield Building Department for construction upon said property and said materials are intended for use in connection with such construction or are part of the stock or trade of business located upon said property. 
(3)	Outdoor storage or accumulation of garbage of any kind, except domestic refuse originating on the premises and stored in a sanitary container until scheduled pick up. 
(4)	Any structure or part of a structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or a physical deterioration is no longer habitable, unless said structure is kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals, animals or vermin. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-103. - Enforcement. 
    The owner, if said owner's address is known by the city, and the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 18-102 hereof is found to exist, shall be notified in writing by personal service or first class mail to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such property within 14 days after service of the notice upon him. The date of mailing said be considered the date of service. If service of such notice cannot be had upon the owner or occupant, it shall be sufficient to post the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises. The notice shall contain a summary of the provisions of this article. Failure to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to collect payment of the cost of abatement as provided in section 18-105 of this article. 
    Failure to comply with such notice within the time allowed by the owner and/or occupant shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-104. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-105. - Abatement. 
    If a blight nuisance condition as defined in section 18-102 is not removed or corrected within 14 days after an admission or determination of responsibility, following the issuance of a civil infraction citation, the Springfield Code Official or other authorized representative of the City of Springfield, is hereby authorized and empowered to arrange and pay for the removal of or correcting such condition either by a Springfield Department of Public Works or by others, and shall bill the expense of such removal to the owner or person in control of such property. For the purpose of correcting the condition, Springfield Code Official, or authorized representative of the City of Springfield, is authorized and empowered to enter upon the premises of any public or private land within the city at reasonable times and under reasonable condition to accomplish the appropriate corrective action. 
    Any expense incurred by the city to correct the conditions governed by this article remaining due and unpaid for a period of 30 or more days after the invoice is mailed to the person(s) responsible for correction of the condition shall constitute a lien upon the property. The portion of the Invoice remaining unpaid as of December 31 of the year of services rendered shall then be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for in property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act 1893 PA 206, as amended, being MCL 211.1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2009-1, § 1, 5-18-2009) 
Secs. 18-106-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE 

Sec. 18-121. - Findings of fact. 
    The city finds that non-stormwater flows that enter the storm sewer system adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare because these flows may contain harmful constituents that, when conveyed to the waters of the city, State of Michigan, or United States, will be harmful. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § I, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-122. - Objectives and intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to protect, maintain and enhance the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by: 
(1)	Regulating non-stormwater discharges, also known as illicit discharges or illicit connections, to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. 
(2)	Establishing methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants, by any user, into the MS4 in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(3)	Establishing legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § II, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-123. - Definitions. 
    Definitions of terminology used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and their successor agencies, or the City of Springfield, whether acting separately or in concert. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Building means a structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes but is not limited to a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, carport, mobile home or prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles which generate wastewater or which are installed on a site for more than 180 days. 
    City means the City of Springfield, including staff and elected officials. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction means activities subject to NPDES construction permits. NPDES stormwater phase II permits are required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Development means any of the following: 
(1)	Construction, installation, alteration, demolition, or removal of a structure impervious to surface stormwater management system; or 
(2)	Clearing, scraping, grubbing or otherwise removing or killing the vegetation of a site; or 
(3)	Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, dumping, or otherwise disturbing the soil or rock of a site in a manner that is contrary to the requirements of this article. 
    Director means the director of public services and his or her designees. 
    Drain means a channel, natural depression, slough, stream, creek or pipe in which stormwater runoff and floodwater can flow. This includes systems installed to carry urban storm runoff. 
    Hazardous materials means any substance, waste or a combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics or properties may cause or contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed or otherwise managed or cared for. 
    Illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted by this article. 
    Industrial activity means an activity subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means a permitting system established by the Environmental Protection Agency (or by the State of Michigan under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that issues permits to authorize the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing an building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Public waters means waters of the city or waters of the state. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaking, dumping or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system, drain or public waters. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water that results from and occurs immediately following a rainfall, snowfall, or snow melt event. 
    Stormwater management system means and includes all natural and manmade elements used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with the surface of the earth to a suitable outlet location internal or external to the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes all pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention basins, ponds, and other stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities, whether public or private. 
    Structure means the results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days; and includes retaining walls, tanks and manholes. 
    Surface water means water that finds its way to an open channel without infiltrating into the soil. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § III, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-124. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all land within the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § IV, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-125. - Exemptions. 
    The following discharges shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(1)	Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (only when dechlorinated to less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and street washing runoff containing no detergents or solvents. Other non-polluting sources require written approval from the director before discharge is allowed into the MS4. 
(2)	Specific instances of listed, exempted activities may be determined by the director to be a source of pollutants to public waters or the MS4 and will be considered a prohibited discharge if: 
a.	Written notice is provided to the discharging party; and 
b.	The discharge continues after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the discharge. 
(3)	Discharges specified in writing by an authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(4)	Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires filing with the director a copy of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality authorization prior to the time of the test. 
(5)	Non-stormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. A copy of the written approval shall be filed with the director. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required by the city. 
(6)	The disposal or release of any substance in compliance with applicable legal requirements, such as in conformity and pursuant to the terms and provisions of a valid permit issued by an authorized enforcement agency, or the application of agricultural chemicals and fertilizers as used in routine operations when applied under "Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices" and in conformity with label directions approved by the EPA or Michigan Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § V, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-126. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Examples include overland runoff from car wash facilities, from dumpsters, from tree nurseries, or intentional dumping of pollutants down storm drains, such as, but not limited to, used automobile oil, pesticides, and herbicides. 
(b)	No person shall construct, use or maintain any existing illicit connections or non-storm sewer lines to the MS4. Additionally, this prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. All such connections shall be abandoned within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)	Private sanitary (septic) systems shall operate in a manner such that any effluent waters do not enter or infiltrate into storm sewer lines. Such occurrences will be considered illicit discharges and the owner of the offending system will be in violation of this article. Other considerations concerning private sanitary (septic) systems are presented in the Code of Ordinances section 48-248. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § VI, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-127. - Notification of spills; littering. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or public waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to insure the discovery, containment and clean-up of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence, the emergency dispatch services. In the event of the release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications by person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such an establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its reoccurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any provision in this Code of Ordinances, littering which results in the release of pollutants contaminating stormwater is defined as a "spill" under this article and the offending parties will be held accountable for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § VII, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-128. - Monitoring of discharges; industrial and construction activities. 
(a)	The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has securing measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(b)	Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)	The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)	The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(f)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(g)	If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protected the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § VIII, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-129. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § IX, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-130. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city will initially request compliance with this article by issuing a voluntary compliance notice. Such a notice will contain the following information: 
(1)	A description of the discharge/connection that is in violation of this article. 
(2)	A description of the appropriate action to take to correct the violation. 
(3)	Deadline date to complete the corrective action. 
(4)	Notice that failure to correct the violation prior to the deadline date will result in the issuance of a notice of violation, a legally enforceable citation compelling the offender to take action. 
(b)	If the deadline date contained in the voluntary compliance notice passes without satisfactory abatement of the violation, then the city shall issue a notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)	The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
(2)	The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)	Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)	The implementation of source control or treatment best management practices (BMPs). The technical details of such BMPs are discussed in the Stormwater Management Technical Reference Manual (TRM). 
(c)	If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § X, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-131. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)	Emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or public waters. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or public waters, or to minimize danger to the persons. 
(b)	Illicit discharge detection. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)	A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XI, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-132. - Non-compliance. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, then representatives of the city shall, in accordance with applicable law, enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation or restore the property, or both. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XII, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-133. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 30 days after the abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 14 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the city or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal monthly payments. Interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 30th day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XIII, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-134. - Public nuisance. 
    Any development activity commenced without compliance with this article or any activity conducted contrary to the requirements of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law or equity. The city may institute injunctive mandamus or other appropriate action for the enforcement of this article and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions or mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XIV, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-135. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XV, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-136. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the city may request a court to impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XVI, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-137. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
    The city shall also recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XVII, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 18-138. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. 
(b)	In addition to the penalty provided in this section, this article may be enforced by suit for injunction, action for damages, or any equitable relief appropriate to the enforcement of this article, including, but not limited to, that relief provided for MCL. 600.8302(4). 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § XVIII, 12-21-2015) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Firefighting and prevention, § 5.16. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; emergency services, ch. 16; use of fire hydrant, § 48-126 et seq. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 20-31. - Adoption of the fire code. 
    A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the city, being marked and designated as "the International Fire Code," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the city for the control of buildings, structures and premises as herein provided; penalties, conditions and terms of such code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this sections, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 20-32. 
(Ord. No. 1982-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1986-2, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1995-3, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1998-3, § 3(D), 6-1-1998; Code 1972, § 6-2; Ord. No. 2007-4, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-2007) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes, § 6.8. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 20-32. - Additions, insertions and chang-es. 
    The following sections of the International Fire Code, are hereby amended or deleted or additional sections or subsections are added as follows: 
    Section 101.1. Insert: City of Springfield. 
(Ord. No. 1998-3, § 3(E), 6-1-1998; Code 1972, § 6-3; Ord. No. 2007-4, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 20-33. - Amendments. 
    The "board of appeals" referred to in section 108 of the International Fire Code shall be understood to mean the AMSA board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1982-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1995-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 6-3.1) 
Sec. 20-34. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1972, § 6-4) 
Sec. 20-35. - Modifications to application. 
    The director of public safety shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or owner's or lessee's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the director of public safety thereon shall be entered upon the records of the public safety department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 6-5) 
Sec. 20-36. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    Fees for any permits or inspections required by the fire prevention code shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 6-6) 
Chapter 22 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; plat requirements for subdivisions within or abutting floodplain, MCL 560.138; conditions for approval for subdivisions within floodplain, MCL 560.194. 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, the following words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
    Areas of special flood hazard means the land within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This land is identified as zone A on the official map. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in the stream's flow or stage that results in water overflowing its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel or an unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any sources. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
    Habitable floor means any floor used for living, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home park (subdivision) means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land which has been divided into two or more lots for rent or sale and the placement of mobile homes. 
    100-year flood means the condition of flooding having a one percent chance of annual occurrence. 
    Regulatory flood elevation means the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground, including but without limitation to buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile homes and other similar uses. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)	Before the improvement is started; or 
(2)	If the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations, as well as structures listed in the national or state registers of historic places. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Code official to enforce chapter. 
    The code official has these added responsibilities and is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city now in force or hereafter adopted, relating to zoning, subdivision or building codes. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Appointment of code official to additional responsibilities; temporary absence or disability. 
    The code official shall be appointed to these additional responsibilities by resolution of the city council and such official's appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. During temporary absence or disability of the code official, the manager of the city shall designate an acting code official. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Flood hazard boundary maps. 
    The city council hereby designates the flood hazard boundary map of June 28, 1974, and revised January 30, 1976, and amendments, as the official maps to be used in determining those areas of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Permits required. 
    No person shall erect, construct, enlarge or improve any building or structure in the city or cause such work to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure in accordance with the provisions of article III, division 13 of chapter 50 and without paying the fees required by section 50-37 thereof. 
(1)	Building permits required. Within zone A on the official map, separate building permits are required for all new construction, substantial improvements and other development including the placement of mobile homes. 
(2)	Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
a.	Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
b.	Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
c.	Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
d.	Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction. 
e.	Be signed by the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
f.	Within designated floodprone areas, be accompanied by elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) or in the case of floodproofed nonresidential structures, the elevation to which it has been floodproofed. Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the code official. 
g.	Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.5) 
Sec. 22-6. - Review of permit application-Generally. 
    The code official shall review all building permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by federal or state law (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) and make recommendations for development in all locations which have flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.6) 
Sec. 22-7. - Same-Criteria. 
    The code official, in reviewing all applications for new construction, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of mobile homes and other developments, will: 
(1)	Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory flood elevation data from federal, state or other sources, until such other data is provided by the Federal Insurance Administration, in a flood insurance study and require, within areas designated as zone A on the official map, the following performance standards be met: 
a.	The first floor elevation (to include basement) of new residential structures be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation. 
b.	The first floor elevation (to include basement) of nonresidential structures be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation. 
c.	Construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage be used. 
d.	Construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage be used. 
(2)	Require that structures be designed or anchored to prevent the flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure or portions of the structure due to flooding. 
(3)	Require that mobile homes meet the following specific anchoring requirements: 
a.	Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home with two additional ties per side at the intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side. 
b.	Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side. 
c.	All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
d.	Any additions to mobile homes be similarly anchored. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.7) 
Sec. 22-8. - Review of subdivision applications. 
    The city council shall review all subdivision applications and shall make findings of fact and determine if: 
(1)	All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)	Subdivision proposals for development of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals, regulatory flood elevation data. 
(3)	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)	All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(5)	Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions will file evacuation plans with appropriate disaster preparedness authorities. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.8) 
Sec. 22-9. - New water and sewer systems. 
    New water and sewer systems shall be constructed to eliminate or minimize infiltration by floodwaters; moreover, on-site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.9) 
Sec. 22-10. - Maintenance of flood-carrying capacity of altered or relocated portions of watercourses. 
    The city council will ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. The city will notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the administrator. Moreover, the city will work with appropriate state and federal agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.10) 
Sec. 22-11. - Conflicting ordinances; amendment. 
    This chapter shall take precedence over conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances. The city council may, from time to time, amend this chapter to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation as published in the Federal Register, Volume 41, Number 207, dated October 26, 1976. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, 5-16-1977; Code 1972, app. A-1, § A-1.11) 
Chapter 24 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Civil rights act, MCL 37.2101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Discrimination in real estate transactions, MCL 37.2501 et seq. 

Sec. 24-31. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, familial status or marital status and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-11) 
Sec. 24-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means chronological age except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Discrimination because of sex includes sexual harassment. Sexual harassment means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions: 
(1)	Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations or public services, education or housing. 
(2)	Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual's employment, public accommodations or public services, education or housing. 
(3)	The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or public services, education or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive employment, public accommodations, public services, educational, or housing environment. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals under the age of 18 years residing with a parent or other person having custody or in the process of securing legal custody of the individuals or residing with the designee of the parent or other person having or securing custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person. For purposes of this definition, the term "parent" includes a person who is pregnant. 
    Housing accommodation means improved or unimproved real property, or a part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more persons. 
    National origin means the national origin of an ancestor. 
    Person means an individual, agent, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship committee, joint stock company, labor organization, legal representative, mutual company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee in bankruptcy, unincorporated organization, the state or a political subdivision of the state or an agency of the state, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of those activities; who holds such person out as engaged in those activities; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property; who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of a real estate broker or salesman. 
    Real estate transaction means the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property, or an interest therein. 
    Real property includes a building, structure, mobile home, real estate, land, mobile home park, trailer park, tenement, leasehold, or an interest in a real estate cooperative or condominium. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 37.2103, 37.2501. 
Sec. 24-33. - Real estate transactions. 
(a)	A person engaging in a real estate transaction, or a real estate broker or salesman, shall not on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status, or marital status of a person or a person residing with that person: 
(1)	Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person. 
(2)	Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection with a real estate transaction. 
(3)	Refuse to receive from a person or transmit to a person a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction. 
(4)	Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)	Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or knowingly fail to bring a property listing to a person's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect real property, or otherwise make unavailable or deny real property to a person. 
(6)	Make, print, circulate, post, mail, or otherwise cause to be made or published a statement, advertisement, notice or sign, or use a form of application for a real estate transaction, or make a record of inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination with respect to the real estate transaction. 
(7)	Offer, solicit, accept, use, or retain a listing of real property with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(8)	Discriminate against a person in the brokering or appraising of real property. 
(b)	A person shall not deny a person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting real property or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of that access, membership, or participation because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status, or marital status. 
(c)	This section is subject to section 24-34. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2502. 
Sec. 24-34. - Exclusions. 
(a)	Section 24-33 does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)	The rental of a housing accommodation in a building that contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room in a single-family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides in the dwelling. 
(2)	The rental of a housing accommodation for not more than 12 months by the owner or lessor if it was occupied by the owner or lessor and maintained as the owner's or lessor's home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is maintained as the owner's or lessor's legal residence. 
(3)	With respect to the age provision and the familial status provision only, the sale, rental, or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state, or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older. 
(b)	As used in subsection (a) of this section, the term "immediate family" means a spouse, parent, child or sibling. 
(c)	Information relative to the marital status of an individual may be obtained when necessary for the preparation of a deed or other instrument of conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2503. 
Sec. 24-35. - Financing. 
(a)	A person to whom application is made for financial assistance or financing in connection with a real estate transaction or in connection with the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or a representative of that person, shall not: 
(1)	Discriminate against the applicant because of the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(2)	Use a form of application for financial assistance or financing or make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with an application for financial assistance or financing which indicates, directly or indirectly, a preference, limitation, specification or discrimination as to the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(b)	A person whose business includes engaging in real estate transactions shall not discriminate against a person because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status or marital status, in the purchasing of loans for acquiring, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance secured by residential real estate. 
(c)	Subsection (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a form of application for financial assistance prescribed for the use of a lender regulated as a mortgagee under the national housing act, chapter 847, 48 Stat. 1246, or by a regulatory board or officer acting under the statutory authority of this state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2504. 
Sec. 24-36. - Limitations on use or occupancy; religious or charitable institution or organization or property; discriminatory provisions in instruments prohibited. 
(a)	A condition, restriction or prohibition, including a right of entry or possibility of reverter, that directly or indirectly limits the use or occupancy of real property on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status or marital status is void, except a limitation of use as provided in subsection 24-34(a)(3) or on the basis of religion relating to real property held by a religious institution or organization, or by a religious or charitable organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization, and used for religious or charitable purposes. 
(b)	A person shall not insert in a written instrument relating to real property a provision that is void under this section or honor such a provision in the chain of title. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2505. 
Sec. 24-37. - Inducing of transactions. 
    A person shall not represent, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which the person may benefit financially, that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, familial status or marital status of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located, or represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2506. 
Sec. 24-38. - Landlord's use of reasonable accommodations permitted. 
    This article does not preclude the use by a landlord of reasonable accommodations as required by section 102(2) of the Michigan handicappers' civil rights act, 1976 PA 220 (MCL 37.1102 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2506a. 
Sec. 24-39. - Procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a complaint with the city attorney within 30 days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, and in no event more than 60 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. The city attorney or such attorney's duly authorized representative shall investigate such complaint and attempt to resolve each complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both parties and compliance with this article shall cause the city attorney to forward the complaint and findings to appropriate state and federal officials. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-15) 
Sec. 24-40. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which such person might otherwise be entitled or from filing a complaint with any appropriate governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 41/2-16) 
Chapter 26 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50; signs, § 50-501 et seq. 
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND DIVISIONS 

Sec. 26-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the land division act (1967 PA 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.)), formerly known as the subdivision control act, to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and such act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the municipality by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § II, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § II) 
Sec. 26-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Divided and division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by such proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of a building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). 
    Exempt split and exempt division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by the proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent; provided all resulting parcels are accessible for vehicular travel and utilities from existing public roads through existing adequate roads or easements, or through areas owned by the owner of the parcel that can provide such access. 
    Forty acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
    Land division act means 1967 PA 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
    Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § III, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § III) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-33. - Prior approval requirement for land divisions. 
    Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the city assessor, or other official designated by the city council, in accordance with this article and the land division act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)	A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to article III of this chapter and the land division act. 
(2)	A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with article III of this chapter and the land division act. 
(3)	An exempt split as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § IV, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § IV) 
Sec. 26-34. - Application for land division approval. 
    An applicant shall file all of the following with the municipal clerk or other official designated by the city council for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development: 
(1)	A completed application form on such form as may be provided by the city. 
(2)	Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided. 
(3)	a.	A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of 1970 PA 132 (MCL 54.211) by a land surveyor licensed by the state and showing the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be created by the division, the location of all existing structures and other land improvements, and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from existing public roads. 
b.	In lieu of such survey map, at the applicant's option, the applicant may waive the 30-day statutory requirement for a decision on the application until such survey map and legal description are filed with the city, and submit a tentative preliminary parcel map drawn to scale of not less than that provided for on the application form including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, dimensions, and the accessibility of each division from existing or proposed public roads for automobile traffic and public utilities, for preliminary review, approval, and/or denial by the locally designated official prior to a final application under section 26-34(3)c. 
c.	The city council, or its designated agent delegating such authority by the city council, may waive the survey map requirement where the tentative parcel map stated in subsection (3)b. of this section is deemed to contain adequate information to approve a proposed land division considering the size, simple nature of the divisions, and the undeveloped character of the territory within which the proposed divisions are located. An accurate legal description of all the proposed divisions, however, shall at all times be required. 
(4)	Proof that all standards of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article have been met. (See checklist accompanying this article which is on file in the office of the city clerk.) 
(5)	The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of which the proposed division was a part sufficient to establish the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(6)	Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full. 
(7)	If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
(8)	Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be "not buildable" under section 26-37, all divisions shall result in "buildable" parcels containing sufficient "buildable" area outside of unbuildable wetlands, floodplains and other areas where buildings are prohibited therefrom, and with sufficient area to comply with all required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and sewer service is not available), and maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site. 
(9)	The fee as may from time to time be established by resolution of the city council for land division reviews pursuant to this article to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this article and the land division act. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § V, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § V) 
Sec. 26-35. - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
(a)	Upon receipt of a land division application package, the city clerk or other official designated by the city council shall forthwith submit the application package to the city assessor or other designated official for decision. The city assessor or other designee shall approve, approve with reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare, or disapprove the land division applied for within 30 days after receipt of the application package conforming to this article's requirements, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decisions and the reasons for any denial. If the application package does not conform to this article's requirements and the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the assessor or other designee shall return the application package to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance with this article and the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(b)	Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the assessor or designee may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the city council or such other board or person designated by the city council which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of such board or by the designee at its next regular meeting or session affording sufficient time for a 20-day written notice to the applicant (and appellant where other than the applicant) of the time and date of such meeting and appellate hearing. 
(c)	A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the county register of deeds' office and filed with the city clerk or other designated official accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(d)	The city assessor or designee shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § VI, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § VI) 
Sec. 26-36. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
    A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)	All the parcels to be created by the proposed land division fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel) area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, and maximum lot (parcel) coverage and minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures. 
(2)	The proposed land division complies with all requirements of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article. 
(3)	All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefor, to a public road for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, road ordinance or this article. In determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels. 
(4)	a.	The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a 21/2 to one ratio exclusive of access roads, easements, or nonbuildable parcels created under section 26-37 and parcels added to contiguous parcels that result in all involved parcels complying with such ratio. 
b.	The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured along the median between the side lot lines and shall be the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
c.	The permissible minimum width shall be as defined in the applicable zoning ordinance. 
(5)	All parcels created by a land division shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
a.	Minimum road frontage shall be as specified in chapter 50 of this Code. 
b.	Minimum width shall be as specified in chapter 50 of this Code. 
c.	Minimum lot (parcel) area shall be as specified in chapter 50 of this Code. 
(6)	In the absence of applicable zoning or other ordinances providing a different standard, all parcels created by a land division shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
a.	Where accessibility is to be provided by a proposed new dedicated public road, proof that the city engineer or state department of transportation has approved the proposed layout and construction design of the road and of utility easements and drainage facilities connected therewith. 
b.	Where accessibility by vehicular traffic and for utilities is permitted through other than a dedicated and accepted public road or easement, such accessibility shall comply with the following: 
1.	Where such private road or easement extends for more than 660 feet from a dedicated public road, or is serving or intended to serve more than one separate parcel, unit or ownership, it shall be not less than 66 feet in right-of-way width, 24 feet in improved roadbed width with at least three feet of improved shoulder width on each side and adequate drainage ditches and necessary culverts on both sides to accumulate and contain surface waters from the road area. It shall further be improved with not less than six inches of a processed and stabilized gravel base over six inches of granular soil, have a grade of not more than seven percent, and if dead-ended, shall have a cul-de-sac with a radius of not less than 75 feet (industrial) or 60 feet (residential and others) of improved roadbed for the accommodation of emergency, commercial and other vehicles. 
2.	Where the private road or easement is 660 feet or less in length, and is serving or intended to serve not more than four separate parcels, units or ownerships, it shall not be less than 40 feet in right-of-way width, 20 feet in improved roadbed width with at least two feet of improved shoulder width on each side, and adequate drainage ditches on both sides with necessary culverts to accommodate and contain surface waters from the road area. It shall further be improved with processed and stabilized gravel and granular soil, have a grade of not more than seven percent, and a cul-de-sac where dead-ended as specified in subsection (6)b.1 of this section. If such private road or easement is serving or intended to serve more than four separate parcels, units or ownerships, the right-of-way and development standards set forth in subsection (6)b.1 of this section shall apply. 
3.	If accessibility is by a private road or easement, a document acceptable to the city shall be recorded with the county register of deeds and filed with the assessor or designee specifying the method of private financing of all maintenance, improvements and snow removal, the apportionment of these costs among those benefitted, and the right of the city to assess such costs against those properties benefitted, plus a 25 percent administrative fee, and to perform such improvements in the event of a failure of those benefitted to privately perform these duties for the health, safety and general welfare of the area. 
4.	Any intersection between private and public roads shall contain a clear vision triangular area of not less than two feet along each right-of-way line as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
5.	No private road or easement shall extend for more than 1,000 feet from a public road. 
6.	No private road shall serve more than 25 separate parcels. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § VII, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § VII) 
Sec. 26-37. - Allowance for approval of other land divisions. 
    Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this article, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance or this article may be approved in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the city, designating the parcel as "not buildable". Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not buildable" in the city records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a request to the zoning board of appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or aboveground structure exceeding four feet in height. 
(2)	Where, in circumstances not covered by subsection (1) of this section, the zoning board of appeals has, previous to this article, granted a variance from the lot, yard, ratio, frontage and/or area requirements with which the parcel failed to comply. 
(3)	Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties which does not result in either parcel violating this article, any applicable zoning ordinance, or the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § VIII, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-38. - Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval requirement. 
    Any parcel created in noncompliance with this article shall not be eligible for any building permits, or zoning approvals, such as special land use approval or site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, violation of this article shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement actions as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § IX, 12-6-1999; Code 1972, app. E, § IX) 
Secs. 26-39-26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-61. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the city in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the community. The regulations are specifically designed to: 
(1)	Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the community, consistent with orderly growth policies. 
(2)	Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and viability. 
(3)	Ensure adequate provision for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewer facilities and other public health requirements. 
(4)	Secure adequate traffic circulation through a coordinated major street system with adjoining subdivisions and public facilities. 
(5)	Secure adequate provision for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities. 
(6)	Provide for a logical procedure for achievement of these purposes in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.010, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.010) 
Sec. 26-62. - Legal basis. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by the land division act, 1967 PA 288 (560.101 et seq.), and 1945 PA 246 (MCL 41.181 et seq.), authorizing city councils to adopt ordinances and regulations to secure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.020) 
Sec. 26-63. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except for the further dividing of those lots. Nor is it intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.030, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.030) 
Sec. 26-64. - Administration. 
    The approval provisions of this article shall be administered by the city council in accordance with 1967 PA 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.040, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.040) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 26-65. - Compliance standards with this article. 
    The permits required under the provisions of this article shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivisions or project improvements within the city to be installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, or public easements and under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this and all other related city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.050, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.050) 
Sec. 26-66. - Interpretations of the provisions of this article. 
    The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted by the city for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations and laws of the city, nor conflict with any statutes of the state or county, except that this article shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes and laws. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.060, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.060) 
Sec. 26-67. - Variance. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to be desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed uses of the land existing, the existing use of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision on traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict applications of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land. 
(2)	The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(3)	The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 1.070, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 1.070) 
Sec. 26-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Alley means a minor service street used primarily to provide secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street. 
    Block means property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of such areas and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Boulevard street means a street developed to two-lane, one-way pavements separated by a median. 
    Collector street means a street within a neighborhood used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares, including principal entrance streets to a residential development. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short minor street having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dedication means the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to public use. 
    Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the use. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability; or, any structure incident to servicing or furnishing facilities for a subdivision. 
    Land division act means 1967 PA 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
(1)	Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
(2)	Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the setback line and at right angles to the lot depth. 
    Major thoroughfare means any interstate, state or county highway, or any local traffic artery of considerable continuity carrying a large volume of both private and commercial vehicles; i.e., a "section line road." 
    Marginal access means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the city, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the planning commission. 
    Master streets or thoroughfare plan means the part of the master plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
    Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
    Outlot means when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, a lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
(1)	Plat, tentative preliminary, means an investigation of street, utility, drainage, flooding and school considerations. Such plat shall be in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and may be prepared by a land surveyor, civil engineer or land planner, or other qualified persons. 
(2)	Plat, final preliminary, means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
(3)	Plat, final, means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the final preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them that hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships or municipal or other public authority providing cable television, gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or city roadway; or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county registrar of deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns. 
    Subdivide and subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by the proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building developments that result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or the requirements of this Code. 
    Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
    Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, art. II, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, art. II) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-69. - Fees. 
    Preliminary and final plat review fees, attorney fees, water and sewer connection charges and other municipal fees shall be paid by the proprietor as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 7.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 7.020) 
Secs. 26-70-26-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 26-86. - General preparation procedure. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting should be preceded by a review of ordinance requirements and shall proceed as follows: Preliminary plat review and approval by planning commission, preliminary plat approval by city council (tentative and final), and final plat, all in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, art. III, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, art. III) 
Sec. 26-87. - Preliminary plat procedure. 
    The preliminary plat procedure is intended to survey all existing and proposed conditions pertaining to the development of the proposed plat. This includes review and approval by the planning commission after an administrative review has been accomplished and a written report submitted. The procedure for preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows: 
(1)	Filing: 
a.	Six copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application, shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall transmit the plat to the planning commission and the city manager for processing. Planning review fees are payable with submission. 
b.	The preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
c.	Should any of the data required in this division be omitted, the city manager shall direct the city clerk to notify the proprietor of the additional data required and planning commission action shall be delayed until the required data is received; the date of filing shall be that date when all data is received. The planning commission will act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing. Otherwise, such preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been approved by the planning commission. 
(2)	Identification and description. The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
a.	Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.	Location by section, town and range or by other legal description. 
c.	Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner-proprietor, and the registered professional community planner, registered engineer or registered surveyor or registered landscape architect who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate their interest in the land. 
d.	Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as the minimum acceptable scale. 
e.	Date. 
f.	North point. 
(3)	Existing conditions. The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
a.	An overall area map showing the relationship of the subdivisions to surrounding areas within one-half mile; information on the area map shall include such things as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets. Scale shall not be less than one inch equals 800 feet. 
b.	Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions. 
c.	Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads. 
d.	Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public and private easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 
e.	Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not more than two feet. Topography to be based on U.S. Geological Survey datum. 
(4)	Proposed conditions. The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
a.	Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways. Street names shall be indicated as approved by the county planning commission, county road commission and the city department of public works. 
b.	Tentative layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 
c.	Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
d.	An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has any interest or owns any parcel so identified as "excepted," the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located. 
e.	An indication of system proposed for sewage by a method meeting the requirements of the city council and the state department of natural resources. 
f.	An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method meeting the requirements of the city council and the state department of public health. 
g.	An indication of storm drainage method and disposal area. 
h.	In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part proposed for initial subdivision shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends. Each subsequent plat shall follow this procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
i.	A subdivision, or extension of an existing subdivision, must be developed so as to provide sufficient access streets. 
(5)	Variances. Any variance from the provisions of this article must be requested in writing upon the submission of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 3.010, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 3.010) 
Sec. 26-88. - Tentative preliminary plat-Planning commission (stage I). 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the city clerk to send a notice to the proprietor and the owners of all lands within 300 feet, or adjoining property. This notice shall describe the preliminary plat, and the time and place of the meeting of the planning commission to consider such preliminary plat. The notice shall be sent by registered mail not less than five days before the date of the meeting. 
(b)	The city manager shall transmit copies of the tentative preliminary plat to the city engineer, the department of public works, the department of inspections and the public safety department for technical review and recommendation. Each department, as well as the city manager, shall prepare written comments and recommendations. 
(c)	A city manager's report to the city council shall be prepared which shall include the recommendations of all of the departments listed in subsection (b) of this section. This report will be made available to the planning commission. 
(d)	The planning commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of chapter 50 of this Code, within the various elements of the master plan and within the standards of this article. 
(e)	The planning commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove, or approve the tentative preliminary plat as follows: 
(1)	Should the approval be a conditional approval and therefore tentative, the tentative preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the city council until such conditions have been satisfied by the proprietor. 
(2)	Should the planning commission disapprove the tentative preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the regular meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. 
(3)	Should the planning commission find all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may give approval of the tentative preliminary plat; the chair shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and forward the preliminary plat and all accompanying material to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 3.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 3.020) 
Sec. 26-89. - Same-City council (stage II). 
    Stage II of the preliminary plat procedure constitutes review and approval by the city council after receiving a recommendation from the planning commission and the city manager's report, specified under subsection 26-88(c). Stage II is intended to provide the proprietor with an assurance that the preliminary concepts of the plan are acceptable and that detailed engineering may proceed. 
(1)	The city council will not review a tentative preliminary plat until it has received the review and approval of the planning commission and the city manager's report. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall take action on the tentative preliminary plat within 90 days of its filing date. This 90-day period shall not include periods of time that the proprietor spends in meeting conditions for approval by the planning commission. 
(2)	Should the city council approve the tentative preliminary plat, they shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the tentative preliminary plat and distribute copies of the tentative preliminary plat as follows: 
a.	Return one copy to the proprietor. 
b.	Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the planning commission's files. 
c.	Forward one copy to the school board or school superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned. 
d.	Return one copy to the proprietor's engineer or surveyor. 
e.	Return remaining copies to the department of public works and the city engineer. 
(3)	Tentative approval shall constitute final approval of the preliminary plat. 
(4)	Tentative approval of the city council shall be effective for a period of 12 months. Should the preliminary plat, in whole or in part, not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission and city council for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the city council. 
(5)	If disapproved by the city council, the reasons shall be given to the proprietor with any recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 3.030, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 3.030) 
Sec. 26-90. - Final preliminary plat-City council (stage III). 
    Stage III of the preliminary plat procedure is the final approval of the preliminary plat by the city council. Stage III constitutes final acceptance of the detailed plans for all improvements within the proposed subdivision. Upon the granting of this approval by the city council, construction of the plat may begin. The procedure for submittal and final approval of the final preliminary plat shall be as follows: 
(1)	Filing. 
a.	The final preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
b.	The final preliminary plat submitted for final approval shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as tentatively approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved tentative preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at that time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
c.	Six copies of the final preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application, shall be submitted to the city clerk at least ten working days prior to the regular city council meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing). The city clerk shall transmit five copies to the department of public works. Engineering review fees are payable with submission. 
d.	Utility plans shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer. 
e.	The proprietor shall submit three sets of detailed working drawings and calculations showing grades, drainage structures, existing and proposed utilities (including street lighting plan) and road construction plans for roads within and adjoining such plat. 
f.	The proprietor shall provide proof of approval of plats from each of the necessary authorities required for approval in sections 112 through 119 of the land division act (MCL 560.112-560.119). 
(2)	Review. 
a.	The final preliminary plat, detailed working drawings, and calculations shall be reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), construction standards of the city and this article. 
b.	A city manager's report shall be prepared and submitted to the city council, which shall include final comments and recommendations on the final preliminary plat by the city engineer. 
(3)	Action by city council. 
a.	The city council shall take action on the final preliminary plat upon receipt of the city manager's report and staff recommendations outlined in subsection (2)b. of this section, within 20 days of the submission of all necessary approved plats and detailed working drawings. 
b.	If the final preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the city council and meets all conditions laid down for final approval and has been approved by the necessary agencies in sections 112 through 119 of the land division act (MCL 560.112-560.119), the city council shall approve the preliminary plat. 
c.	The city clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given. 
d.	Approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(4)	Plat approval required prior to installation or construction. No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the plat has received approval of the city council and the engineering plans have been certified to conform to city specifications and standards and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 3.040, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 3.040) 
Sec. 26-91. - Final plat. 
    The final plat is the actual acceptance of the constructed improvements within the plat by the city council. The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)	Preparation. 
a.	The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
b.	The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
(2)	Final plat review. 
a.	The original print and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the city clerk and the proprietor shall deposit such sums of money as the city council may require in this article or by resolution. 
b.	The final plat shall be reviewed by the city engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
c.	The city engineer shall be responsible for the inspection of the construction of all improvements identified in the final plat, and shall certify that construction has been carried out based upon the approved design, that acceptable construction methods were used, and that the improvements meet with city standards. 
d.	A city manager's report shall be prepared including the recommendations of the city engineer for either approval or rejection of the final plat. This report will be made available to the planning commission. 
e.	The city clerk shall transmit the final plat to the planning commission who shall, within 30 days, meet to either recommend approval or disapproval of the final plat. The planning commission shall, within five days after its meeting, transmit its recommendations to the clerk of the city council. 
f.	The city council shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat within 60 days of its date of filing. 
g.	When all necessary improvements have been approved and accepted by the city council, a certified approved plat shall be transmitted to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 3.050, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 3.050) 
Secs. 26-92-26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-111. - Purpose. 
    The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this division are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the city council as provided by subsection 26-90(4). 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.010, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.010) 
Sec. 26-112. - Streets. 
    Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross sections as set forth in this design layout standards section of this article, and other conditions set forth by the city council. 
(1)	Location and arrangement. 
a.	The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. 
b.	The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning commission. 
c.	The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
d.	Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
e.	Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad, expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
f.	Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedication or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted. 
(2)	Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Major thoroughfare: In conformance with major thoroughfare plan. 
b.	Collector streets ..... 66 feet 
c.	Industrial service 
streets ..... 66 feet 
d.	Multiple-family residential streets where platted ..... 66 feet 
e.	Minor (single-family residential) streets ..... 66 feet 
f.	Marginal access streets ..... 60 feet 
g.	Turnaround (loop) street ..... 120 feet 
h.	Alley (where permitted) ..... 30 feet 
i.	Cul-de-sac streets-turnarounds: 
1.	Industrial ..... 75-foot 
radius 
2.	Residential and others ..... 60-foot 
radius 
j.	Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500 feet. Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed 500 feet subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(3)	Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than one-half percent. The maximum street grade shall be six percent. 
(4)	Street geometrics. Standards for maximum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be those established by the standards of the county road commission. 
(5)	Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares, shall do so with a tangent section of a centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or secondary thoroughfare. 
(6)	Grading and centerline gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.020) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 26-113. - Blocks. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Sizes. 
a.	Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
b.	Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
(2)	Public walkways. 
a.	Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public or private facilities such as, but not limited to, schools and parks. 
b.	Widths of public walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be in the nature of an easement for this purpose. 
(3)	Easements. 
a.	Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, six feet from each parcel. 
b.	Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone, electric company, and cable television easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the approved preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
c.	Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicate lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights granted to the (utility) company." 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.030, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.030) 
Sec. 26-114. - Lot requirements. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Sizes and shapes. 
a.	The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated; and in accord with this article. 
b.	Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 50 of this Code for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
c.	Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 50 of this Code. 
d.	Corner lots shall be platted at least 20 feet wider than the minimum width permitted by chapter 50 of this Code in order to permit conformance with setback lines or side-lotted streets. 
e.	Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of 21/2 to one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
f.	Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking; setbacks and other requirements in accordance with chapter 50 of this Code. 
(2)	Arrangement. 
a.	Every lot shall front or abut on a street. 
b.	Side lot lines shall be as nearly as possible at right angles to straight streets or radial to the curved street lines. 
c.	Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between building and such trafficway. 
d.	Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where possible. 
e.	Where lots border upon bodies of water, the front yard may be designated as the waterfront side of such lot provided the lot has sufficient depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for all structures equal to the front setback on the street side as well as on the waterfront side. 
(3)	Lot division. The division of a lot in a recorded plat is prohibited, unless approved following application to the city council. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state the reason for the proposed division. No lot in a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four parts and the resulting lots shall be not less in area than permitted by the city or county zoning ordinances. No building permit shall be issued, or any building construction commenced, unless the division has been approved by the city council and the suitability of the land for building sites has been approved by the county or district health department. The division of a lot resulting in a smaller area than prescribed in this article may be permitted but only for the purpose of adding to the existing building site. The application shall so state and shall be in affidavit form. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.040, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.040) 
Sec. 26-115. - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.050, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.050) 
Sec. 26-116. - Floodplain and uninhabitable areas. 
    Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or partly within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall require specific compliance with the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and its review by the state department of natural resources. Such lands subject to flooding, or otherwise deemed uninhabitable by the city due to natural environmental constraints, such as, but not limited to, steep slopes, unsuitable soils, floodprone areas, shall not be platted for any purpose that, in the judgment of the city council, may increase the damage to public health, life, safety or property. This shall include the increase of such risk to local residents. Such lands within a subdivision may be set aside for other uses, such as parks and other open space. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 4.060, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 4.060) 
Secs. 26-117-26-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 26-136. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the requirements for the improvements and the standards to which they must be constructed by the proprietor. 
(1)	Providing of improvements. Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this article and/or any other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by city ordinance. The improvements set forth under this division are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standards. In those instances in which a standard may not be specified, the city manager after consultation with the city engineer may set the standard with which the proprietor must comply. 
(2)	Maintenance bond. Prior to the acceptance by the city of the improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the city council shall be posted by the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 5.010, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 5.010) 
Sec. 26-137. - Streets. 
    All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications approved by the city council. 
(1)	Street pavement width standards. Street pavement width standards shall be measured from back of curb to back of curb as follows: 
a.	Major thoroughfares: In conformance with standards and specifications established by the city engineer or the city council. This width is generally established as 48 feet. 
b.	Collector streets ..... 48 feet 
c.	Industrial streets ..... 40 feet 
d.	Multiple-family residential streets where dedicated ..... 36 feet 
e.	Minor residential 
streets ..... 36 feet 
f.	Marginal access streets ..... 24 feet 
g.	Turnaround (loop) streets: Not less than 80-foot diameter at terminating loop-36-foot wide pavement. 
h.	Alley (paved) ..... 12 feet 
i.	Cul-de-sac streets; turnarounds: 
1.	Industrial ..... 65-foot 
radius 
2.	Residential and others ..... 50-foot 
radius 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 5.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 5.020) 
Sec. 26-138. - Utilities. 
(a)	Requirements. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, except for major thoroughfare right-of-way, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation of the city engineer, city planner, planning commission, and the approval of the city council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
(b)	Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system including all appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. 
(c)	Water supply. When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to, or reasonably near the service area of a public water supply system, water mains, fire hydrants and required water system appurtenances shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat, both for domestic use and fire protection. In the event of the nonexistence or nonavailability of a public water supply system, a subdivision water supply system, if feasible, as determined by the city engineer, shall be installed by the proprietor. 
(d)	Storm drainage system. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, catchbasins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater runoff from residential rear yards. Each yard shall be self-contained and shall be drained from rear to front except where topography or other natural features require otherwise. Rear yards shall slope it a minimum grade of one-half percent. 
(e)	Street lighting. 
(1)	Decorative street lighting poles of steel or concrete are required at all intersections, curves, culs-de-sac and dead-end streets. 
(2)	A street lighting plan, approved by the local public utility supplying electricity, must be submitted for the stage III approval of the preliminary plat. 
(3)	The proprietor shall deposit, with the city, sufficient funds to cover cost estimates provided by the local public utility supplying electricity for the actual installation of the system. The city will coordinate installation with the local public utility supplying electricity. The proprietor shall be responsible for reasonable amounts in excess of the original cost estimates. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 5.030, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 5.030) 
Sec. 26-139. - Other improvements. 
(a)	Sidewalks. 
(1)	Major thoroughfares. For major thoroughfares, a four-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on the sides of the roadway abutting the subdivision shall be provided. 
(2)	Collector streets. For collector streets, a four-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. 
(3)	Minor streets. For minor streets, a four-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. 
(4)	Marginal access streets. For marginal access streets, a four-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on the private property side of the roadway shall be provided. 
(5)	Public walkway. The surface of the walkways shall be developed in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the planning commission. Fences and/or other improvements may also be required if the planning commission and/or city council determines they are necessary to protect the adjacent property owners. 
(b)	Time limits. All sidewalks required hereunder shall be built within five years from the date of final approval of the plat; provided, however, that if any lot in the subdivision shall be built upon, the sidewalks on such lot shall be constructed prior to occupancy, weather permitting, and in no event later than one year from the date of occupancy. To ensure performance of these conditions, the developer shall place funds in escrow as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 5.040, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 5.040) 
Sec. 26-140. - As-built drawings. 
    The proprietor shall submit to the city council or appropriate public agency "as-built" engineering drawings on mylar of each of the required improvements that have been completed prior to final plat approval. Each set of drawings shall be certified by the proprietor's engineer. Similar drawings shall also be submitted for improvements installed under bond, after final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 5.050, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 5.050) 
Secs. 26-141-26-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRD AND PDD REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-156. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the following requirements which apply in addition to all other requirements of this article where a preliminary plat is filed for approval under the provisions of chapter 50, article III, divisions 12 and 13, relative to PRD planned residential districts and PDD planned development districts. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 6.010, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 6.010) 
Sec. 26-157. - Statement of principles. 
    Consideration by the planning commission and the city council of proposed optional use of planned residential districts or planned development districts shall reflect the following basic principles: 
(1)	The provisions of chapter 50, article III, divisions 12 and 13, relative to planned residential districts or planned development districts provide an optional method of subdividing property and approval of any subdivision is subject to the discretion of the city council. 
(2)	Particular attention shall be given to the effect of a subdivision upon the immediate area, where the character of that area has been established by previous development. Major attention shall be given by the planning commission and the city council to the benefits to be derived by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the city because of the subdivision, with minor consideration to be given to the proprietor. 
(3)	The following objectives shall govern the approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision: 
a.	To provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of the terrain features. 
b.	To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas. 
c.	To encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the land while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles. 
d.	To encourage the provision of open space so benefits may accrue directly to residents of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 6.020, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 6.020) 
Sec. 26-158. - Application. 
    The application for approval of subdivision under the planned residential districts or planned development districts provisions shall contain the following, in addition to the information required by other sections of this article: 
(1)	A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to the city or to the common use of lot owners (herein called open land) shall be provided, including the following as a minimum: 
a.	Legal description of the land. 
b.	Topographical survey of the land. 
c.	Type of soil on the land. 
d.	Description of natural features on the land. 
(2)	The proposed plan of development of the open land shall be contained in the application and shall include the following as a minimum: 
a.	The proposed manner in which the title to land and facilities owned by the subdivision shall be held. 
b.	The proposed manner of maintenance costs, financing costs or assessments so that nonpayment will constitute a lien on the property, thus avoiding municipal responsibility in the future. 
c.	The proposed manner of regulating the use of the common facilities and area so as to eliminate possible nuisances to other property owners and cause for enforcement by the city. 
d.	The proposed method of notifying the city when any change is contemplated in plans that would affect the original specifications approved by the city. 
e.	The proposed method of setting up assessments to cover contingencies, insurance against casualty and liability and payment of taxes relating to these properties. 
f.	The proposed uses of open land and the proposed improvements which are to be constructed by the proprietor. 
(3)	The application shall contain a statement of the benefits to be realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the city, by approval of the proposed subdivision, with particular reference to the objectives stated in chapter 50 of this Code. 
(4)	Before any action is taken upon any subdivision, ten copies of the preliminary plat, application and supporting data shall be submitted to the clerk and processed according to the procedure set forth in chapter 50, article III, divisions 12 and 13, as appropriate. 
a.	If the planning commission is satisfied that the proposed subdivision meets the letter and spirit of chapter 50 of this Code and should be approved, it shall recommend such approval to the city council with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. Thereafter, the city council shall take action upon such application in accordance with the provisions of chapter 50, article III, divisions 12 and 13, as appropriate. 
b.	If the planning commission is not satisfied that the proposed subdivision meets the letter and spirit of chapter 50 of this Code or finds that the approval of such subdivision will be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall communicate such disapproval to the city council with reasons. The proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon such proposal before the city council upon written request filed with the city clerk. 
c.	If the city council gives approval to the proposed subdivision, it shall instruct the city attorney to prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract, after approval by the city council shall be entered into between the city and the proprietor prior to the approval of any final plat based on the approved preliminary planned residential district or planned development district plat. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 6.030, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 6.030) 
Sec. 26-159. - As-built drawings. 
    The proprietor shall submit to the city council or appropriate public agency "as-built" engineering drawings on mylar of each of the required improvements that have been completed prior to final plat approval. Each set of drawings shall be certified by the proprietor's engineer. Similar drawings shall also be submitted for improvements installed under bond, after final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 1981-6, § 6.040, 12-7-1981; Code 1972, app. D, § 6.040) 
Chapter 28 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General powers of city in regard to trailers, § 2.1(s). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Mobile home commission act, MCL 125.2301 et seq.; motor coach parks, MCL 125.1035 et seq.; campground licensing and registration, MCL 333.12501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILERS 

Sec. 28-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residence district means "R-1," "R-2," "R-3" and "RM-1" residence districts as defined in chapter 50 of this Code. 
    Trailer means any enclosure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirtings, and which has been equipped or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the enclosure from place to place, whether by motive power or by other means. The term "trailer" shall include camp cars and house cars, but shall not be construed to mean a "dwelling" or a "mobile home" as defined in chapter 50 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-32. - Legislative intent. 
    It is the legislative intent that all provisions of this article be liberally construed to lessen congestion on the public streets and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-17) 
Sec. 28-33. - Article not to prohibit lawful parking of trailers. 
    Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as preventing the parking of an unoccupied trailer not used for storage purposes on any lot in the city if such parking otherwise meets the provisions of this article; nor shall anything in this article be interpreted to prevent the parking or use and occupancy of any trailer in a campground specifically licensed as such in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-18) 
Sec. 28-34. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The director of public safety or code official shall have the authority to enter and inspect at any reasonable time any premises upon which a trailer is parked, used or occupied for the purpose of ascertaining that the owner, operator or occupant thereof is complying with all statutes, ordinances and rules and regulations governing trailers. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-19) 
Sec. 28-35. - Use in residential or commercial districts prohibited. 
    No person shall use or maintain any trailer for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes in any residential or commercial district of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-20) 
Sec. 28-36. - Parking between setback lines and curblines. 
    No person shall park any trailer at any time between any setback line established in chapter 50 of this Code and the curbline of any lot. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-22) 
Sec. 28-37. - Use at places other than licensed campgrounds. 
    No person shall park or permit the parking of any occupied trailer or use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any trailer on any site, lot, field or tract of land not specifically licensed as a campground by the state, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-23) 
Sec. 28-38. - Removing wheels; elevating; stabilizing. 
    No person shall remove the wheels or tires from any trailer except for the purpose of repair, nor shall any person elevate, block or stabilize any trailer, other than with jacks designed for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-24) 
Sec. 28-39. - Occupancy limit for sleeping purposes. 
    No parked trailer shall be occupied for sleeping purposes by a greater number of persons than the vehicle is designed and arranged to accommodate. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-25) 
Sec. 28-40. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, § 7, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 16-26) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definition of public place. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "public place" shall mean any street, alley, park, public building or any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-2. - Persons aiding and abetting in offenses to be considered as having committed offense. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code, whether such person directly commits the act constituting the offense or procedures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission may be prosecuted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if such person had directly committed such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Code 1972, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Secs. 30-3-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-31. - Obstructing, resisting or hindering public safety department. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the public safety department, or any peace officer in the discharge of such officer's duties. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(10)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 30-32. - False fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in any false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(18)) 
State Law reference- False alarms, MCL 750.240. 
Secs. 30-33-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Secs. 30-61-30-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 

Sec. 30-91. - Littering streets. 
    No person shall place, throw or leave on or in any street any leaves, dirt, grass, filth, refuse, rubbish, wastepaper, waste material of any kind or any other article which would litter the street, make travel thereon hazardous or create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1953-11, § 1; Code 1972, § 14-1) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 30-92. - Permitting refuse to be blown from premises. 
    No person who is the owner or occupant of a premises shall permit any paper or other refuse matter to be blown, to be carried upon or to litter any public or private place beyond the limits of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1960-5; Code 1972, § 8-40) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 30-93. - Damaging, defacing or unauthorized removal of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy or damage or in any manner deface, destroy, injure or tamper with any property not owned by such person, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of any public building, or any fence, tree or pole within the city, or take, or meddle with any property belonging to the city or remove such property from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, standing or stored, without authority from the city manager or other official custodian of the property. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(4)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 30-94. - Damage, destruction or theft from gardens or orchards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any garden or orchard located within the city without the consent of the owner or tenant, or the owner's or tenant's agent, and there cut down, damage, destroy, eat or carry away any portion of the garden, including any growing thing, crop, tree, timber, grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence or any other protective device or any other thing used for the development, cultivation, maintenance and use of such gardens or orchards. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(11)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.547. 
Sec. 30-95. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prowl about the premises owned or leased by another in the nighttime, without the express or implied consent of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(20)) 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 30-96. - Trespassing. 
    Any person who willfully enters upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, occupant or agent of either, or any person being upon the lands or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner, occupant or agent of either, who, without lawful authority, neglects or refuses to depart therefrom shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Posting of the premises against trespassing in a conspicuous manner shall constitute notice under the foregoing provision. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1, 3-19-2007) 
Secs. 30-97-30-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 30-121. - Loitering. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and also includes the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or for other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)	Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians after having been told to move on by a public safety officer; 
(2)	Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move on by a public safety officer; 
(3)	Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(15)) 
Sec. 30-122. - Unlawful assemblies and crowds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or stand in crowds or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal purposes in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(13)) 
State Law reference- Riots and unlawful assemblies, MCL 752.541 et seq. 
Sec. 30-123. - Jostling or roughly crowding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park or public building. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(14)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 30-124. - Public disturbances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in any public place or to disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the public peace and quiet by violent, loud, offensive or boisterous conduct. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(5), (17); Ord. No. 2003-1, § 2, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 30-125. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or to act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 30-126. - Noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by such person to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(16)) 
Sec. 30-127. - Furnishing alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated or disorderly person or habitual drunkard. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, give or furnish alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated or disorderly person, or to any habitual drunkard. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(19)) 
State Law reference- Sales to intoxicated persons prohibited, MCL 750.1707. 
Secs. 30-128-30-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-151. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 30-152. - Frequenting place of prostitution, gambling, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(6)) 
State Law reference- Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq.; gambling generally, MCL 750.301 et seq.; loitering in house of ill fame, MCL 750.167(1)(i); loitering in place of illegal occupation, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 30-153. - Prostitution or accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in prostitution or solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal act. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(7)) 
State Law reference- Soliciting or accosting, MCL 750.449. 
Sec. 30-154. - Transportation for illegal purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport any person to a place for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in illegal gambling or in any illegal act. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(8)) 
State Law reference- Transporting female for prostitution, MCL 750.459. 
Sec. 30-155. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or permit the use of, a gaming room, gaming table, gambling equipment or any policy or pool tickets to be used for illegal gaming or gambling on any premises occupied or controlled by such person, or place, receive or transmit any bet on the outcome of any race, contest or game of any kind whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(9)) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Secs. 30-156-30-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC NUDITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for this division, MCL 117.5h. 

Sec. 30-171. - Definition. 
    As used in this division, the term "public nudity" means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including but not limited to payment or promise of payment of an admission fee of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, § 1, 4-20-1992; Code 1972, § 10-31) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-172. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Public nudity within the city boundaries is hereby prohibited. 
(b)	No person shall aid or abet the knowing or intentional display in a public place or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including but not limited to payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A mother's breastfeeding of her baby does not under any circumstances constitute nudity irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, § 2, 4-20-1992; Code 1972, § 10-32) 
Sec. 30-173. - Application. 
    This division applies only to live exhibitions and/or film or videotape displays intended for on-premises viewing. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, § 3, 4-20-1992; Code 1972, § 10-33) 
Sec. 30-174. - Knowledge presumed. 
    The following persons are presumed to know of the display of public nudity with regard to any premises or business: 
(1)	Record land owner or land contract owner or lessee under a written lease; 
(2)	Licensee of any premises licensed by state liquor control commission; 
(3)	Licensee under any sales tax license issued by the state department of treasury; 
(4)	Manager or operator of any premises or business, who is on or at the premises at the time of the advertising or display of public nudity. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, § 4, 4-20-1992; Code 1972, § 10-34) 
Secs. 30-175-30-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances generally, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq. 

Sec. 30-191. - Controlled substance defined. 
    As used in this division, the term "controlled substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in schedules 1 to 5 of 1978 PA 368 (MCL 333.7212-333.7220). The term "immediate precursor" is defined in section 7106 of 1978 PA 368 (MCL 333.7106). 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, § 1, 10-21-1996; Code 1972, § 10-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-192. - Dispensing of drugs prohibited. 
    No person shall possess, sell, offer for sale, distribute, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away any controlled substance unless authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, § 2, 10-21-1996; Code 1972, § 10-42) 
Sec. 30-193. - Possession of needles and paraphernalia prohibited. 
    No person shall, at any time, have or possess a hypodermic syringe or needle or any other instrument, implement or paraphernalia adapted for the use of a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or any other paraphernalia used or adapted for the controlled substance to be introduced into the body, unless such possession is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, § 3, 10-21-1996; Code 1972, § 10-43) 
Sec. 30-194. - Furnishing of paraphernalia prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, furnish, supply or give away any empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or needle or any other instrument, implement or paraphernalia adapted for the use of a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or any other paraphernalia adapted for the controlled substance to be introduced into the body, unless such dispensing is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, § 4, 10-21-1996; Code 1972, § 10-44) 
Sec. 30-195. - Association with controlled substances prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly loiter in or about any building, apartment, store, automobile, trailer or other place, or an area open to the public, where a controlled substance is being illegally used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away or stored. 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, § 5, 10-21-1996; Code 1972, § 10-45) 
Secs. 30-196-30-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 30-221. - Discharge of firearms and weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle, slingshot, crossbow or other dangerous weapon within the city except at an enclosed firing range or other place designed for target or practice firing of such weapons. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(3)a) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearms, MCL 750.234 et seq. 
Sec. 30-222. - Possession of firearms or weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any firearm, air rifle, slingshot, crossbow or other dangerous weapon in any public street, park or other place open to the general public within the city unless such weapon is licensed as required by law and securely wrapped or encased. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(3)b) 
State Law reference- License required to purchase, carry or transport a pistol, MCL 750.224 et seq.; carrying concealed weapons without a license, MCL 750.227. 
Sec. 30-223. - Killing and hunting animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, hunt or take in any manner any wild animal or bird within the city, except for rodents doing damage to property. 
(Ord. No. 1964-4, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-5) 
State Law reference- Hunting area control-local ordinances, MCL 324.41902. 
Sec. 30-224. - Abandoned or unattended icebox or refrigerator; leaving in place accessible to children. 
    Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snap lock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof, is guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1954-5; Code 1972, § 10-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493(d). 
Sec. 30-225. - Allowing children to be unattended. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any child under seven years of age to remain unattended in any house, room, structure or automobile. 
(Ord. No. 1953-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1973-1, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-6, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 10-2(a)(12)) 
Secs. 30-226-30-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-251. - Purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by minor; attempt; furnishing fraudulent identification to minor. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a minor to purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor. A minor who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following: 
(1)	For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100.00. In addition, a person convicted of violating this subsection may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c). 
(2)	For a second violation, a fine of not more than $200.00. In addition, a person convicted of violating this subsection a second time may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services, and may be ordered to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c). 
(3)	For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more than $500.00. In addition, a person convicted of violating this subsection a third or subsequent time may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c). 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a person to furnish fraudulent identification to a minor, or, notwithstanding subsection (a), it shall be unlawful for a minor to use fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor. A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00 or both. 
(c)	The court may order the person convicted of violating subsection (1) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Section 6103 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, in order to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. 
(d)	The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (a) or (b) as provided in Section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
(e)	A public safety officer or a peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A public safety officer or peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
(f)	A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(g)	This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act, by the liquor control commission or by an agent of the liquor control commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(h)	This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent or employee for a violation of this act. 
(i)	The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(j)	The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(k)	Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)	An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)	An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(l)	For purposes of this section, "minor" means a person less than 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1964-6, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1983-6, §§ 2, 3; Code 1972, § 10-4(a); Ord. No. 2004-3, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 30-252. - Definition. 
    The term "alcoholic liquor" shall, for the purpose of this division, include any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or any compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1964-6, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1983-6, §§ 2, 3; Code 1972, § 10-4(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.264(b), 436.1703. 
Secs. 30-253-30-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751; power of city to regulate by ordinance a curfew for minors, MCL 722.754. 

Sec. 30-271. - Established. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play, pleasure ride, park or be in or on any type of vehicle whatsoever, or be or remain in, on or about any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, vacant lots, places of amusement or entertainment, or other unsupervised places in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except that on Friday and Saturday nights such prohibition for persons 15 and 16 years of age shall be between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-16) 
Sec. 30-272. - Exceptions. 
    The curfew established by section 30-271 shall not apply to a minor accompanied by such minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by such minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is going to, attending or coming directly from a legitimate church, municipal or school function, or to a minor whose lawful employment makes it necessary that the minor be in, on or about the places prohibited during the hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 1; Code 1972, § 10-17) 
Sec. 30-273. - Permitting violations by parents and guardians. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years to allow or permit any such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play, pleasure ride, park or be in or on any type of vehicle whatsoever, or be or remain in, on or about any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, vacant lots, places of amusement or entertainment, or other unsupervised places in the city contrary to the provisions of and within the time prohibited in section 30-271. It shall further be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years to fail or neglect to cause any such minor to refrain from being in, on or about the places set forth in section 30-271 within the times prohibited contrary to the terms and provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 2; Code 1972, § 10-18) 
Sec. 30-274. - Permitting violations by operators of places of amusement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating places of amusement and entertainment in the city to permit any minor under the age of 17 years to enter such places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited by the terms of section 30-271. The provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 3; Code 1972, § 10-19) 
Sec. 30-275. - Detention of minor; notification of parent or guardian. 
    Any public safety officer of the city is hereby authorized to take into custody, without warrant, any minor under the age of 17 years found violating any of the terms and provisions of section 30-271, and to detain such minor for a reasonable time until the parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of such minor has been notified of the violation and detention. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 5; Code 1972, § 10-20) 
Sec. 30-276. - Minors violating curfew to be deemed delinquent or neglected. 
    Any minor violating the provisions of section 30-271 shall be deemed a delinquent or neglected child as defined by state law, and shall be brought before the juvenile court having jurisdiction over such minor, to be dealt with by the juvenile court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1964-9, § 5; Code 1972, § 10-21) 
Secs. 30-277-30-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 30-291. - Purpose. 
(a)	The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act legalized the sale, possession, and use of consumer fireworks in Michigan while granting limited control over the use and discharge of fireworks to local communities. Since the adoption of the Act, the citizens of Springfield have endured the disruption of the peace and quietude of its residential neighborhoods resulting in a negative impact to the quality of life of residents. Additionally, the resources of the city have been impacted due to increased complaints of noise and personal injuries owing to the use of consumer fireworks. 
(b)	The purpose of this article is to impose conditions on the time, place, and manner of the use and discharge of consumer fireworks so as to promote the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 30-292. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451 et seq. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. "Consumer fireworks" does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1., 3.1.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    National holiday means New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday, Presidents' Day (also referred to as Washington's Birthday), Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 30-293. - Consumer fireworks prohibitions. 
(a)	A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks except during permitted hours on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. 
(b)	No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. 
(c)	No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use consumer fireworks on those premises. 
(d)	Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a minor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 30-294. - General noise prohibition. 
    The ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks shall be subject to the general prohibition contained at section 18-92 of the Springfield City Code, which addresses continued excessive or unusually loud noise, measured or unmeasured, which disrupts, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 30-295. - Penalties. 
    A person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00 for first offense, $250.00 for first repeat offense and $500.00 for second and any subsequent repeat offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Powers of city manager over parks; rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the conduct and use of the parks and public grounds of the city as are necessary to administer the parks and public grounds, and to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1980-13, § 2; Code 1972, § 10-22) 
Sec. 32-2. - Violations prohibited. 
    After such rules and regulations have been promulgated by the city manager and approved by the city council, no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. Violation of such rules and regulations is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1980-13, § 2; Code 1972, § 10-23) 
Chapter 34 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq., 445.471 et seq.; junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; pawnbrokers licensing, MCL 446.201 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 

Sec. 34-31. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of collecting junk or operate as a junk dealer or secondhand dealer, or as a pawnbroker without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Code 1972, § 8-52) 
Sec. 34-32. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-53) 
Sec. 34-33. - Adoption of state laws by reference. 
    All statutes of the state, and specifically sections 1 through 7 of 1917 PA 350 (MCL 445.401-445.407), and sections 1 and 2 of 1945 PA 231 (MCL 445.471, 445.472), relating to secondhand dealers and junk dealers are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference and no person shall violate any law, rule or regulation contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Code 1972, § 8-54) 
Sec. 34-34. - Infestation by vermin, insects, etc., prohibited. 
    No person who is the owner, occupant or operator of a secondhand or junk business shall permit any rats, other vermin, flies, mosquitoes or other disease-bearing or noisome insects of any kind to infest or to breed in or upon the premises where such secondhand or junk business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Code 1972, § 8-58) 
Sec. 34-35. - Certain minors prohibited from loitering about premises. 
    No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter or be permitted to loiter about the premises of any business licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Code 1972, § 8-59) 
Sec. 34-36. - Restricted hours. 
    No person, except an authorized security person, shall be permitted upon the premises of any business licensed under this article from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Code 1972, § 8-60) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disposing of dead dogs, § 4-59; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; utilities, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-11. - Necessity; intent. 
    This article is necessary to govern the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of refuse, garbage, rubbish and other rejected, unwanted or discarded waste materials within the limits of the city in order that the public health, safety and welfare may be protected. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-1) 
Sec. 36-12. - Scope of article. 
    Every owner, occupant or person in possession of a residential premises in the city shall be required to have accumulations of refuse removed and disposed of in accordance with this article and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. The city shall provide for such refuse removal services for residential premises and there shall be paid to the city the charges specified by the city council for such services. Every owner, occupant or person in possession of multiple residential or of nonresidential premises shall be responsible for storage, collection and disposal of such person's own refuse by any means authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-2) 
Sec. 36-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as from time to time appear to be necessary to carry out the intent of this article; provided that such rules are not in conflict with this or any other law of the city or other appropriate governmental unit and provided that such rules shall be approved by the city council. Failure to observe any approved rule or regulation shall be a violation of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be published and available for distribution at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-3) 
Sec. 36-14. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or any person owning, leasing and/or occupying any building structure, property, or premises in the city to allow or to store, collect, transport, or dispose of any refuse, garbage, rubbish and other rejected, unwanted or discharged waste materials, except in compliance with this article and applicable state, federal and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-4) 
Sec. 36-15. - Definitions; meaning and interpretation. 
    The following words, terms, phrases and their derivations, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved disposal area means a solid waste transfer facility, incinerator, sanitary landfill, processing plant, or other solid waste handling or disposal facility utilized in the disposal of solid waste, as approved by the city, the county health department and applicable state law, rule and regulation. 
State Law reference- Development of methods for disposal of solid waste, MCL 324.11507. 
    Approved incinerators means incinerators constructed, approved and operated in accordance with the International Fire Code, as amended from time to time, the single state construction code, as amended from time to time, and the state department of natural resources. 
    Backyard pickup means a residential premises refuse collection service option which allows the customer to place two containers or plastic bags of residential refuse generated at such residential premises at the sideyard or backyard once a week for pickup. 
    Bulky waste means stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other household waste of this nature. 
    Bundle means tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not to exceed four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. 
    City contractor means a licensed person, firm or corporation with whom the city has entered into a contract for the collection, transport and disposal of refuse from residential premises within the city. 
    Commercial refuse means the miscellaneous waste material such as garbage, rubbish and ashes resulting from operation of business enterprises and institutions. Such term includes construction waste, but excludes industrial trade waste. 
    Construction waste means waste from building construction, alteration, demolition or repair and dirt from excavations. 
    Containers means a receptacle with a capacity of 20 gallons or greater but not more than 32 gallons, constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass. 
    Curbside unlimited means a residential premises refuse collection service option which allows the customer to place an unlimited amount of residential refuse generated at such residential premises at the curb for pickup once a week. 
    Elderly means a person who is age 65 or older and head of household at the service address. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable. 
    Handicapped means a person who is head of household at the service address and has any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's life activities, and such person is certified as being (i) physically disabled by a licensed physician, or (ii) mentally disabled by a licensed psychiatrist or registered psychologist, Veterans' Administration, Social Security Administration, or the county health department. 
    Hazardous waste means waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material which because of its quality; concentration; or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. The term "hazardous waste" does not include material which is sold for recycling or treatment and stored for one year or less, or solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage discharge, or solid or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge, authorized industrial discharge to a municipal treatment system, or industrial discharge which is a point source subject to permits under section 402 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 USC 1342, or is a source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 USC 2011-2282. (See Hazardous waste management, 1994 PA 451 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.) 
    Industrial waste means all such trade wastes peculiar to industrial manufacturing or processing plants and shall include hazardous refuse, but shall not include commercial refuse. 
    Licensee means a person who has been issued a license to collect, transport or dispose of refuse by the city. 
    Multiple residential premises means a parcel of land containing five or more residential units. 
    Nonresidential premises means commercial, industrial or other institutional premises. 
    Open burning means any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney or an approved incinerator. 
    Plastic bags means polyethylene or similar plastic bags of not less than 11/2-mils thickness designed to store refuse, secured in a manner to prevent spillage, leakage or other release of its contents by use of wire, string or ties appropriate for this purpose. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
    Premises means a parcel of land consisting of a lot or a portion thereof, including any buildings, improvements or appurtenances thereon, which by legal construction or by actuality, forms one enclosure with it. 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, and including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, small dead animals, and solid construction, hazardous, industrial and market wastes. 
    Residential premises means a parcel of land containing four or less residential units. 
    Residential refuse means refuse generated from normal household use. The term shall not include commercial refuse, construction waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste or small dead animals exceeding ten pounds in weight. 
    Residential unit means a dwelling, primarily for providing living accommodations, occupied by any person or group comprising a single-family unit. It shall have no significant producing or processing activity of a commercial, industrial or institutional nature. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    Small dead animals means carcasses of small animals, fish and fowl not exceeding ten pounds in weight. 
    Storage means the accumulation of materials which are awaiting collection, transportation and disposal. 
    Toter means a 90-gallon refuse container on wheels. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Ord. No. 1987-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 7-5) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-16. - Penalties and sanctions. 
(a)	Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of division 4 of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided by section 1-56. 
(b)	Misdemeanor. A person who violates any provision of the remaining articles of this chapter is responsible for a misdemeanor, subject to penalties as provided by section 1-31. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Ord. No. 1997-5, § 4, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 7-11) 
Secs. 36-17-36-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PREPARATION, STORAGE AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE FROM MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES 

Sec. 36-31. - Preparation of garbage. 
    All garbage intended for collection shall be drained of all free liquid. The garbage shall be wrapped or placed in closed containers. 
(Ord. No, 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.1) 
Sec. 36-32. - Construction waste. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, occupant, or other person responsible for construction work to remove from the land within 30 days after the completion of such construction work, all surplus construction and all construction waste. Such materials shall be removed to approved disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.2) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6. 
Sec. 36-33. - Commercial refuse. 
    Every owner, occupant or person in possession of a commercial establishment shall be responsible for the storage, collection and disposal of such person's refuse by contracting with a person licensed by the city or by the use of an approved incinerator. Commercial establishments shall include establishments for group eating, such as clubs, restaurants and institutions, and establishments such as markets, commission houses, grocery stores, fruit and vegetable stands, bakeries, canneries, butcher shops and similar establishments. Garbage and food waste need not be wrapped but shall be placed or stored in covered or closed containers. No garbage or food waste of any description shall be placed or stored in any uncovered receptacle, nor shall garbage be burned in any container, receptacle or unapproved incinerator. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.3) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 
Sec. 36-34. - Contagious materials; disposition of medicines, poisons, etc. 
(a)	All materials which may be contagious, such as bandages, dressings, sputum cups, soiled tissues, etc., from hospitals, clinics, convalescent homes, nursing homes, doctors' offices or any other source, shall be burned in approved incinerators. Where incinerator approval cannot be granted, contagious materials shall be wrapped or otherwise disposed of in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)	Medicines or poisons from domestic sources, hospitals, clinics, convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar sources shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable law. Hazardous waste management, 1994 PA 451 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.) shall apply where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.4) 
Sec. 36-35. - Hazardous waste. 
    Hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the person who produced, used or possessed the hazardous waste, and shall not be disposed of within the city, or allowed to be collected, stored or transported within the city without the written approval of the city manager. Hazardous waste management, 1994 PA 451 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.) shall apply where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.5) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 18. 
Sec. 36-36. - Industrial waste. 
    All industrial waste shall be disposed of by the industrial, manufacturing or processing plant generating such waste under such methods and conditions as shall be approved by the applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.6) 
State Law reference- Hazardous waste management, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.471 et seq. 
Sec. 36-37. - Pathogenic and radioactive waste. 
    All pathogenic and radioactive waste shall be disposed of by the hospital or institution generating such waste in compliance with hazardous waste management, 1994 PA 451 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.7) 
Sec. 36-38. - Other refuse categories. 
    A person wishing to collect, dispose of or transport any category of refuse not provided for in this article or who wishes to dispose of any category of refuse in a manner not provided for in this article must receive approval from the city manager and then only in accordance with applicable law and the rules and regulations promulgated under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.8) 
Sec. 36-39. - Incinerators; garbage disposal units. 
(a)	Incinerators used for the disposal of refuse must comply with the standards of, and receive the approval of, all local, state and federal authorities. 
(b)	Special incinerator permits may be secured from the city inspections department and where applicable, from the Department of Natural Resources, Air Pollution Control Division, Lansing, Michigan. 
(c)	The use of garbage disposal units is permitted if such units comply with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.9) 
Sec. 36-40. - Containers; receptacles. 
    In the case of multiple residential and nonresidential premises, the owner and/or occupant of such premises shall provide containers or receptacles of sufficient number and size for the storage of refuse between collections. All containers and receptacles shall be kept clean and in good repair and free of offensive odors. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.10) 
Sec. 36-41. - Construction and demolition sites. 
    All construction and demolition sites shall require adequate numbers of receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building materials waste, scrap building materials, and other trash produced by those working on the site. All loose refuse shall be containerized by the end of each day, and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property other than the construction or demolition site shall be immediately removed by the contractor to an approved site. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.11) 
Sec. 36-42. - Loading and unloading areas. 
    All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with an adequate number of refuse containers or receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers or receptacles required for each such area shall be governed by the need to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary premises, as directed by the city manager or the city manager's authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.12) 
Sec. 36-43. - Parking lots. 
    All parking lots, including drive-in restaurants, taverns, shopping centers, supermarkets and grocery stores, shall have an adequate number of refuse containers or receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using parking areas to use the refuse receptacles or containers provided for the purposes intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.13) 
Sec. 36-44. - Picnics; gatherings. 
    Unless otherwise provided for by the city or the owner or possessor of the premises, it shall be required that any gathering of persons for amusement, picnics, reunions or similar activities which may produce refuse shall provide containers or means of collection, transportation and disposal of such refuse. Each person in attendance shall be deemed responsible for compliance with this law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-6.14) 
Secs. 36-45-36-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PREPARATION, STORAGE AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES 

Sec. 36-61. - Refuse and waste not subject to collection. 
    The city contractor shall not be required to collect commercial refuse, construction waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste or other refuse which is not generated from normal residential use of premises. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7) 
Sec. 36-62. - Preparation of refuse for disposal. 
    Garbage shall be wrapped or placed in closed containers. Rubbish shall be placed in a container so as to prevent scattering or littering, or may be cut, baled, tied, bundled or packaged so as not to exceed 50 pounds in weight or four feet in length. Residential refuse that is larger shall be stored in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.1) 
Sec. 36-63. - Storage. 
    The following provisions govern the storage of refuse of residential premises: 
(1)	Every owner, occupant or person in possession of residential premises in the city shall provide for their residential unit adequate numbers of proper containers or receptacles, as provided in this division. Containers must be located in such a manner as to prevent them from being overturned. Receptacles and containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and free from any substance which will attract or breed flies, mosquitoes or other insects. No container or receptacle shall have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure any person depositing refuse in or collecting the contents thereof. 
(2)	Each container shall be constructed of substantial plastic, metal or fiberglass, have a tightly fitting lid, be portable, watertight and vectorproof and verminproof and be provided with handles or bails. The mouth of a container shall have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. Wrapped garbage and other refuse may be deposited in plastic bags. 
(3)	Rubbish and yard waste which cannot be secured in a container may be secured in bundles or may be deposited in plastic bags. 
(4)	For bulky waste, containerization is not required. However, such bulky waste items shall be secured so as to prevent scattering. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use plastic bags for unprotected outdoor storage of refuse other than for leaves or other lawn debris, except that plastic bags containing all forms of refuse may be set out for scheduled collection in accordance with section 36-67. Storage of plastic bags containing refuse shall be considered "unprotected" when not used as liners for cans or galvanized metal or other approved construction or not placed in an enclosure affording reasonable protection from damage by animals. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.2) 
Sec. 36-64. - Types of collection. 
    Contractor shall provide, either curbside unlimited or backyard collection service as defined by this article to each residential premises one time per week. Curbside refers to that portion of right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city roadways, excluding approved alleys. Backyard refers to a sideyard or backyard or place both convenient for the city contractor and customer but in no case shall the city contractor be required to enter a garage or dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.3) 
Sec. 36-65. - Collection of refuse. 
    The city contractor shall collect refuse on the designated collection day except for holidays when refuse will be collected the following day, excluding holidays or Sundays, or unless published to the contrary. Collection shall be subject to weather conditions and other conditions beyond the control of the city contractor. Each owner and/or occupant of residential premises may place for pickup only refuse generated by each residential unit owned, leased or occupied by such owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.4) 
Sec. 36-66. - Location of containers, bags and bulky waste for collection; removal of doors from appliances. 
(a)	For backyard pickup collection, the producer may place containers or plastic bags in the back or side yards of a residential premises for collection once each week. 
(b)	For curbside unlimited collection, all containers, bags, bundles and bulky wastes shall be placed at curbside in a manner to prevent scattering. The city contractor may decline to collect any container, bag, bundle or bulky waste item not so placed. Doors from refrigerators and freezers must be removed before being stored for collection. Refrigerant removal and tagging shall be as set out in the solid waste collection and disposal contract. 
(c)	It shall be incumbent upon tenants, lessees, occupants, possessors or owners of premises to provide a safe and convenient entrance to and through the premises for the purpose of collecting garbage. Containers shall be placed where collectors may pick up and empty such containers without attack from animals. 
(d)	Garbage and refuse shall not be stored in close proximity to other personal effects which are not desired to be collected but shall be reasonably separated in order that the collectors can clearly distinguish between what is to be collected and what is not to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.5) 
Sec. 36-67. - Time for depositing refuse for collection. 
    No garbage or refuse shall be placed for collection earlier than 1:00 p.m. on the day prior to scheduled collection. After the collection of container contents has been made, empty containers shall be removed by the customer from the curb area no later than 9:00 a.m. on the day following collection. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-7.6) 
Secs. 36-68-36-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROHIBITED PRACTICES 

Sec. 36-86. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)	Accumulations or deposits of refuse remaining on premises are hereby declared to be a nuisance. No owner or occupant of a residential unit shall permit the accumulation of refuse upon the residential premises for a period of more than seven days. No person shall permit accumulations or deposits of refuse to remain upon premises occupied or owned by such person except as permitted by this article. 
(b)	The city shall first investigate the existence of the alleged nuisance to determine whether or not a nuisance, as defined in this section, exists and to further determine the person who has created or is committing or maintaining such nuisance. The city shall then give written notice to the person responsible for the creation, commission or maintenance of such nuisance, specifying in particular the nature thereof, the corrective action to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time limit for abatement of such nuisance, which shall be a reasonable time. Such notice shall be served by prepaid mail upon the last known owner and occupant, and if such person cannot be found, posted prominently and securely upon such premises for at least seven days before any abatement action is taken. If at the expiration of the time limit in such notice, the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of the nuisance has not complied with the requirements thereof, the city shall carry out the requirements of such notice. The cost of such abatement shall be a debt owed the city by the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of such nuisance, and if the nuisance is attributable to the use, occupancy or ownership of any land or premises within the city, the cost shall be charged against such premises in the same manner as a special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.1) 
Sec. 36-87. - Interference with containers and refuse. 
    No person, other than the owner or person lawfully in control of any premises or any authorized employee of a person licensed by the city for collection or removal of refuse, shall interfere in any manner with a container or plastic bags used for the accumulation or handling of rubbish or remove any such container from the location where it shall have been placed by the owner or person lawfully in control of the premises; nor shall any such person disturb or remove refuse placed for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.2) 
Sec. 36-88. - Unlawful dumping. 
    No person shall dump, deposit, place or scatter any refuse, ashes or yard wastes within the limits of the corporate limits of the city; except at an approved disposal area and in compliance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.3) 
Sec. 36-89. - Littering; scattering of refuse. 
(a)	No person shall cast, spill, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any other premises within the city. 
(b)	The owner and/or occupant of any premises shall clean up and remove any scattered refuse resulting from the breakage, opening or handling of any container, plastic bag or receptacle placed by such owner or occupant for collection from the premises after the refuse has been scattered. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.4) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq.; littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 36-90. - Vacant lots. 
    Any person owning or having a possessory interest in any lot or portion of land within the city, which is vacant or not constituting a premises, shall be responsible for the securing, collecting and disposal of refuse which may accumulate thereon by contracting with a person licensed in accord with the requirements of this article; or, by self-removal through proper collection and storage of refuse, transporting the refuse in a manner to prevent littering or any other nuisances, and depositing the refuse at an approved disposal area, in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.5) 
Sec. 36-91. - Open burning prohibited. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any premises without having obtained a permit or other proper authorization therefor from the public safety department. This restriction shall not apply to residential fireplaces or to the use of charcoal and similar materials for the purpose of food preparation. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.6) 
Sec. 36-92. - Scavenging. 
    After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge refuse left for disposal or rifle the refuse; and no person shall damage or destroy the bags or containers of refuse placed for storage. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-8.7) 
Secs. 36-93-36-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES, BILLING AND ASSESSMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL PREMISES 

Sec. 36-111. - Establishing residential rates. 
    The city council shall establish by resolution all rates and fees for residential premises refuse collection. Such rates shall be subject to revision by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.1) 
Sec. 36-112. - Responsibility for payment. 
(a)	In the case of residential premises containing more than one dwelling unit which is billed separately for water and sewer charges by the city treasurer, such fees shall be billed to the person who is the customer of the city treasurer. In the case of residential premises containing more than one dwelling unit served by a single water and sewer bill, so that occupants or tenants cannot be billed separately by the treasurer's office, such fees as are prescribed by this article shall be billed to the customer of the single utility bill who shall be liable for the service fee for such premises. Owners and/or occupants of residential premises who are not customers of the city treasurer shall be billed individually. 
(b)	Although the occupant or person in possession of the residential premises may make arrangements with the city for payment of rates for the required refuse service, the owner of record, as title holder as reflected in the records of the city assessor, shall be responsible for all refuse collection charges for service to the owner's residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.2) 
Sec. 36-113. - Continuing service; occupancy. 
    Residential premises refuse collection and appropriate charges for service shall continue, regardless of the customer's response to the billing procedure, so long as the residential unit is deemed occupied. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to advise the city or its contractor of any change in occupancy of the residential unit for purposes of service and billing. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.3) 
Sec. 36-114. - Exceptions to payment. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of any owner and/or occupant of residential premises to notify the city treasurer's office if such premises are being vacated between billing periods. It shall be the duty of any owner and/or occupant entering into any residential premises in the city to notify the city treasurer's office immediately to avoid delay in billing and collection procedures. 
(b)	No charge shall be levied on and no refuse collection shall be rendered to the owner and/or occupant of residential premises when such premises are temporarily vacated as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.4) 
Sec. 36-115. - Elderly handicapped discount. 
    All elderly and handicapped persons shall receive a discount for residential curbside unlimited or backyard unlimited service by the city contractor as determined by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.5) 
Sec. 36-116. - Billing of service fee. 
    The service fee for removal of refuse by the city contractor shall be established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.6) 
Sec. 36-117. - Billing procedures. 
    The following billing procedures shall be controlling as to residential premises refuse collection service: 
(1)	Statements shall be rendered bimonthly and be payable to the city at the office of the city treasurer and other locations as may be designated. 
(2)	The billing statement shall be payable on or before the due date shown on the statement. Payment date shall constitute the date upon which payment is received at the appropriate office. A late charge of ten percent of the unpaid bill shall be assessed on all bills paid more than 30 days after the due date. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.7) 
Sec. 36-118. - Charges to constitute lien on residential premises; assessment; payment. 
    The following provisions govern the attachment, collection and payment of liens constituted by charges for residential refuse collection: 
(1)	The charges for residential premises refuse collection shall constitute a lien on all such premises. 
(2)	In addition to the methods of collection and fees imposed in this article, the city treasurer shall, on June 30 and January 1, certify all unpaid charges for such service furnished to any premises which, as of these dates, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, to the city assessor who shall place the unpaid charges on a special assessment roll of the city, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as special assessments. 
(3)	If the city is properly notified that a tenant is responsible for residential refuse service charges, the city shall require a tenant deposit as established by resolution of the city council from time to time which shall be applied to the final bill upon termination of refuse service to such tenant. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-9.8) 
Sec. 36-119. - Additional services allowed; schedule for charges for additional services. 
    The city contractor shall be allowed to provide additional services to residential customers. Those additional services may include providing containers that are larger than 30 gallons and removal of yard waste that is greater than 50 pounds in weight or larger than four feet in length. Charges for any additional services not included in the services to be covered by the contract shall be a private transaction between the occupant of the residential premises and the city contractor. However, the city contractor shall be required to prepare written schedules of the charges for additional services and provide the schedule to the city clerk ten calendar days prior to instituting the charges provided for by the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1987-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 7-9.9) 
Secs. 36-120-36-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONTRACT; LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licensing, § 8-31 et seq. 

Sec. 36-136. - Contract; residential premises. 
    The city council may, either by advertising for bids or otherwise, enter into an exclusive contract with the mutual consent of a contractor, which shall be licensed, or extend the term thereof, which such person as the city council may deem best able to collect and dispose of residential refuse in the city in accordance with the best interests of the city and its citizens. The contractor shall be the only person allowed to provide residential refuse collection and disposal services within the city or within the boundaries prescribed by the limitations of this article. The contract documents shall contain provisions that the city contractor shall collect and dispose of refuse from all residential premises in the city in full compliance with this article and applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.1) 
Sec. 36-137. - Collection and disposal as business; license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation or disposal of refuse in the city without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. All persons, other than persons disposing of such persons' own refuse, shall obtain a license and be subject to the provisions of this division as though such persons were engaged in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of refuse in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.2) 
Sec. 36-138. - License application. 
    Application for a license under this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk's office upon forms furnished by such office and each applicant in such application shall state such applicant's residence and business address, the number, year and style of conveyances and vehicles to be used and owned by the applicant, the engine numbers of the motor vehicles and the places where such vehicles are parked overnight. Such application shall also contain an agreement by the applicant to obey, abide by and comply with all provisions of this article and all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the conduct of such business now in force or which may hereafter be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.3) 
Sec. 36-139. - Indemnification. 
    A licensee shall pay any judgment which may be obtained against the city, alone or jointly with such licensee, on account of any injury or damage to persons or to property by reason of any license granted under this division. The licensee shall intervene and defend any such suit or action upon written notice thereof given by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.5) 
Sec. 36-140. - Issuance of license. 
    If the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this division and all provisions of this Code applicable to the applicant and business for which the license is made, the city clerk shall issue the license provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.7) 
Sec. 36-141. - Fee, bonding and insurance requirements. 
    Every person who engages in the business of collection, transportation or disposal of refuse in the city shall meet fee requirements of this article and any bonding and insurance requirements imposed by the city manager. The license year shall be from May 1 to the succeeding April 30 and the fee shall be payable in advance. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.9) 
Sec. 36-142. - Compliance of licensee. 
    The licensee shall at all times comply with all requirements of this division and all rules and regulations issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.10) 
Sec. 36-143. - License denial, suspension and revocation. 
(a)	The city manager may deny, suspend or revoke any license granted under this division for cause after an informal hearing is requested in writing by the affected licensee. 
(b)	Any licensee aggrieved by a final decision of the city manager shall have the right to a hearing before the city council provided that a written request is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of notice of the city manager's decision. During the pendency of any such appeal, the final determination of the city manager shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.11) 
Sec. 36-144. - Vehicle maintenance. 
    Vehicles used in the transportation of refuse shall be kept clean and in good repair. The hauling body shall be watertight and completely enclosed on all sides. Vehicles shall be maintained and operated so that no portion of the vehicles' contents are spilled or allowed to remain on any public highway. All vehicles shall be cleaned at intervals frequent enough to maintain the unit in a sanitary condition and as free from disagreeable odor as possible to prevent nuisance or vermin attraction. A vehicle that fails to meet the requirements of this article shall be removed from service until it complies or its use shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.12) 
Sec. 36-145. - Vehicle operation; collection practices. 
    The following provisions govern the operation of vehicles used in the transportation of refuse: 
(1)	The openings of each vehicle shall be closed and doors or covers shall be secured by an adequate latch or restraining mechanism to keep them closed while transporting refuse. The driver and licensee shall see that the available cover is in the proper position. A special covering shall be used where conditions require control of odor, vermin, liquids, dust or smoke. 
(2)	Each vehicle shall be loaded in a manner to minimize the spilling of materials. It shall be the duty of contractors to transfer the contents of all containers for which they have contracted with a customer into vehicles licensed under this article, using care to avoid spilling any garbage, rubbish or waste. It shall be the duty of the operator or the operator's designated agent to clean up all garbage or rubbish spilled during collection and completely empty the containers and replace the lids thereon. 
(3)	Where spillage does occur from a refuse transporting unit, the material shall be picked up by the operator or a designated agent as soon as possible and the area suitably cleaned. 
(4)	Each vehicle, when transporting refuse, shall be emptied only in approved disposal areas. 
(5)	No vehicle shall be parked in a residential area longer than necessary to collect refuse unless it is parked not less than 500 feet from adjacent residences. The 500-foot requirement does not apply to vehicles parked at one's own residence if a nuisance is not created. Vehicles shall not be parked, stored or established at any location so as to cause a hazard to health or at any residentially zoned location so as to cause a nuisance. 
(6)	All licensees shall provide a telephone number to receive complaints through at least normal daytime business hours and provide someone to answer and resolve such complaints within 24 hours. 
(7)	Licensees collecting in early morning hours shall use every precaution to prevent unnecessary noise. 
(8)	The licensee shall not damage cans which are owned by customers or other property while making collections and shall return cans to their location or designated place. 
(9)	The licensee servicing residential customers shall provide each customer a minimum of one pickup per week in accordance with a pickup schedule approved by the city council. 
(10)	No refuse shall be collected from residential premises in the city except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.13) 
Sec. 36-146. - Vehicle requirements. 
    All vehicles of any licensee carrying refuse under this article shall have on both sides thereof a sign containing the name of the licensee, with the telephone number and the number of the vehicle, all of which shall be painted thereon in plain and unobscured letters not less than four inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 7-10.6) 
Secs. 36-147-36-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-171. - Defined. 
    For purposes of this article, a "resource recovery facility" is defined as set out in 1994 PA 451 (MCL 324.11505). 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-211) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-172. - Adoption of state laws by reference. 
    All statutes of the state relating to waste recycling and recovery are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference and no person shall violate any rule, law or regulation contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-214) 
Sec. 36-173. - Infestation by vermin and insects prohibited. 
    No person who is the owner, occupant or operator of a resource recovery facility shall permit any rats, other vermin, flies, mosquitoes or other disease-bearing or noisome insects of any kind to infest or breed in or upon the premises where such facility is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-216) 
Secs. 36-174-36-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 36-191. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a resource recovery facility operation without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-212) 
Sec. 36-192. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-213) 
Sec. 36-193. - Application; contents. 
    The application for a license required by this article shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, and by the president or executive officer if a corporation, showing the following: 
(1)	The full name, permanent residence and local address of the applicant; 
(2)	The name of the firm or corporation represented, if any, together with the address of the central or district office of such firm or corporation; 
(3)	The address or location of the places within the city at which the applicant proposes to engage in business; 
(4)	If a corporation, the state of incorporation; 
(5)	The length of time for which the license is desired; 
(6)	Whether the business has previously been licensed under this article and if so, the date of the last license, and whether this application is a renewal; 
(7)	The general description of the type of business to be operated; 
(8)	Such other information as to the identity or character of the persons managing the business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article and the protection of the public good; 
(9)	An affidavit of the applicant to the truth of the statements in the application; 
(10)	Such other information as the city may deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-218) 
Sec. 36-194. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of the application for a license required by this article, payment of the required fee and confirmation by the city clerk that the applicant is otherwise in compliance with city ordinances, the city clerk shall issue a license to operate as a resource recovery facility. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-219) 
Sec. 36-195. - Contents of license. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this article shall contain the following: 
(1)	The date of issuance; 
(2)	The nature of the business to be conducted under the license; 
(3)	The amount of fee paid; 
(4)	The expiration date; 
(5)	The place where the business may be conducted; and 
(6)	The name of the person authorized to conduct the business. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-220) 
Sec. 36-196. - Expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on June 30 and may be renewed at that time. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 3-4-1996; Code 1972, § 8-217) 
Chapter 38 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General power of city relative to special assessments, § 11.4 et seq. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Special assessments for public improvements, MCL 68.31 et seq.; higher interest rates permitted when there are obligations in anticipation of special assessments, MCL 133.9; public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - "Public improvement" defined. 
    The term "public improvement" as used in this chapter shall include the reconstruction in whole or in part of any structure or work as well as the original construction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Financing the cost of public improvements. 
    Construction of public improvements in the city in excess of the amount provided for in the annual appropriation resolution shall be paid for by one or more of the following methods or by such other method as may be permitted by state law: 
(1)	Federal or state participation individually or combined with any or all other methods of financing with the city. 
(2)	Special assessment including bond issue. 
(3)	Revenue bond issue. 
(4)	Advance financing by property owners. 
(5)	Tax increment bonds. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-2) 
Sec. 38-3. - City to construct public improvements. 
    The city shall construct and repair, or cause to be constructed and repaired, all public improvements deemed necessary for the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-3) 
Sec. 38-4. - Special assessment procedure. 
    The making and financing of public improvements in the city by the special assessment method shall be governed by this chapter and all proceedings therefor shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Determination of cost. 
    The cost of surveys, maps, drawings, plans and specifications for a public improvement and all expenses incident to the proceedings for the making of such improvement, the making and collecting of the special assessments therefor, and the issuance of bonds in anticipation of such special assessments, shall be deemed a part of the cost of such improvement. Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for the purpose of any public improvement, all or any part of the cost thereof may be included as a part of the cost of such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.1) 
Sec. 38-6. - Assessment may be based on estimated cost. 
    Any assessment may be made upon the basis of the estimated cost of the improvement if the actual cost has not been definitely determined. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.2) 
Sec. 38-7. - Petition generally. 
    A petition addressed to the city council may be filed with the city clerk requesting the city council to make a public improvement therein described and to assess the cost thereof, or such part of the cost as the city council shall decide, to benefited lands comprising a special assessment district to be determined by the city council. Any petition so filed may be in one or more parts and shall be signed by the owners of lands having at least 50 percent of the privately owned frontage abutting upon the proposed improvement. The city clerk shall not present to the city council any petition not so signed. A purchaser of a land contract shall be deemed the owner of such land. Such petition, in addition to the signatures of the owners, shall contain a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof. The genuineness of the signatures on each petition or part thereof shall be verified by the affidavit of the circulator. Any such petition shall not be mandatory upon the city council, but shall be advisory only, and in no event shall such petition be deemed jurisdictional. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.3) 
Sec. 38-8. - Authority of council to make public improvements; initial procedure. 
(a)	Irrespective of whether or not a petition shall have been filed in accordance with section 38-7, the city council may determine to make any public improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost thereof by special assessment upon property especially benefited thereby. The city council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to do so, stating therein the nature and the route or location of the proposed improvement and the lands and premises proposed to be included in the special assessment district and assessed therefor, and shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the city council, the following: 
(1)	A map or drawing showing the route or location of such proposed improvement and such proposed special assessment district. 
(2)	Plans and specifications for such proposed improvement. 
(3)	An estimate of the cost thereof. 
(b)	Upon the submission of the map or drawing, plans, specifications and cost estimate required by subsection (a) of this section, the city council shall, if it desires to proceed with the making of the improvement and the special assessments therefor, so declare by resolution. The city council by such resolution shall order the map or drawing, plans, specifications and cost estimate to be filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination, shall determine the necessity of such improvement, shall state the estimated cost thereof and what part or proportion, if less than all, shall be paid by special assessment and what part or proportion, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, shall specify the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and shall designate the district or lands and premises upon which the special assessments shall be levied. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.4) 
Sec. 38-9. - Hearing; notice. 
(a)	Before finally determining to make the improvement and the special assessments therefor, the city council shall hold a public hearing at a time and place to be fixed by the city council. At such hearing, the council shall hear and consider any objections which may be submitted by any interested person with respect to the making of such improvement and the assessing to the designated special assessment district of all or that part of the cost of the improvement which the city council has proposed to so assess. 
(b)	The city council shall cause notice of such hearing to be given by the city clerk not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing, by publication thereof at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, and by sending by first class U.S. Mail, postage thereon fully prepaid, a copy of such notice addressed to each person in whose name any land in the special assessment district is assessed on the last preceding tax assessment roll of the city, at such person's last known address, and also (if such address is different from the address of the premises in the district) a copy of such notice addressed to the "occupant" of each such premises which has an address served by U.S. Mail. Such notice shall specify the improvement, describe the district, state the estimated cost and the division thereof as between the district and the city at large, and give notice that the map or drawing, plans, specifications and cost estimate of the improvement are on file with the city clerk for public examination. Such notice shall also comply with the requirements of 1962 PA 162 (MCL 211.741 et seq.). 
(c)	At the time of such hearing, or any adjournment thereof, which may be without further notice, the city council shall hear and consider such objections as are submitted and shall record in the minutes of such meeting the names of all persons objecting, the properties owned by them, and the nature of such persons' objections. The city council, without further notice, may revise, correct, amend or change the map or drawing, plans, specifications, estimate and/or district; provided that no property shall be added to the district until notice is given as provided in subsection (b) of this section or by personal service upon the owners thereof and a hearing afforded such owners. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.5) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearing notice, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 38-10. - Adoption of resolution to make improvement; contents. 
    After the hearing provided for in section 38-9, if the city council desires to proceed with the making of the improvement and the special assessments therefor, it shall adopt a resolution approving the map or drawing, plans, specifications and cost estimate as originally presented or as revised, corrected, amended or changed, determining to make the improvement, designating the lands and premises constituting the special assessment district therefor, stating what part of the cost of the improvement, if any, shall be assumed and paid from the general funds of the city and directing that the remainder be assessed in accordance with benefits to the lands and premises constituting such special assessment district, specifying the number of installments in which the assessments shall be payable, and ordering the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll for all or that part of the cost to be so assessed; provided that if prior to the adoption of such resolution, written objections to the improvement have been filed by more than 50 percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for the improvement, or in the case of a paving or similar improvement, more than 50 percent of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, then such resolution shall not be adopted and such improvement shall not be made, except in case of sidewalk construction, without the affirmative vote of five members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.6) 
Sec. 38-11. - Special assessment roll-Preparation; filing; certificate. 
(a)	The city assessor shall thereupon, after the adoption of the resolution so directing, as provided for in section 38-10, prepare the special assessment roll in which shall be entered and described all the lands and premises to be assessed, with the names of the respective owners thereof, if known, and the amount to be assessed against each such parcel of land or premises. Such amount shall be such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands and premises in the special assessment district as the benefit to such parcel of land or premises bears to the total benefits to all the lands and premises in the special assessment district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assumed by the city at large, if any. 
(b)	When the city assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, the assessor shall file the assessment roll in the office of the city clerk, after first having affixed thereto a certificate stating that it was made pursuant to a resolution of the city council adopted on a specified date and that in making such assessment roll the city assessor has, according to the assessor's best judgment, conformed in all respects to such resolution, this chapter and the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.7) 
Sec. 38-12. - Same-Hearing; notice. 
(a)	Before confirming any assessment roll, the city council shall appoint a time and place when it will meet and review the assessment roll and hear any objections thereto. The city council shall cause notice of such hearing and of the filing of such assessment roll to be given by the city clerk not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing, by publication thereof at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, and by sending by first class U.S. Mail, postage thereon fully prepaid, a copy of such notice addressed to each person in whose name any land is assessed on such roll, at such person's last known address, and also (if such address is different from the address of the premises in the district) a copy of such notice addressed to the "occupant" of each such premises which has an address served by U.S. Mail. Such notice shall also comply with the requirements of 1962 PA 162 (MCL 211.741 et seq.). 
(b)	The city council shall meet at the appointed time and place and at such meeting or any adjourned meeting (which may be without further notice), shall review the special assessment roll and hear and consider any objections thereto, and shall record in the minutes of such meeting the names of all persons who objected to such roll, the properties owned by such person's, and the nature of such person's objections. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.8) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notice and hearing, MCL 211.741. 
Sec. 38-13. - Same-Confirmation. 
(a)	After the hearing on the special assessment roll, provided for in section 38-12, the city council by resolution may confirm the special assessment roll, or may correct it as to any matter appearing therein and confirm it as so corrected, or may refer it back to the city assessor for revision, or may annul it and direct a new roll to be made. No special assessment roll shall be confirmed except with the affirmative vote of at least five members of the city council. If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment roll, more than 50 percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed thereon, or in the case of paving or similar improvement, more than 50 percent of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed thereon, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the special assessment roll shall not be confirmed, except in case of sidewalk construction, without the affirmative vote of five members of the city council. When a special assessment roll shall be confirmed, the city clerk shall endorse thereon the date of confirmation. After such confirmation, the special assessment roll and all assessments therein shall be final and conclusive. 
(b)	No work shall be commenced on any public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment until after confirmation of the special assessment roll therefor, nor shall any confirmation, except for legal, engineering, administrative and other services required for the preparation of the map or drawing, plans, specifications and cost estimate for the improvement and the taking of necessary proceedings, including the making of the special assessment roll, for the levying of the special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.9) 
Sec. 38-14. - Payment of special assessments. 
(a)	Special assessments may be made payable in one or more installments, as determined by the city council, but such installments may not exceed five in the case of sidewalk improvements, 15 in the case of paving or similar street improvements, and 20 in the case of water, storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other improvements. The first installment shall be due at such time after confirmation as the city council shall provide and the several subsequent installments shall be due at intervals of 12 months from the due date of the first installment. The amount of each installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the special assessment roll until after confirmation. All installments not paid by a date to be fixed by the city council shall bear interest thereafter at the rate of one-half of one percent for each month or fraction thereof that the special assessment shall remain unpaid prior to their transfer to the city tax roll. Such accrued interest on all unpaid installments shall be due and payable annually on the due dates of the respective installments. Any one or more installments may be paid at any time before due together with accrued interest on such installments. 
(b)	If any installment is not paid when due, then the installment shall be deemed to be delinquent, and there shall be collected thereon, in addition to interest as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a collection fee of one percent and a penalty of two percent of such installment. In case any assessment or any installment thereof shall remain unpaid on the first Monday of May following the date when the installment became delinquent, the installment shall be reported unpaid by the city treasurer to the city council, and such delinquent assessments, together with all accrued interest, shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual city tax roll in a column headed "special assessments" with a penalty of four percent upon such total amount added thereto, and when so transferred and reassessed upon such tax roll, shall be collected in all respects as provided for the collection of city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.10) 
Sec. 38-15. - Lien of city upon property assessed. 
(a)	Special assessments and all interest, charges and penalties thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll and until paid, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for the state and county taxes and by the city Charter for city taxes. 
(b)	No judgment or decree, nor any act of the city council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the property assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the property, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.11) 
Sec. 38-16. - Collection of special assessments. 
(a)	When any special assessment shall be confirmed, the city council shall direct the assessment so made in the special assessment roll to be collected. The assessor shall thereupon deliver to the city treasurer such special assessment roll to which the assessor shall attach a warrant commanding the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in such roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite such person's name therein. Upon receiving such special assessment roll and warrant, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the several amounts assessed therein. 
(b)	In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment together with interest and penalties may be collected in an action in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city, which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.12) 
Sec. 38-17. - Procedure when lot or parcel of land is divided after confirmation of special assessment. 
    Should any lot or parcel of land be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and before the collection thereof, the city council may require the city assessor to apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several parts of such lot or parcel of land. The report of such apportionment when confirmed shall be conclusive upon all parties, provided that before such confirmation, notice of hearing shall be given to all the interested parties by personal service or by publication and mailing as provided in case of an original assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.13) 
Sec. 38-18. - When additional pro rata assessments may be made. 
    Additional pro rata assessments may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incidental thereto, or insufficient to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll; provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed ten percent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the city council is held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.14) 
Sec. 38-19. - Power of council to make new assessment where original declared invalid or illegal. 
    Whenever any special assessment roll shall, in the opinion of the city council, be invalid by reason or irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city council shall, whether the improvement shall have been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment shall have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment except as to corrections in the proceedings required to make the assessment legal. Whenever any sum or part thereof, levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment. If the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.15) 
Sec. 38-20. - Special assessment account. 
    Moneys raised by special assessments for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and for expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments. The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expense incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions or any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.16) 
Sec. 38-21. - Procedure when expense incurred by city relative to single premises. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of the Charter or any ordinance of the city or law of the state, and is not of that class required to be prorated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material and service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city treasurer, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. If the city treasurer finds that such amount is not otherwise collectible, the city treasurer shall report such information to the city council which may direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges reported to it, together with a penalty of ten percent. Such roll shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall present the assessment roll to the city council. Thereafter, the same proceedings shall be followed in respect to such special assessment roll as are provided in section 38-11 and subsequent sections of this chapter and all the provisions of such sections with reference to special assessments generally shall apply to special assessments under this section, insofar as such provisions may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.17) 
Sec. 38-22. - No lands exempted from assessment; exception. 
    No lands in a special assessment district, which are benefited by the improvement therein, shall be exempt from assessment, but if the lands are owned by a public or other corporation exempt by law from the payment of special assessments, then the special assessments against such lands, or the installments thereof, may be paid by the city as the assessments become due or may be paid in advance of the assessments' due dates or may be paid by the exempt unit by special agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-4.18) 
Sec. 38-23. - Advance financing by property owners. 
    After determining the estimated cost and the proportion thereof to be defrayed by the city at large, the city council may order any public improvement, which is not included in the current year's construction program, to be made or constructed, in any case when the improvement has been petitioned for by all of the owners of property within the district to be affected or which shall constitute a special assessment district for the payment of the cost of such improvement; provided that, prior to the commencement of work on the improvement petitioned for, 100 percent of the total estimated cost and expense of such improvement according to the estimates of the cost thereof and the special assessment roll based thereon shall have been deposited with the city treasurer by the property owners within the district to be affected or constituting such special assessment district. In all cases where the total cost of any improvement has been deposited with the city treasurer prior to commencement of work thereon, the assessment roll and each assessment appearing thereon shall immediately, upon confirmation of such roll, be marked paid. In doing any work authorized and financed under the provisions of this section, the city engineer shall keep an accurate record of the cost and expense thereof and, upon completion of the work, shall report such cost and expense to the city council which shall, thereupon, authorize and direct that the amount, if any, of such money so deposited with the city treasurer which is in excess of the actual cost and expense of the improvement made shall be repaid by the city treasurer to those persons making such deposit, pro rata according to the several amounts deposited by such persons. The city council shall report to the city treasurer the city's share, if any, of the cost and expense of such improvements, as determined by the council under the provisions of chapter 40, article II, and shall direct that repayment of such city's share shall be made in one lump sum, or in five equal annual installments to the person making such deposits. Such lump sum payments or the first of such installments shall be paid on or before the 90th day of the fiscal year following the completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-5) 
Sec. 38-24. - Sidewalks. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings for the construction of sidewalks and licensing of sidewalk contractors shall be initiated and continued in the manner set forth in and subject to the provisions of chapter 40, articles II and III. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-6) 
Sec. 38-25. - Streets-Construction proceedings. 
    Proceedings for the construction of streets, courts or alleys and the financing thereof within the city may be commenced by resolution of the city council or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7) 
Sec. 38-26. - Same-Costs. 
    The city council may cause a street, court or alley to be improved and the cost thereof financed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.1) 
Sec. 38-27. - Same-"Cost" defined. 
    The term "cost," when referring to the cost of any improvement, shall include the cost of surveys, plans, land, rights-of-way, preparation of subgrade, excavation, fine grading, outlawn, base, pavement, landscaping, necessary replacement of repair of existing improvements, headers, catchbasins, water service replacement, general engineering expense, accounting, financing, printing, advertising, legal, and all other costs incident to the making of such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-28. - Same-Recessed parking; cost of construction. 
    In case of recess parking construction, the adjacent property owners may be required 100 percent of the cost of the recessed construction. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.3) 
Sec. 38-29. - Same-Cost assessment. 
    In all street construction, the city shall pay from its proper funds at least one-third of the entire cost of street construction and the benefiting property owner shall pay not more than two-thirds of the entire cost including the cost of driveway approaches; provided, however, that benefiting property owners shall pay and shall be assessed for 100 percent of the cost of construction for curbs and gutters, except for the owners of corner lots who shall be assessed in accordance with section 38-31. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.4) 
Sec. 38-30. - Same-Contract for construction of street on tentative plat. 
    A contract for the construction of a street, where such street is a part of the tentative plat not yet put on public record, shall be performed in accordance with chapter 26, article III. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.5) 
Sec. 38-31. - Same-City to pay 50 percent of the cost of the special assessment levied against the longer of two sides of any platted corner lot. 
    The city shall pay 50 percent of the cost of the special assessment levied against the longer of the two sides of any platted corner lot for the payment of public improvements authorized by this Code. The property owners shall pay the balance of the cost of the special assessment levied against any platted corner lot. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-7.6) 
Sec. 38-32. - Sewers-Construction proceedings. 
    Proceedings for the construction of sewers and the financing thereof may be commenced by resolution of the city council or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-8) 
Sec. 38-33. - Same-Authority of council. 
    The city council may cause a sewer or an extension of a sewer to be laid and the cost thereof to be financed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-8.1) 
Sec. 38-34. - Same-Cost assessment. 
    In all sewer construction, the city shall pay from its proper funds 100 percent of the cost of any sewer in any street, alley or easement exceeding the cost of the eight-inch sewer, in the case of a sanitary sewer, and a 12-inch sewer, in the case of a storm sewer. In the case of trunk sewers, the city may create a trunk sewer assessment district and assess two-thirds of the cost of all such sewers, exceeding the cost of an eight-inch sewer, in the case of a sanitary sewer, and a 12-inch sewer, in the case of a storm sewer, against the property benefited by the trunk sewer. The city shall pay from its proper funds the balance of the cost thereof, except that, with respect to the assessment to be borne by any exempt property, the city shall pay the entire cost. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-8.2) 
Sec. 38-35. - Driveway culverts. 
(a)	All pipe culverts, where deemed necessary for the public health and safety, shall be laid, constructed and repaired by the city, excepting as may be provided for in this chapter. Culverts may be ordered under private driveway approaches, where deemed necessary, by resolution of the city council. 
(b)	All pipe culverts for private driveway approaches laid, constructed and repaired shall be of corrugated iron pipe, cast iron pipe, or concrete culvert pipe. 
(c)	The cost of a 12-inch pipe and materials necessary to install the culvert shall be paid for by the owner. If a size larger than 12 inches is required, the city shall pay the difference in cost between the larger size required and the cost of a 12-inch culvert. The city shall pay the cost of all labor required to install culverts. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-9) 
Sec. 38-36. - Water mains. 
    In all water main construction, the city shall pay from its proper funds 100 percent of the cost of any water main in any street, alley or easement exceeding the cost of a six-inch main. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-10) 
Sec. 38-37. - Off-street parking lots. 
    Off-street parking lots, deemed by the city council to be necessary to the public convenience and safety, may be established, constructed and maintained by the city. If the city council shall determine to defray the cost of any such parking lot by special assessments upon the property benefited by the establishment and maintenance of any such parking lot, the procedures therefor shall be those established by this chapter. In determining the special assessment district benefited by the establishment and maintenance of any off-street parking lot, such district shall not be limited to properties abutting upon or adjacent to such parking lot, but may include properties within an area which, in the opinion of the city council, may derive benefit from the establishment and maintenance of such parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-11) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 46-31 et seq. 
Sec. 38-38. - Separability of invalid provisions. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1991-2; Code 1972, § 13-12) 
Chapter 40 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General power to use, regulate and improve streets and other public ways, § 2.1(a). 
Cross reference- Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(9); any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(5); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; demolition and moving of buildings, § 6-131 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 10; community development, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; design layout standards for streets in subdivisions, § 26-112; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; offenses against property, § 30-91 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 32; special assessments and public improvements, ch. 38; telecommunications, ch. 44; traffic and vehicles, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50; signs, § 50-501 et seq. 
State Law reference- City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK REPAIRS 

Sec. 40-31. - "Sidewalk repair" defined. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "sidewalk repair" shall mean any reconstruction work of existing concrete sidewalks including replacement, relaying, patching, filling to grade or grading that may be required to bring the existing sidewalk to a condition satisfactory for public use. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-32. - Permit required for construction and repair. 
    No sidewalk shall be constructed or repaired without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-18) 
Sec. 40-33. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 14-19) 
Sec. 40-34. - Property owner may contract work or do work. 
    The owner of property adjacent to a proposed sidewalk may contract with a licensed sidewalk builder to have the sidewalk constructed, or the owner of property adjacent to a proposed sidewalk may construct the sidewalk upon obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-20) 
Sec. 40-35. - Construction and repairs to conform to approved grades and specifications. 
    All sidewalks constructed or repaired shall be of concrete and in strict conformity with the grades and specifications adopted or approved by the city engineer and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-21) 
Sec. 40-36. - City engineer to establish line and grade; record. 
    Wherever sidewalks are ordered constructed on any street or any part thereof, or where a permit has been issued for the construction of a sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to indicate the sidewalk line and grade by setting stakes. A record of the line and grade shall be kept in the city engineer's office. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-22) 
Sec. 40-37. - Acceptance of sidewalks in new subdivisions; prerequisites. 
    The city may accept a sidewalk as part of a public right-of-way where a sidewalk is constructed in a street shown on a tentative plat given tentative approval by the city, but not at that time put on public record if the following conditions are met: 
(1)	A special permit is given by the city; 
(2)	The city is paid for the services of a city inspector to inspect the sidewalk or to supervise the construction thereof insofar as is necessary to ensure that such construction is in accordance with plans and specifications adopted or approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-23) 
Sec. 40-38. - Rebate of construction costs upon acceptance by city. 
    When the construction of a sidewalk has been completed and has been inspected and approved by the city engineer, the owner of the property shall be entitled to receive from the city a rebate of $0.05 per square foot for any sidewalk accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-24) 
Sec. 40-39. - Initiation of sidewalk repairs. 
    The repair of any sidewalk may be initiated by a resolution adopted by the city council ordering the work done or by a written request of the owner of the property affected. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-25) 
Sec. 40-40. - Repairs to be made by city. 
    All sidewalk repairs shall be made by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-26) 
Sec. 40-41. - Sidewalk repairs to be set up prior to adoption of annual budget; inclusion of costs in budget. 
    Any program of sidewalk repair shall be set up in advance of the adoption of the annual city budget and the city's share of the cost shall be included in the budget. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-27) 
Sec. 40-42. - Manner of billing and assessing for sidewalk construction. 
    The cost of constructing sidewalks which are ordered by resolution of the city council or upon the written request of the property owner shall be billed and assessed as follows: 
(1)	The total estimated cost and expense of the work, as determined by the city council, shall be charged to the owner whose property abuts the sidewalk. 
(2)	If the owner fails to pay the cost and expense of the sidewalk construction within 30 days from the date of invoice, the city council shall cause the amount unpaid, together with a penalty of six percent to be reported to the city assessor, to be levied by the city assessor as a special tax or assessment upon the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon the sidewalk. 
(3)	The special assessment levied pursuant to subsection (2) of this section shall be subject to review, after proper notice is given as in all other cases of special assessments, and such tax, when confirmed, shall be a lien upon such lot or premises, the same as other special assessments, and shall be spread, together with such penalty upon the tax roll as a special assessment upon such lot or premises. 
(4)	Special assessments made pursuant to this section shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes; or the city may collect such amount, together with the penalty from the owner of such premises in an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)	Whenever a majority of the members of the city council present and voting shall determine by resolution that the public necessity and welfare require a variation of this section, it may, in the same resolution, determine that the city shall bear up to 100 percent of the cost of such construction, and the cost to the abutting property owners shall abate accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1968-1, § 1; Code 1972, § 14-28) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearing notice, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 40-43. - Manner of billing and assessing for sidewalk repairs. 
    The cost of repairing sidewalks which are ordered by resolution of the city council or upon written request of the property owner shall be billed and assessed as follows: 
(1)	The property owner's share of the costs shall be charged to the property owner. If the owner fails to pay the costs within 30 days from the date of the invoice, the city council shall cause the amount unpaid, together with a penalty of ten percent to be reported to the city assessor, to be levied by the city assessor as a special tax or assessment upon the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalk, which special assessment shall be subject to review, after proper notice is given as in all other cases of special taxes or assessments, and when confirmed, shall be a lien upon such lot or premises, the same as other special assessments. 
(2)	Special taxes and assessments made pursuant to this section shall be spread, together with any penalty, upon the tax roll as a special assessment upon such lot or premises, and the special taxes and assessments shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes or the city may collect such amount, together with the penalty as provided in subsection (1) of this section, from the owner of such premises in an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-29) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearing notice, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Secs. 40-44-40-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 40-71. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of constructing sidewalks in the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-40) 
Sec. 40-72. - Application for license; contents. 
    Application for a license required by this article shall be made to the city clerk and shall contain the name and place of business of the applicant, shall state that the applicant is qualified by experience to engage in the work of constructing sidewalks and is willing to be governed in all respects by the provisions of this Code and the resolution of the city council relating to sidewalk construction. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-41) 
Sec. 40-73. - License fee. 
    The fee for a license required by this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Ord. No. 1981-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 14-42) 
Sec. 40-74. - Insurance required; terms of policy. 
    Each licensed sidewalk contractor shall maintain, during the term of the license, such public liability and property damage insurance as shall protect the licensed sidewalk contractor and the city from claims for damage for personal injury, including wrongful death, as well as from claims for property damage which may arise from the contractor's operations as a sidewalk contractor within the city. The insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. The amounts of the insurance shall be as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. Certificates of public liability and property damage insurance shall be filed with the city clerk before the required license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-43) 
Sec. 40-75. - Duty to notify city clerk of address and name changes. 
    Each person licensed pursuant to this article shall notify the city clerk of any change in the licensed person's business address, residence address and name under which the business is transacted. 
(Ord. No. 1953-19; Code 1972, § 14-44) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Budget procedure, general finance and taxation, § 7.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(2); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-141 et seq.; businesses, ch. 8. 
State Law reference- General property tax law, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Administration fee for collection of property taxes. 
    Whenever the city shall act as collecting agent for property taxes, there shall be added to such taxes, assessments and charges a property tax administration fee of not more than one percent of the total tax bill per parcel, which amount shall be calculated to the nearest $0.01 if a fraction shall result. A property tax administration fee is defined as a fee to offset costs incurred by the city in assessing property value-at one-half percent on the summer and one-half percent on the winter rolls, in collecting the property tax levies, and in review and appeal processes. Such administration fee shall not inure to the benefit of the city treasurer but shall be the property of the city and shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1969-4, § 4; Code 1972, § 2-41; Ord. No. 4-2005, § 1, 6-20-2005) 
Sec. 42-2. - Penalties for late payment of city taxes. 
    To all city taxes, and to all special assessments and charges appearing on the tax rolls of the city, which are paid during the months of September, October, November and December next following the first date on which such taxes, special assessments, and charges are due for payment, there shall also be added a penalty in the amount of one percent on all such payments made in the month of September, two percent in the month of October, three percent in the month of November, and four percent in the months of December, January and February. 
(Ord. No. 1953-12, § 3; Code 1972, § 2-42) 
Sec. 42-3. - Powers and duties of city treasurer. 
    In the collection of city taxes, the city treasurer shall do and perform all acts required by the city Charter for the collection of taxes and shall have and exercise all the powers granted by state law and the city Charter for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1953-12, § 4; Code 1972, § 2-43) 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Sec. 42-4. - Notice to property owners when taxes are delinquent; contents of notice. 
    During the first week of February of each year, the city treasurer shall give notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city that taxes, special assessments and charges are due and of the fact that all such taxes, assessments and charges which are not paid during the month of February will be returned to the county treasurer for collection under the general laws of the state. Such notice shall further advise that as to each delinquent taxpayer that the county treasurer will add a collection fee to the total of the several taxes, assessments and charges returned to the treasurer plus interest and that, if not paid according to the law, the property upon which such taxes are levied will be sold at tax sale. 
(Ord. No. 1953-12, § 5; Ord. No. 1993-4, § 1; Code 1972, § 2-44) 
Secs. 42-5-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INCOME TAX 

Sec. 42-31. - Adoption of uniform ordinance. 
    The "Uniform City Income Tax Ordinance," as set forth in 1964 PA 284 (MCL 141.501 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety by the city as though fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-4, § 1, 8-4-1997; Code 1972, § 151/2-1) 
Sec. 42-32. - Alternate provisions. 
    In accordance with the authority vested in the city pursuant to 1969 PA 42 (MCL 141.701 et seq.), sections 60, 61 and 87 of such act (MCL 141.760, 141.761, 141.787), are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety by the city as if fully set forth in this section. Such sections shall be applicable and in force in place of and in lieu of sections 60, 61 and 87 of chapter 2 of 1964 PA 284 (MCL 141.501 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1997-4, § 2, 8-4-1997; Code 1972, § 151/2-2) 
Sec. 42-33. - Amendments to statutes. 
    Sections 31 and 62 of 1964 PA 284 (MCL 141.631, 141.662) are to be amended as follows: 
(1)	141.631 Personal exemptions; limitations. 
    Sec. 31.  (1) For tax years beginning 2009, an individual tax payer, in computing his or her taxable income, is allowed a deduction of $750.00 for each personal and dependency exemption under the rules for determining exemptions and dependents as provided by the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The taxpayer may claim his or her spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if the taxpayer and the spouse are both subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, the number of exemptions claimed by each of them, when added together, shall not exceed the total number of exemptions allowed under this chapter. 
    (2) For tax years beginning after 1988, an additional exemption is allowed under subsection (1) for a taxpayer who is 65 years of age or older, or who is blind as defined in section 504 of the Income Tax Act of 1967, 1967 PA 281 (MCL 206.504), or if the taxpayer is both 65 years of age or older and blind, two additional exemptions are allowed under subsection (1). For tax years beginning after 1988, an additional exemption is allowed under subsection (1) for a taxpayer who is a paraplegic, quadriplegic, hemiplegic or a totally and permanently disabled person, as defined in section 216 of title II of the Social Security Act, 42 USC 416, or a taxpayer who is a deaf person, as defined in section 2 of the Deaf Persons' Interpreters Act, 1982 PA 204 (MCL 393.502). If the taxpayer qualifies for an additional exemption under more than one of the following, an additional exemption is allowed for each of the following for which the taxpayer qualifies: 
(a)	A taxpayer who is a paraplegic, quadriplegic or hemiplegic, or who is a totally or permanently disabled person, as defined in section 216 of title II of the Social Security Act, 42 USC 416. 
(b)	A taxpayer who is blind, as defined in section 504 of the Income Tax Act of 1967, 1967 PA 281 (MCL 206.504). 
(c)	A taxpayer who is a deaf person, as defined in section 2 of the Deaf Persons' Interpreters Act, 1982 PA 204 (MCL 393.502). 
(d)	A taxpayer who is 65 years of age or older. 
    (3) For tax years beginning 2009, an exemption in the amount of $750.00 is allowed to a person with respect to whom a deduction under Section 151 of the Internal Revenue Code is allowable to another federal taxpayer during the tax year and who is, therefore, not considered to have a federal personal exemption under subsection (1). 
(2)	141.662 Declaration of estimated tax not withheld; filing. 
    Sec. 62.  (1) A person who anticipates taxable income from which the city income tax will not be withheld shall file a declaration of estimated tax on a form furnished by or obtainable on request from the city. A calendar year taxpayer shall file a declaration on or before April 30. A taxpayer on a fiscal-year basis or other accounting period shall file a declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year or other accounting period. 
    (2) If a taxpayer has not previously been required to file, the declaration shall be filed on or before the first date for making a quarterly payment that occurs after the taxpayer becomes subject to the requirement to file a declaration. A taxpayer shall file a declaration for the same calendar year, fiscal year or other accounting period that has been accepted by the Federal Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax purposes. A declaration by an individual or unincorporated entity is not required if the total estimated tax, less any credits applicable to the tax, does not exceed $100.00. A declaration by a corporation if the total estimated tax, less any credits applicable to the tax, does not exceed $250.00. A declaration by or on behalf of an estate or trust is not required. 
(Ord. No. 1998-10, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-1, § 2(A), (B); Code 1972, § 151/2-3; Ord. No. 2009-2, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-2009) 
Chapter 44 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 48; zoning, ch. 50; franchises, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION 

Sec. 44-31. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, the term "community antenna television" means the business of transmission, distribution and sale of television signals by means of cable to persons located inside the city. 
(Ord. No. 1965-1, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 44-32. - Expression of legislative intent. 
    It is the legislative intent, in enacting this article, that all provisions of this article be liberally construed to lessen congestion on the public streets and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1965-1, § 5; Code 1972, § 8-97) 
Sec. 44-33. - Franchise from city required. 
(a)	No person shall install, maintain, operate or furnish the services of a community antenna television system in the city without first having obtained a franchise from the city authorizing the establishment of such business. 
(b)	No person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets, alleys, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, bridges or other public places in the city for the purpose of installing, operating or furnishing community antenna television service to subscribers without first having obtained a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1965-1, §§ 2, 3; Code 1972, § 8-98) 
Secs. 44-34-44-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR BASIC CABLE T.V. RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 44-61. - Definitions. 
(a)	Generally . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 79.923. 
    Basic cable service means "basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the act and the FCC Rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC Rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
(b)	Other words and phrases. All other words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in the act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 44-62. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this article is to (i) adopt regulations consistent with the act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation, and (ii) prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-100) 
Sec. 44-63. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-101) 
Sec. 44-64. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)	A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)	In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)	A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-102) 
Sec. 44-65. - Proprietary information. 
(a)	If this article, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to subsection 44-64(b), or any request for information pursuant to such subsection requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, (i) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (ii) the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)	Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)	The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 04.59. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-103) 
Sec. 44-66. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to subsection 44-64(a), the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: (i) the filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and (ii) interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk no later than seven days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-104) 
Sec. 44-67. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under subsection 44-64(a) unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-105) 
Sec. 44-68. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 44-67 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 44-64. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: (i) the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be held, (ii) interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates, and (iii) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the city clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-106) 
Sec. 44-69. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 44-70. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the city council acts under section 44-70. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-107) 
Sec. 44-70. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 44-67 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 44-67 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-108) 
Sec. 44-71. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, or by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-109) 
Sec. 44-72. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to sections 44-70 or 44-71 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: (i) summarize the written decision, and (ii) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the city clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-110) 
Sec. 44-73. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 44-64, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the act and the FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-111) 
Sec. 44-74. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-112) 
Sec. 44-75. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city council may hold additional public hearing upon such reasonable notice as the city council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-113) 
Sec. 44-76. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the act, the FCC Rules, and the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the act, the FCC Rules, and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-113.1) 
Sec. 44-77. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's consent agreement with the city) for failure to comply with the act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this article. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article any requirements of this article, or any rules and regulations promulgated under this article shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-113.2) 
Sec. 44-78. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this article and the provisions of any prior ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1; Code 1972, § 8-113.4) 
Secs. 44-79-44-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - METROPOLITAN EXTENSION TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY OVERSIGHT 

Sec. 44-91. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-92. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-93. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Springfield. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Springfield or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City Manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this ordinance only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)	Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)	A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-94. - Permit required. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make three copies of the application and distribute a copy to the building, public works, and public safety departments. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the act. 
(c)	Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)	Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the act. 
(f)	Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)	Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-95. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)	Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 44-94(b) above for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the act. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-96. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit from the public works department, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-97. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-98. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format as the MPSC may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-99. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-100. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 44-94(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-101. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-102. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the act, if Section 8 of the act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 44-101 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-103. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant Section 10(4) of the act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-104. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-105. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-106. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-107. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in subsection 44-94(c) above; 
(2)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 44-94(f) of this article; 
(3)	Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application fee, in accordance with subsection 44-94(g) of this article; 
(4)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 44-95(a) of this article; 
(5)	Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 44-95(a) of this article; 
(6)	Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 44-95(a) of this article; 
(7)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 44-95(b) of this article; 
(8)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 44-95(c) of this article; 
(9)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 44-95(d) of this article; 
(10)	Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 44-96 of this article; 
(11)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 44-101 above; 
(12)	Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 44-104 above; and 
(13)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 44-105 above. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-108. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-109. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 44-110. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to a payment of a civil fine of $250 for the first offense and $500 for a second or any subsequent offense, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction as provided in section 1-58. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this ordinance or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to acquire, construct and operate parking facilities, § 2.1(d). 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution prescribing specific parking restrictions, no parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones, specific stop or yield intersections and truck routes, § 1-9(15); inoperable and dismantled motor vehicles, § 18-31 et seq.; offenses, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; P-1 vehicular parking districts, § 50-306 et seq. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 46-1a. - Super drunk driving. 
    Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL § 257.625 is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 46-2. - Uniform Traffic Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages promulgated by the commissioner of state police, and published in accordance with 1956 PA 62 (MCL 257.951 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1969-1; Ord. No. 1979-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1983-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 9-17) 
Sec. 46-3. - Motor Carrier Act adopted. 
    Pursuant to MCLA 42.23, the Motor Carrier Act (MCLA 475.1 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4, 8-15-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-4, adopted August 4, 2011, in effect repealed the former § 46-3, and enacted a new § 46-3 as set out herein. The former 46-3 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 46-4. - Resolution of conflicts. 
(a)	In the event of a conflict between the Michigan Vehicle Code adopted by section 46-1, the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 46-2, and the Motor Carrier Act adopted by section 46-3, the Michigan Vehicle Code shall prevail. 
(b)	In the event of a conflict between the Michigan Vehicle Code adopted in section 46-1 and this Code or any ordinance, the Michigan Vehicle Code shall prevail. 
(c)	In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 46-2 and this Code or any ordinance, this Code or the ordinance shall prevail. 
(d)	In the event of a conflict between the Motor Carrier Act adopted by section 46-3 and this Code or any ordinance, this Code or the ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 46-5. - Publication. 
    Section 46-3 and 46- 4 shall be effective after legal publication and in accordance with the provisions of the Act governing same. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4, 8-15-2011) 
Secs. 46-6-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Off-street parking, § 38-37; off-street parking requirements, § 50-406; off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance, § 50-407; off-street loading and unloading, § 50-408. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a); stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.672 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Prohibited parking of heavy trucks and machinery. 
(a)	When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park any semitrailer, trailer, gravel truck, dump truck, cement mixer, or other vehicle of similar type, upon any of the streets or parts of streets on which such signs have been posted. Such signs shall read substantially as follows: 
"Semis, heavy trucks, and heavy machinery 
prohibited, except local deliveries." 
(b)	This section shall not be construed to prohibit delivery of goods, wares and merchandise to households or commercial and industrial establishments not having access to unposted streets or highways. 
(c)	The violation of this section is a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1969-1; Ord. No. 1974-5, § 1; Ord. No. 1979-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-7, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1; Code 1972, § 9-21(5.61)) 
Sec. 46-32. - Overnight parking of tractor-trailers or trailers on streets and public places. 
    No person shall park any tractor-trailer or trailer overnight on any street, alley, highway or other public place in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1965-2; Code 1972, § 16-21) 
Sec. 46-33. - Parking in front yards. 
(a)	Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term "front yard" means that area measured by the full width of the front lot line to a depth measured from such lot line to the first supporting member of a structure. In the case of corner lots, the front yard shall be the area measured by the lot lines on each street to a depth measured from such lot lines to the first supporting member of the structure. 
(b)	Prohibited. For the purposes of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, for the enhancement of the visual environment of the city and for the purpose of preserving residential neighborhoods, the parking, storage or leaving unattended of any motor vehicle, truck, off-road or all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, tractor, boat, house trailer, portable living quarters or similar property in any required front yard in any residential district in the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
(c)	Exceptions. 
(1)	Waiver. Exceptions to subsection (b) of this section may be obtained by filing a petition for waiver with the zoning board of appeals. Each petition shall contain the following: 
a.	The street address and legal description of the property. 
b.	The signature of the owner or owners. 
c.	The purpose for which the exception is being requested. 
d.	A sketch of the entire lot, including street access, locating all buildings thereon and designating the side yard and front yard setback, with a proposed parking area located on the sketch, which shall be drawn to scale. 
e.	Letters from adjoining neighbors indicating such neighbors' approval or opposition to such petition. 
(2)	Factors regarding waiver. In making its determination concerning whether or not to grant the request for a waiver, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the zoning board of appeals shall consider the following factors: 
a.	Whether or not it is compatible with existing surrounding areas. 
b.	Whether or not the proposed parking area will have an adverse affect on open front space requirements. 
c.	Whether or not there is another area available on the lot other than the front setback area for parking use. 
(3)	Driveways. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking of motor vehicles upon driveways. A driveway for this purpose shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar material and shall lead from an authorized curb cut to a garage, carport or required parking space. 
(4)	Turnabouts. A surfaced turnabout area, a circular driveway from an authorized curb cut to another authorized curb cut and auxiliary parking spaces above those required by ordinance shall be permitted under the following conditions: 
a.	Such areas and driveways shall not occupy in excess of 50 percent of the area of the front yard. 
b.	Such areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, brick or four-inch solid concrete blocks, where the brick or solid concrete block surface is to be used, sod and topsoil shall be removed, and a sand subbase shall be provided. 
(d)	Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be a civil infraction offense punished as prescribed in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Ord. No. 1969-1; Ord. No. 1974-5, § 1; Ord. No. 1979-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-7, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1; Code 1972, § 9-20(8.25); Ord. No. 2011-6, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 46-34. - All night parking prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall park a vehicle on either side of any street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day wherever signs are erected prohibiting such parking. 
(b)	Violation of this section is a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1969-1; Ord. No. 1974-5, § 1; Ord. No. 1979-3, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-7, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1; Code 1972, § 9-20(8.26)) 
Secs. 46-35-46-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish, MCL 600.8395. 

Sec. 46-51. - Established; city manager to supervise. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by 1968 PA 154 (MCL 600.8395), a parking violations bureau is hereby established for the purposes of accepting civil infraction admissions in parking violations cases and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs prescribed for such violations. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-1, § 1, 4-19-1993; Code 1972, § 9-46) 
Sec. 46-52. - Duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the city council, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-1, § 1, 4-19-1993; Code 1972, § 9-47) 
Sec. 46-53. - Jurisdiction. 
    The parking violations bureau shall have the authority to accept pleas of responsible or responsible with explanation in parking violation cases and to collect and retain fines and costs in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-1, § 1, 4-19-1993; Code 1972, § 9-48) 
Sec. 46-54. - Disposal of violation at bureau not required; right to court hearing. 
    No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau. All persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire, in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before the court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 9-49) 
Sec. 46-55. - Ticket issuance; information on ticket. 
    The public safety department shall provide authorized personnel from such department with parking violation notices also known as parking tickets. The issuance of a parking violation notice by a public safety officer or other designated and authorized personnel of the department shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such notice shall state the date and location where such violation occurred, the time of the violation, the state and license number of the vehicle involved in such violation, the type of vehicle and other facts which plainly state the nature of the violation. A copy of the parking notice shall be attached or fastened to the vehicle in a conspicuous place, which notice is deemed to be a notification to the owner or operator that such vehicle was parked in violation of this Code. Such notice shall instruct the owner or operator that such violation can be fully settled and satisfied by the payment of the penalty scheduled for the violation for which such notice was issued and that such payment shall be made to the parking violations bureau. The parking violation notice shall also indicate the mailing and business address of the parking violations bureau and the amount of the penalty scheduled for the violation and shall advise that a civil infraction citation, as allowed by law, will be sought if the owner or operator fails to respond within specified time limits. 
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-1, § 1, 4-19-1993; Code 1972, § 9-50) 
Sec. 46-56. - Penalty; waiver. 
(a)	Any person violating a parking regulation of the city, including those set forth in the Uniform Traffic Code, as amended, is guilty of a civil infraction. Such person may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00 in costs in accordance with 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), unless the person waives trial and pays a fine as provided in the schedule set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	A person alleged to have violated a parking regulation of the city, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, may waive hearing on the issue and pay a fine as set forth in the following schedule: 
Parking Violation Fines Initial fine if paid within 10 days Fine if paid after 10 days (1) Parking more than 12 inches from curb ..... $15.00 $30.00 (2) Failure to obey angle parking signs or markings ..... 15.00 30.00 (3) Parking in loading zones ..... 15.00 30.00 (4) Failure to park without setting brakes ..... 15.00 30.00 (5) Parking in manner so as to obstruct traffic ..... 15.00 30.00 (6) Parking on sidewalk ..... 15.00 30.00 (7) Parking in front of public or private driveway ..... 15.00 30.00 (8) Parking within an intersection ..... 15.00 30.00 (9) Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant ..... 15.00 30.00 (10) Parking on crosswalk ..... 15.00 30.00 (11) Parking within 20 feet of crosswalk ..... 15.00 30.00 (12) Parking within 30 feet of traffic control signal on edge of highway ..... 15.00 30.00 (13) Parking within 50 feet of nearest rail of railroad track ..... 15.00 30.00 (14) Parking within 50 feet of driveway entrance to fire station or 75 feet opposite entrance to fire station ..... 15.00 30.00 (15) Parking on highway side of stopped or parked vehicle ..... 15.00 30.00 (16) Parking alongside or opposite street obstruction or excavation so as to obstruct traffic ..... 15.00 30.00 (17) Parking within 200 feet of automobile accident ..... 15.00 30.00 (18) Parking in front of theater ..... 15.00 30.00 (19) Parking so as to obstruct egress from emergency exit ..... 15.00 30.00 (20) Parking vehicle on street displaying "For Sale" sign ..... 15.00 30.00 (21) Parking vehicle on street for washing, polishing, etc. ..... 15.00 30.00 (22) Parking vehicle on street to display advertising ..... 15.00 30.00 (23) Parking on street to sell merchandise therefrom ..... 15.00 30.00 (24) Parking for storage for more than 48 continuous hours ..... 15.00 30.00 (25) Parking in public alley so as to obstruct traffic ..... 15.00 30.00 (26) Parking in excess of time limit ..... 15.00 30.00 Initial fine if paid within 10 days Fine if paid after 10 days (27) Parking on street between hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. whenprohibited and posted ..... 15.00 30.00 (28) Parking in any prohibited zone posted as such ..... 15.00 30.00 (29) Parking in a front yard in a residential district ..... 15.00 30.00 (30) Parking in a space designated for handicapped parking without an approved permit ..... 50.00 100.00 (31) Other violation of the parking provisions of chapter 8 of the Uniform Traffic Code ..... 15.00 30.00  
(Ord. No. 1971-3, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-1, § 1, 4-19-1993; Code 1972, § 9-51) 
_____
Secs. 46-57-46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUNK DRIVING COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 46-111. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. 
(Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1; Code 1972, § 9-61) 
Sec. 46-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)	The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, fire fighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city, or by a private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an incident resulting in an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance; or 
(2)	An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest by a public safety officer when a driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance. 
    Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services at the scene of the incident. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests of blood, breath or urine and all costs related to any prosecution of the person causing the incident. 
(Ord. No. 1992-3, § 2; Code 1972, § 9-62) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-113. - Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
(a)	Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response, if while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, such person's operation of a motor vehicle proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response. 
(b)	Presumptions. For the purpose of this article, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, when such person's physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that such person no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical analysis of such person's blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in such person's blood was in excess of seven one-hundredths of one percent. 
(c)	Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(d)	Cost recovery schedule. The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the public safety department. 
(e)	Billing. The director of public safety, or the director's designee, may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service. 
(f)	Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person described in this article as liable for the expense of an emergency response to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1992-3, § 3; Code 1972, § 9-63) 
Secs. 46-114-46-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES REMOVED FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-201. - Vehicle removed from private property. 
(a)	When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the custodian of the vehicle shall notify the department of public safety within one hour of the removal. The custodian shall supply that information which is necessary for the department of public safety to enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (a) of this section, the department of public safety immediately shall do all of the following: 
(1)	Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(2)	Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(c)	The owner of the vehicle removed, as described in subsection (a) of this section may obtain a release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian shall notify the department of public safety of the disposition of the vehicle. 
(d)	If the vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section is not claimed by the owner within seven days after the department of public safety has been notified by the custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed abandoned, and the procedures described in Section 252a(4)(c) to (9) of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code [MCL 257.1 et seq.] shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 46-202. - Penalty. 
    Failure of a wrecker and towing service, operator, or other custodian to notify the department of public safety as called for by section 46-201 shall constitute a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for first offense, $250.00 for second offense and $500.00 for third offense together with such other sanctions and penalties as may be allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Chapter 48 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power in regard to installation of sewers and waterworks and assessment of costs thereof, § 2.1(e); power to acquire waterworks and sewage plants, § 2.1(h); utility franchises and municipal ownership, § 10.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; electrical work, § 6-181 et seq.; businesses, ch. 8; community development, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; telecommunications, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it in this section: 
    Habitable building means any building where human beings reside, are employed or congregate. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 48-2-48-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Stub service means any service connection with the principal mains, and service pipes from the principal mains to approximately seven feet outside the property line, including the stop or curb cock or valve and box for the same. 
    Water main means all that part of the water distribution system which is located within the right-of-way lines of the several streets and alleys of the city or within casements on private property which is the property of the city or held and controlled by the city for the purpose of supplying water to the inhabitants thereof, or for the purpose of fighting fires within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-32. - Right of entry for inspections; covering meters and equipment. 
    The water superintendent and the superintendent's authorized representatives shall have access to all water meters, water piping and plumbing fixtures at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting the water meter or any of the plumbing used in connection with the water supply system and no such water meter or auxiliary equipment shall be covered or fenced in such a way as to be inaccessible. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-18) 
Sec. 48-33. - Injuring and disturbing water mains and other facilities. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously break, injure or disturb any water main, service pipe, water meter, water fixture or water facility of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-19) 
Sec. 48-34. - Only city employees to open and close valves and gates. 
    No person, except a duly authorized employee of the city, shall open, close or in any way interfere with any valve or gate in any water main, conduit or street pipe. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-20) 
Sec. 48-35. - Obstructed valve boxes to be unobstructed or replaced. 
    Any person who has disturbed or displaced a valve box so that the valve stem cannot be reached by a key, or who has covered a valve box or manhole cover of a valve chamber with dirt, paving, plank or other material shall immediately replace the valve box or remove the obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-21) 
Sec. 48-36. - Authority of city to limit use of and shut off water. 
(a)	The city council reserves the right to limit the amount of water furnished to any consumer should circumstances appear to warrant such action, although no limit may be stated in the application or permit for use. The city council may entirely shut off the water supply used for any manufacturing purpose, or for furnishing power or for lawn sprinkling, at any time, by giving reasonable notice to the consumer of such intended action. 
(b)	In the case of making or constructing new work, in making repairs or leakage tests, the right is reserved to shut off the water from any consumer without notice for as long a period as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-22) 
Sec. 48-37. - Liability of city for changes in water pressure and interruption of service. 
    Neither the water superintendent nor the city shall be liable for any damage or loss of any nature or kind to property or persons, which may arise from, or be caused by any change in water pressure or for shutting off water for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-23) 
Sec. 48-38. - Safety requirements for steam boilers and hot water tanks. 
    In all places where steam boilers or hot water tanks are supplied with water from the city water supply, the owner or consumer must have placed a suitable safety valve, vacuum valve or other proper device to prevent damage from collapse or explosion when the water is shut off. There shall be placed on the effluent side of the meter a suitable checkvalve to prevent backflow of hot water or steam into the meter. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-24) 
Sec. 48-39. - Extension of water mains to be authorized by resolution of city council. 
    The city council shall provide by resolution for the extension of water mains within the city and for the method of defraying the cost of the extension of such water mains. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-25) 
Sec. 48-40. - Repairs, additions, etc., to water system and fixtures to comply with article; state approval required. 
    No person shall make any attachment or connection with the water distribution system or make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any fixtures connected with the system unless such connection, repairs, additions, extensions or alterations are in accordance with this article, are approved by the state plumbing board and with any additional rules and regulations regulating the installation of plumbing which the city council may from time to time adopt. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-26) 
Sec. 48-41. - Inspections; authority of city to order work disconnected or changed. 
    All work performed in making additions, connections, repairs, extensions or alterations of any fixtures connected with the water distribution system shall be subject to inspection by the plumbing inspector who is hereby granted authority to order any part of such work disconnected or changed in order that the work shall comply with the rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-27) 
Secs. 48-42-48-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 48-61. - Application for installation of service pipes; contents; constitutes acceptance of applicable regulations. 
(a)	When the installation of service pipes is desired from the water distribution system, an application in writing, on the approved form, shall first be made to the director of public works. Such application shall set forth the true legal description of the premises it is proposed to serve, the size of the service desired and such other pertinent information as may be required by the city council. The applicant shall be required to answer truthfully all questions regarding the application. 
(b)	Every person who shall be supplied, or whose property shall be supplied, with water by the city shall be deemed to have accepted and approved this article and all the rules of the city governing and regulating the supplying of water, and such rules shall constitute a part of the contract between such person and the city. Each application shall be signed by the owner of the property or the property owner's legally authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-34) 
Sec. 48-62. - Postponement of permission for connection when mains are subject to damage. 
    The director of public works may postpone the granting of permission to connect water service when, in the director's judgment, the making of connections will endanger the mains from freezing or other damage. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-35) 
Sec. 48-63. - Connections to be made by city; fee. 
    Connections to the water distribution mains shall be installed only by the city and then only upon the prepayment of the service connection fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-36) 
Sec. 48-64. - Persons authorized to furnish stub service and make connections. 
(a)	Stub service shall be furnished and installed only by properly authorized employees of the city, acting under the orders and direction of the water department. 
(b)	No person shall make any connection with the stub service, except a regular employee of the city or a duly licensed plumber, having a special permit from the city showing that the service has been inspected and approved. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-37) 
Sec. 48-65. - Plumber to be agent of owner of premises. 
    The plumber designated and employed by the owner of the premises will be considered the agent of such owner while employed in the prosecution of the work of introducing water into the premises, and in no sense as the agent of the city. The city will not be responsible for the acts of such plumber. The owner and plumber will each be held responsible for the trench opened by such owner and plumber. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-38) 
Sec. 48-66. - Separate connections required for all buildings; exception. 
    Every building must have a separate connection with the street main except where there are two buildings on the same lot and one building is located to the rear of the other building. 
(Code 1972, § 18-39) 
Sec. 48-67. - Curb cock not to be opened prior to inspection and meter installation; exception. 
    The curb cock or valve on any stub service shall not be opened or left open after connecting the service at the curb, so that the water may be supplied to such premises by the service, unless and until the service pipe and installation has been inspected and approved by the city and the meter installation completed. In case of building operations, special temporary permission may be given by the water superintendent under such conditions as may be prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-40) 
Sec. 48-68. - Ownership to vest in city. 
    All right, title and ownership to the stub service, including the corporation cock, service box, stop cock and service pipe between them, shall be vested in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-41) 
Sec. 48-69. - Standards for service pipes and fittings; depth and manner of laying pipes. 
(a)	All service pipes and fittings between the main and the water meter shall be of a minimum internal diameter of three-fourths inch. Such services shall be of seamless annealed type K copper tubing conforming to the American Society for Testing Materials Specifications, having at least a 0.065 inch wall thickness in three-fourths inch, one inch and 11/4 inch sizes. 
(b)	The minimum depth of cover for services shall be five feet below the surface of the ground or the established street grade. The service shall be brought to the required depth as soon as possible after leaving the tap. 
(c)	No service shall be laid along the outside wall or in any position where there is danger of freezing. 
(d)	Every service shall be furnished with a valve with waste on the influent side of the water meter below the action of frost and on two inch and larger water meters a valve shall also be placed on the effluent side of the meter. When such valve is placed under the floor, the rod operating the valve shall extend above the floor. 
(e)	Service pipe laid in the same trench with a sewer shall be at least 18 inches distant from the sewer horizontally and if the sewer is laid to a greater depth, the water service shall be shelved into the bank to a solid bottom. In no case shall a service pipe be laid on a fill. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-42) 
Sec. 48-70. - Inspection and testing to be made prior to backfilling; notice of readiness for test. 
    Where trenches are opened for the laying of service pipes and such service pipes are installed, the trenches, materials and workmanship shall be inspected and tested for leakage by the city before the trenches are backfilled. The plumber performing such work shall notify the water superintendent that the trench and service are ready for inspection and test. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-43) 
Sec. 48-71. - Standpipes and other pipes for suppressing fires. 
(a)	Standpipes or other pipes for automatic suppression of fires in buildings, which fixtures are only intended for such use, may be permitted to be attached to the water supply system. 
(b)	Application for such permits, accompanied by a plan of the proposed pipe system must be submitted to the water superintendent for approval. 
(c)	No additional fixtures, connections or extensions shall be made in any fire system. 
(d)	The entire cost of installing the fire service shall be borne by the owner of the building supplied. 
(e)	Such services shall be subject to the maintenance provisions of section 48-72. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-44) 
Sec. 48-72. - Maintenance of services; costs; failure to maintain. 
    The owner of property into which water is introduced by a service pipe shall maintain in perfect order, at the property owner's own expense, the service pipe from the curb cock and box to the water meter on or for the property owner's premises, including all fixtures therein provided for delivering or supplying water for any purpose. In case such service and fixtures are not so kept in repair, the water superintendent may shut off the service or may make all necessary repairs and renewals of parts thereof. The expense of such work and all materials and labor required shall be paid by the property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-45) 
Secs. 48-73-48-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS, RATES AND CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to fix rates and charges for utility service, § 10.5; power of city to enact ordinances for collection of public utility charges, § 10.6. 

Sec. 48-91. - Water meters required; design; size. 
    All connections with the city water mains, with the exception of fire hydrants and fire protection sprinkler systems, must be prepared for the use of water through a water meter and no water shall be supplied to any inhabitant of the city, unless the water shall be measured by a water meter of a design approved and installed by the city. The city shall not furnish water meters of a larger size than, in its judgment, appears to be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-51) 
Sec. 48-92. - Location and accessibility of water meters; meter pits. 
(a)	All water meters must be set in a clean, dry, sanitary place easily accessible. They shall not be located in closets or compartments that are kept locked; in coal bins; in or under toilet room floors; in pits below basement floors; under buildings having no basements; on porches, show windows, showboards or any other place where accessibility would be difficult. 
(b)	Where practical, water meters shall be installed within the building served but where this is impractical, meter pits shall be built in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city council. The cost of construction of meter pits shall be borne by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-52) 
Sec. 48-93. - Space occupied by meter to be accessible, free of rubbish. 
    The space occupied by each water meter and the meter box shall at all times be kept accessible and free from rubbish and obstruction of all kinds. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-53) 
Sec. 48-94. - Installation of water meters to be done by water superintendent. 
    Actual installation of the water meter shall be done by the water superintendent or the superintendent's authorized agents after the property owner has made application for the water meter and provided a place, at the property owner's own expense, for setting the meter. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-54) 
Sec. 48-95. - Water meters to be furnished by city; ownership by city. 
    Water meters shall be furnished by the city, without cost to the customer, and all rights, title and ownership of the water meter shall vest in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-55) 
Sec. 48-96. - City to maintain and replace water meters to extent of normal usage. 
    The city shall maintain all water meters and make all necessary replacements caused by wear through normal usage. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-56) 
Sec. 48-97. - Water superintendent to repair meters. 
    Water meters shall be repaired only by the water superintendent or the superintendent's duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-57) 
Sec. 48-98. - Responsibility of customer to protect meter; damage resulting from customer negligence. 
    The customer shall be held responsible for the care and protection of the water meter from freezing or damage by hot water and from injury by any person. Any damage which may occur to any water meter due to the carelessness or neglect of the tenant, owner or agent of the owner, or tenant of any property on which the water meter is placed shall be paid for by such person upon presentation of a statement of damages by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-58) 
Sec. 48-99. - Tampering with water meters and seals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, alter, tamper with, interfere with or remove any water meter from any service connection. No person shall break, remove or tamper with any seal which is placed on any water meter or service box by an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-59) 
Sec. 48-100. - Bypassing water meter prohibited. 
    No person shall place or use any device which will allow any water to be used upon any premises which does not pass through the water meter. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-60) 
Sec. 48-101. - Reading meters; rendering statements. 
    It shall be the duty of the water superintendent and the superintendent's assistants to read all meters periodically and to render statements for the amounts due as shown by the reading. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-61) 
Sec. 48-102. - Estimated water usage; basis for estimates. 
    If a water meter reading does not appear to be consistent, or in case the meter has ceased to register, or if any meter should be inaccessible for any reading at the normal reading time, the amount of water charged for shall be the amount estimated by the water superintendent. In making such estimates, previous quantities of water used by the same premises shall be used as a basis for the estimates; however, special conditions such as leaking fixtures or abnormal demand for water may also be considered. When it appears that abnormal use of water has resulted from leakage or carelessness on the part of the consumer, no deduction shall be made therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-62) 
Sec. 48-103. - Rates, deposits and due dates to be established by resolution of city council. 
    All rates, fees, deposits and charges for water services furnished by the city and the due dates for payment thereof shall be as provided by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-63) 
Sec. 48-104. - Statements to be rendered throughout the year. 
    Statements for utility services shall be rendered for certain equal periods throughout the year. The billing periods for any given year shall be determined by a resolution of the city council. In no event shall statements be rendered more often than once every 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Ord. No. 1995-8, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-64) 
Sec. 48-105. - Payment to be made during succeeding billing period. 
    All charges for water supplied during any billing period shall be paid within the succeeding billing period. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Ord. No. 1995-8, § 4; Code 1972, § 18-65) 
Sec. 48-106. - Flat rate authorized for building purposes; application; advance payment. 
    For building purposes only, where it is not advisable or practical to install a meter, the owner or contractor may be furnished water temporarily for construction at a fixed flat rate. In such instances, the owner or contractor shall make written application to the water superintendent giving the estimated service required as to time and quantity, and make payment in advance of the amount of charges for water as determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-66) 
Sec. 48-107. - Discontinuing water service. 
(a)	If any payment for the use of water, or any fees for water service as determined by resolution of the city council remains unpaid for a period of 25 days after the due date, the water department may, following five days' written notice by first class United States mail, cause the water supply to be turned off and the meter removed from such premises until such time as payments and all applicable fees shall have been fully paid. 
(b)	When the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall have been shut off or stopped in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city shall charge a shutoff fee established by a council resolution made under its fee setting powers enumerated in section 48-103. The shutoff fee for the first shutoff in a fiscal year may be increased for each additional shutoff during the same fiscal year. 
(c)	If for any reason a water meter shall be inaccessible for reading for a longer period than six months, the water department may, by written notice by prepaid certified mail, demand that the user make the meter accessible for reading within 30 days from date of the notice and if not made accessible within such time, the water superintendent may turn off the water and the water shall remain turned off until access is given to read the meter. 
(d)	Neither the water superintendent nor the city shall be liable for any damage which may result to any person or premises from shutting off the water from any mains or services, for any purpose whatever, even in cases where no notice is given. 
(e)	When the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall have been shut off, or stopped by or under the direction of the water superintendent, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the water shall not again be supplied to such building, structure or premises until the charges and penalties, plus the "turn-on" fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall have been paid. 
(f)	If fees and payments on shutoff notices pursuant to subsection (a) of this section are not made by 3:00 p.m. of the day restoration of service is sought, the water department shall not be required to restore water services to the delinquent account until the next business day. If fees and payments are received after 3:00 p.m., the water department will be required to restore water services to the premises on the same day upon payment of a penalty charge equivalent to two hours' work at 11/2 times the current department of public works hourly contract rate, plus any additional direct employer costs. 
(g)	A tenant whose landlord files a "no liability" affidavit with the city pursuant to MCL 123.165 shall be required to deposit $75.00 as security for continued payment for water services. Upon voluntary discontinuation of services by the tenant, the city shall refund the $75.00 deposit to the tenant without interest. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Ord. No. 1995-8, § 1; Code 1972, § 18-67) 
Sec. 48-108. - Payment plans permissible for delinquent accounts; report of delinquent utility charges to city council. 
(a)	The city treasurer may, upon proof of inability to pay the entire amount of the utility bill or other extenuating circumstances, structure a payment plan for delinquent accounts. Failure to comply with payment plan terms shall result in revocation of the payment plan and no further payment plan will be structured on the account. 
(b)	All unpaid utility charges, which upon May 1 of each year have remained unpaid for three months or more and are not subject to a payment plan as described in subsection (a) of this section, shall be reported by the city clerk to the city council at the first meeting thereof in the month of May. 
(Code 1972, § 18-68) 
Sec. 48-109. - Publication that unpaid charges shall be lien on premises and will be placed on tax roll for collection. 
    The city council shall thereupon order the publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and published at least weekly, of general notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid water rates, fees or charges which have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more as of March 1 which have not been paid by May 20 are a lien upon the property to which the water had been furnished and will be transferred to the tax roll and assessed upon the city tax roll against the property to which the water for which the unpaid rates, fees or charges accrued, to be collected in the same manner as city taxes on the tax roll. If the charges shall remain delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer to be collected in the same manner as the lien created by taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-69) 
Sec. 48-110. - Penalties and sanctions. 
    A person who violates any provision of sections 48-99 or 48-100 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, § 9, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, § 18-70) 
Secs. 48-111-48-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF FIRE HYDRANT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 20. 

Sec. 48-126. - Permit required. 
    No person, except members of the public safety department, or the water superintendent or the superintendent's agent or representative, shall unlock, unscrew or take off the cap or cover of any fire hydrant, or open or close the valve thereof, or in any manner operate or use, or attempt to operate or use, any hydrant, except under a special written permission issued by the water superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-75) 
Sec. 48-127. - Permit to be for specific use. 
    Permits to use fire hydrants shall be granted by the water superintendent only for specific hydrants at specific times and for specific work. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-76) 
Sec. 48-128. - Display of permit upon request. 
    Any person issued a permit pursuant to this division shall keep the permit at the place of use and it shall be displayed to any member of the public safety department or city official upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-77) 
Sec. 48-129. - Deposit required; use of deposit for damaged equipment. 
(a)	Any person desiring services from a fire hydrant shall place on deposit such a sum of money with the city clerk as shall be designated by the water superintendent in accordance with an appropriate resolution of the city council, which sum shall be held until all charges incurred have been fully paid and all city equipment returned in good condition. 
(b)	The water superintendent shall have the right to use any portion or all of such deposited sum to repair or replace any equipment damaged through negligence of the person using the hydrant or by reason of its use thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-78) 
Sec. 48-130. - Use of hydrant. 
(a)	Before the use of water from a fire hydrant shall be allowed, the discharge port shall first be fitted with a valve, approved by the public safety department, under the direction of the water superintendent. The main valve of the hydrant must be fully opened at the beginning of work each day, and remain open until the stoppage of work at night. The water supply shall be regulated by the independent valve. The hydrant shall be operated only by a proper hydrant wrench which shall be obtained from the water superintendent. 
(b)	Water must not be allowed to run, except when used. No leaking hose, pipe or joints shall be permitted. All persons using hydrants shall immediately obey any instructions or orders that may be issued by the water superintendent to regulate the use of the hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-79) 
Sec. 48-131. - Authority of city to require meter at expense of user; rates. 
    If the use of water from a fire hydrant is to be continued over a number of days, the water superintendent may require a water meter to be applied to the connection made with the fire hydrant at the expense of the party using the fire hydrant. The party using the fire hydrant shall pay for all water by meter measurement at the stipulated rates. 
(Ord. No. 1955-1; Code 1972, § 18-80) 
Secs. 48-132-48-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Battle Creek Township referred to in this division is now in the City of Battle Creek. 

Sec. 48-151. - Acquisition of water supply system within city limits. 
    Under authority of 1947 PA 235 (MCL 123.331 et seq.), the city hereby acquires and takes possession of that portion of the water supply system of Battle Creek Township, Calhoun County, Michigan, lying within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-86) 
Sec. 48-152. - Date of acquisition of water supply system. 
    The date on which the acquisition and taking possession shall be effective and that part of the water supply system of Battle Creek Township, Calhoun County, Michigan, shall become the property of the city shall be April 1, 1954. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-87) 
Sec. 48-153. - Contract for operation of system by city or township permissible. 
    The city and the Township of Battle Creek may, at any time, either before or after April 1, 1954, enter into a contract providing for the operation of both that part of the water system which lies within the city and that part thereof which lies in the Township of Battle Creek as a single unit by either of them as agent for both. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 123.335. 
Sec. 48-154. - Use of water system funds while bonds outstanding. 
    There being outstanding revenue bonds issued for the acquisition, construction, extension and improvement of the township water supply system, as the same existed on November 16, 1953, the integrity and unit operation of the entire system, including that part thereof within the city and that part thereof within the Township of Battle Creek shall be preserved, and the segregation, safekeeping and disposition of its revenues, as provided by the bond ordinance adopted by the Township of Battle Creek, as such ordinance existed on December 1, 1953, shall be continued until all outstanding bonds of that issue assumed by the revenues of the entire system shall have been retired by payment, redemption, assumption or exchange, or provision made for their priority in accordance with sections 6 and 8 of 1947 PA 235 (MCL 123.336, 123.338), under authority of which this article is adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 123.336. 
Sec. 48-155. - Management and disposition of system funds. 
    During the time that the bonds in section 48-154 shall remain outstanding and so long as the system shall be operated as a single unit by a joint board or by the city or the Township of Battle Creek as agent for both, the operating board or agency shall provide for the payment of the necessary amounts into the operation and maintenance fund and into the bond and interest redemption fund for all the bonds in section 48-154 which are secured by the revenues of the entire system. The city and the Township of Battle Creek may provide by contract for the holding and management of other revenues or for their apportionment and deposit into separate bonds and interest redemption funds for bonds, severally issued or assumed and into separate depreciation, contingent and surplus funds. Unless otherwise provided by such contract, such revenues shall be divided and paid quarterly or more often into their respective treasuries and set apart by each into the appropriate funds. Unless otherwise provided by such contract, the city and the Township of Battle Creek shall have control of the construction of extensions and improvements to the system within its boundaries, and shall be entitled to its proportion of the contingent and surplus funds of the system for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 123.340. 
Sec. 48-156. - Division of revenues and liabilities. 
    Unless otherwise provided by contract, all revenues of the system which are subject to apportionment and all the outstanding indebtedness to be separately funded or assumed by the city and the Township of Battle Creek shall be divided in proportion to the net revenues received during the preceding fiscal year from service rendered by the system to property within the respective boundaries of the two units of government. Upon the final separation of the system into that lying within the city and that lying within the Township of Battle Creek, or as otherwise agreed between them, any cash assets and intangible property of or pertaining to the system shall be divided between the city and township in the same proportion as provided in this division for the revenues and outstanding indebtedness to be separately funded or assumed. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 123.341. 
Sec. 48-157. - Present bond ordinance of township to remain in effect; further revenue bonds. 
    So long as the present outstanding bonds of the water system remain outstanding, or the priority thereof is not provided, as required and permitted by this division and by law, the ordinance of the Township of Battle Creek providing for the issuance thereof shall apply to and remain in full force and effect concerning the security of such bonds and, except as in this division provided, the water supply system shall be subject to the provisions of 1933 PA 94 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), which are applicable thereto. Provided, that neither the city nor the Township of Battle Creek shall have the power or authority to make any part of such system lying within the boundaries of the other subject to any further revenue bonds, under any authority whatsoever, without the consent of the legislative body of the other. 
(Ord. No. 1954-6; Code 1972, § 18-93) 
Secs. 48-158-48-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES 

Sec. 48-176. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private water supply means any water supply not defined as a public and semipublic water supply. 
    Public and semipublic water supply means any water supply offered to or available to the public or any water supply used on any premises in a manner where the use of a contaminated water supply might constitute a menace to public health. This definition shall not include municipal supplies for cities. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-177. - Location. 
    All wells, springs, water suction lines and other drinking water structures shall be located at least 50 feet from seepage pits, cesspools, privies, septic tanks, subsurface disposal systems, county drains and other sources of contamination. Buried or exposed sewers or pipes through which sewage may back up shall be located at least ten feet from any well or suction pipe. When such sewers or pipes are located within a ten-foot to 50-foot area, they shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with watertight joints or equal. Such pipes, when exposed and accessible for inspection, may be allowed not closer than ten feet of the well, spring or water suction line. All wells shall be located so that possibility of flooding is reduced to a minimum. The area immediately adjacent to the well shall be mounded up so that the surface water shall be diverted away from the well. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-100) 
Sec. 48-178. - Casings. 
    The casings of tubular wells shall be at least standard weight iron pipe, watertight through its length, and the joints shall be threaded. The casing of all tubular wells shall extend at least one inch above the surface of the platform floor or pedestal. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-101) 
Sec. 48-179. - Hand pumps. 
    Hand pumps shall be designed to exclude all contamination and shall have a closed pump spout directed downward. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-102) 
Sec. 48-180. - Power pumps. 
    Power pumps shall be designed and so fastened to the casing as to exclude all contamination. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-103) 
Sec. 48-181. - Public and semipublic water supplies to comply with division; distance from contamination sources. 
    All public and semipublic water supplies shall be located, constructed and maintained in accordance with the regulations of this division except the distance from sources of contamination shall not be less than 75 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1959-1; Code 1972, § 18-104) 
Sec. 48-182. - Water meter required for premises connected to city sewer with private water supply. 
    Where a private water supply services premises connected to any city sewer, those premises must have a water meter for the purpose of measuring water flow and determining sewer charges. Water meters shall be furnished by the city as provided in section 48-95 and the water superintendent shall have the right of entry into any such premises at any reasonable time to install such meter and the further right of entry and access for maintenance and repair as provided in section 48-32. 
(Ord. No. 1975-8, § 1; Code 1972, § 18-105) 
Secs. 48-183-48-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 48-201. - State department of environmental quality rules adopted by reference. 
    The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of environmental quality, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-106) 
Sec. 48-202. - Backflow inspections and testing. 
    It shall be the duty of the city water department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city water department and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
    All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon installation to ensure proper working order. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall take place on an annual basis as required by the City of Springfield and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved by the City of Springfield and certified by the State of Michigan shall be qualified to perform such testing. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-107; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 12-17-07) 
Sec. 48-203. - City's right of entry. 
    The representative of the city water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-108) 
Sec. 48-204. - Discontinuance of water service where connection in violation of division exists. 
    The city water department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-109) 
Sec. 48-205. - Protection of potable water supply; labeling. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and the city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-110) 
Sec. 48-206. - Validity of other codes and ordinances. 
    This division does not supersede the single state construction code and divisions 1 through 6 of this article, but is supplementary to them. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-111) 
Sec. 48-207. - Cross connection control program. 
    The water superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate a "cross connection control program" within the city. Such program shall be promulgated by the water superintendent immediately after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and copies shall be filed in the offices of the water superintendent and the city clerk and shall be available to the public upon request at all times. The program shall have this division attached and made a part of it. This section is mandatory and not directory. 
(Ord. No. 1978-4, § 2; Code 1972, § 18-113) 
Sec. 48-208. - Violations. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division or any written order of the City of Springfield, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this act shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 12-17-07) 
Secs. 48-209-48-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 48-231-48-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION AND USE 

Sec. 48-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. "COD" denotes chemical oxygen demand. 
    Building connection means the connection of the building drain to the building sewer. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Developer means any person constructing a private sewer system. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    ICR means industrial cost recovery. 
    Industrial user means any user identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as now or hereafter amended or supplemented under the following divisions: 
(1)	Division A-Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing 
(2)	Division B-Mining 
(3)	Division D-Manufacturing 
(4)	Division S-Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services 
(5)	Division I-Services 
Any user discharging less than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day shall be exempt from industrial cost recovery provided its waste discharge does not contain pollutants which (i) are toxic or incompatible; (ii) interfere with treatment works processes; or (iii) may otherwise contaminate or reduce the utility of the sludge. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Inspector means an authorized agent of the director of public works observing the construction, alteration, tapping or repair of any public or building sewer or engaged in other work provided for in this division. 
    Local costs means those costs which are borne in their entirety by the city and include all expenses incurred up to the point of delivery to the regional system. 
    Meter means a device to measure the quantity of water or wastewater passing through it. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means all costs for labor, power, chemicals, materials and supplies, replacements, contractual services, billing and administration chargeable to wastewater operations. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Plumber means a plumber who is licensed and authorized to engage in plumbing work in the city in accordance with city ordinances and state statutes. 
    Plumbing contractor means any contractor registered with the city to engage in work of a plumber. 
    Premises means a structure which cannot be completely divided in its present utilitarian condition through sale. The following are examples of what is meant by premises: 
(1)	A building under one roof owned, leased or occupied by one party as one business or residence; 
(2)	A combination of residential buildings or commercial buildings leased or occupied by one party in one common enclosure; 
(3)	The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall; or 
(4)	A building owned by one party having more than one internal division, such as apartments, offices, stores, etc., and which may have a common or separate entrance. 
    Private sanitary sewer facilities means any privately owned and maintained privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or outlet into any pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
    Properly shredded garbage means wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by a public authority. 
    Residential user means any user introducing into the sewer system domestic strength wastes from premises used for family living. 
    Sanitary sewage means any sewage carried by a sanitary sewer system. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Waste means any discarded or abandoned materials, whether organic or inorganic. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, §§ 18-115, 18-131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-247. - Use of public sewer required. 
(a)	The use of public sewers shall be required within the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste as may from time to time be specified by the director of public works. 
(d)	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank or cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(e)	The owner of any structure within the city and in which structure water is used or is available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes shall connect the structure at the earliest of the following dates or events to a sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts the property and passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from the structure: 
(1)	Upon failure of the owner's current private sanitary sewer facilities; 
(2)	Upon sale of a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. For purposes of this section, the term "structure in which sanitary sewage originates" means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes; 
(3)	Upon improvement of the property so as to become property upon or from which sanitary sewage originates. Connection to the public sanitary sewer system shall be made prior to occupancy; 
(4)	By December 31, 2004. 
(f)	At such time as any premises are connected to the public sewer, the owner shall complete the following: 
(1)	At the time that connection to the public sewer is completed, all connections to any private sanitary sewer facilities shall be disconnected. 
(2)	All cesspools, septic tanks, privy vaults, dry wells, block trenches and any other private sanitary sewer facilities shall be treated in compliance with requirements of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-116) 
Sec. 48-248. - Use of private sanitary sewer facilities. 
(a)	The construction, installation, maintenance or use of private sanitary sewer facilities in the city shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Where a public sewer is not available as specified in section 48-247, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sanitary sewer facility as approved by the county health department or a successor agency having the same authority. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-117) 
Sec. 48-249. - Connection to public sewers. 
(a)	All sewer construction, installation, connections, maintenance and repairs shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	No person, except an authorized employee of the city or persons authorized by the city, shall uncover, make any connections with or into, install, repair, alter or disturb any public sewer, building sewer or appurtenance thereof. A written permit for such work issued by the director of public works shall be required for each interference with any public sewer or appurtenance thereto. 
(c)	Application for a permit required in subsection (b) of this section shall be signed by the owner of the property for which the connection is desired, or by the property owner's duly authorized agent, and must state the name and address of the owner, description of the property and state the purpose for which the connection is desired and shall designate the person to perform the work. The person designated to perform the work shall meet the qualifications for performing such work as may be required by the director of public works. There shall be written proof of the authorized agent's authority. Such application shall be on such form as specified by the director of public works and shall contain such further information as may be required by the director of public works. 
(d)	No permit shall be issued until all charges and fees, inclusive but not limited to connection charges, tap fees and other charges required by this division and any other ordinance of the city have been paid or provisions for the payment of the charges and fees have been made with the director of public works. 
(e)	All private plumbing costs and expenses related to and incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer, including the cost of materials and metering devices as may be required, shall be borne by and at the sole expense of the owner; provided, however, that the city council may by resolution and upon application by the owner agree to contract on the owner's behalf to pay such costs and expenses and thereafter permit the repayment of such costs and expenses to be made in installments over a five-year period with interest not to exceed nine percent per annum from the date of connection. It being further provided, however, that any delinquent payments shall be collectible in the manner provided in section 48-273(d). The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the installation of the building sewer or connection to the public sewer. 
(f)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be required for each premises to be connected to the public sewer. 
(g)	All sewer construction, connections, maintenance and repairs to sewer facilities shall be subject to rules and regulations promulgated from time to time in accordance with the provisions of section 48-252 and shall conform to the building and plumbing codes of the city and any other applicable codes. 
(h)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new premises only when they are found, on examination and test by the director of public works, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(i)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an apparatus approved by the director of public works and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(1)	Whenever such connections are found in any premises, the director of public works shall notify the owner in writing in accordance with provisions for giving notice of any violations. 
(2)	Such connection shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance per se. 
(3)	Failure to remove such connection within 30 days from the date of service of notice shall be deemed to be a separate violation of this section. 
(k)	The person designated pursuant to subsection (c) of this section to perform the work of connecting, installing, repairing, altering or disturbing any public sewer shall notify the director of public works in writing at least 48 hours in advance when the building sewer will be ready for installation and connection to the public sewer. It is the responsibility of the person designated to do such work to ensure the delivery of such notice to the director of public works. This notice shall state the permit number, street, sublot number and anticipated construction time required for the inspection requested. The person designated to do the work shall immediately inform the director of public works of any unforseen delays or postponements prior to 8:00 a.m. of the day for which inspection was arranged. No work may be performed in the absence of an inspector unless written permission is granted by the director of public works. Such written permission shall not be unreasonably denied. The city shall not be liable for any expense incurred by the person designated to do the work in locating mains, wyes, house connections or other sewer appurtenances arising out of information procured from the records of the city. 
(l)	Any work covered previous to the inspection shall be uncovered by the person designated to do the work and an opportunity must be given to inspect the inside as well as the outside of the sewer pipe. The actual tapping of a connection into a sanitary sewer and the connection to the building drain shall be done only in the presence of an inspector. 
(m)	The director of public works shall approve the quality of all materials and workmanship and shall have the right to inspect the material and workmanship at all times. The director of public works may order removed from the job any inferior or defective material and the director of public works may cause to be relaid any portion of a building sewer which is not constructed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(n)	Where a new sanitary sewer main is being built in a street and building drain or building sewer connections are included in the contract, the contractor for such sanitary sewer main shall be required to obtain a permit for each and every connection to a building drain that contractor may be employed to connect. 
(o)	No permit for sewer construction, connection, maintenance or repair shall be issued for any such work requiring excavation in any street, highway or road right-of-way until the person who is to make such excavation shall obtain from the proper authority the required permit for each excavation and shall agree to comply with all the requirements of the issuing authority, or shall obtain a written statement by that authority that no road opening permit is required. This permit shall be shown to the inspector at the commencement of the construction and shall be kept "on-the-job" at all times while work is in progress. 
(p)	No sanitary sewer connection will be made to any premises for which the rough interior plumbing has not been completed, inspected and approved by the proper authority. The connection between the interior plumbing, building drain and the sanitary sewer service connection (building sewer) shall be made at a point approximately five feet outside the inner face of the foundation wall. 
(q)	The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the building sewer from the sanitary sewer main. The director of public works may require the property owner to make whatever repairs or perform any maintenance of the building sewer the director of public works deems necessary for the proper functions of the sanitary sewer system. If the city is requested or finds it necessary for the proper maintenance of the system to repair or maintain any building sewer or connections, the cost of such repair or maintenance shall be billed directly to the owner of the premises and shall be the responsibility of the owner to pay within 30 days from the date of the billing statement. Failure to pay such billed costs within six months of billing shall result in a lien being placed against the property in the amount of the cost, pursuant to provisions of other city ordinances. 
(r)	If any plumbing contractor shall neglect or refuse to do any act required by this division or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder within the time specified after receiving written notice from the director of public works to do so, the director of public works may cause such work to be done and charge such work to the plumbing contractor. If such charges are not paid within 30 days from the date of the billing statement, the city council may revoke the plumbing contractor's authority to perform work in the city. Failure by the plumbing contractor to comply with the provisions of this division or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder or with direct orders of the director of public works shall be deemed just cause for the city to revoke the plumbing contractor's authority to perform work in the city. This sanction shall be in addition to and not in lieu of those penalties provided for violation of this division. 
(s)	The city expressly disclaims and shall not be responsible for any damages caused by, or arising from any stoppage of the main sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-118) 
Sec. 48-250. - Use of the public sewers regulated. 
(a)	The use of the public sewers in the city shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance per se. 
(b)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(c)	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to natural outlets approved by the appropriate state agency. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the appropriate state agency, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(d)	Except as provided by specific limits, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the wastes or waters to any public sewers prohibited by the standards of the City of Battle Creek. 
(e)	(1)	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics referenced in subsection (d) of this section, and which in the judgment of the director of public works may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director of public works may: 
a.	Reject the wastes. 
b.	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
c.	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
d.	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(2)	If the director of public works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of public works and subject to all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(f)	Any person whose operations, residential or industrial, entail the discharge of water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances shall file with the director of public works a written statement setting forth the nature of the operation contemplated or presently carried on, the amount of water required to be used and its source, the proposed point of discharge of such wastes into the sewage system of the city, the estimated amount to be discharged, and a fair statement setting forth the expected bacterial, physical, chemical and other known characteristics of such wastes. Within 30 days of receipt of such statement, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to make an order stating such minimum restrictions as in the judgment of the director of public works may be necessary to guard adequately against unlawful uses of the city's sewage system. 
(g)	Interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of public works, they are necessary for the proper handling of the liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, etc. 
(h)	The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of public works. 
(i)	When required by the director of public works, the owner of any premises serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial or food establishment wastes shall install a suitable manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with a plan approved by the director of public works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(j)	All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(k)	All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. 
(l)	Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or wastes, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(m)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength which may be determined to be detrimental to the public sewer system, or of toxic proportions or character, may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-119) 
Sec. 48-251. - Protection from damage. 
(a)	The sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Appeals. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Only authorized personnel shall be permitted to alter, uncover or tamper with any structure which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be deemed to be a disorderly person and shall be subject to criminal prosecution as provided in this division. Violation of this subsection shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance per se. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-120) 
Sec. 48-252. - Powers of the director of public works. 
(a)	The director of public works shall have the powers set out in this section. 
(b)	The director of public works is authorized and directed to adopt and enforce rules and regulations in accordance with the provisions of sections 48-247 through 48-250 for the purpose of providing control over sewer construction, installation, maintenance, repair and connections and the inspection thereof. Any rules and regulations promulgated by the director of public works shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	All such rules and regulations shall be entitled "Sanitary Sewer Rules and Regulations." 
(2)	All such rules and regulations and any amendments thereto shall be in writing and shall be filed with the clerk of the city and shall be placed on file at the office of the director of public works. 
(3)	Such rules and regulations shall specify the effective date thereof and shall be subscribed by the director of public works and dated as of the date they are promulgated. 
(c)	The director of public works shall maintain accurate and complete records of all public sewers and appurtenances, of all permits issued and all inspections made. The director of public works is empowered to require the abandonment and removal of all connections to the public storm sewers which violate the provisions of this division. 
(d)	The operation, maintenance, alterations, repair and management of the sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer system of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the city council, subject to the terms of the contract dated March 20, 1978, between the county and the city. The city council shall authorize the director of public works to employ such persons in such capacities as the director of public works deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the sanitary sewer system. The city council and director of public works may make such rules, orders and regulations as they deem advisable and necessary to ensure the efficient management and operation of the sanitary sewer system. 
(e)	The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties and buildings, public and private, for the purpose of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing for violations of this division and the rules and regulations. However, the director of public works or the director's representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-121) 
Sec. 48-253. - Sewer line extension. 
(a)	Sewer lines shall be extended in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	The developer of any new subdivision, or parts thereof, shall install all sewer mains, manholes, wyes and other appurtenances at the developer's own expense. Only standard manhole rings and covers used by the city will be approved. All work performed shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director of public works. 
(c)	Line extensions in previously established subdivisions having no sewer service, but petitioned for by the adjoining lot owners, will be installed on an assessment basis. No extension of sewer mains will be approved for less than the entire frontage of the subdivision or property found in the application, or applicant's property and the necessary length from the existing main to that frontage. 
(d)	The city council may extend sewer lines in areas where application or petition has not been received if the city council finds such extension is in the best interest of the general public health and welfare, or it is necessary to pass such properties to reach an area where application or petition has been made. In such cases, the council shall charge any benefited property for local service. 
(e)	No public sewer shall be constructed in the city except by the city or by others in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director of public works, and subject to inspection by the director of public works during construction. No sewer shall be considered to be a part of the sewage system until accepted in writing by the director of public works. 
(f)	The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, method to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling any sewer, and any other work connected with the construction shall conform to the requirements of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-122) 
Sec. 48-254. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this division shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stalled in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1979-4, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-123) 
Secs. 48-255-48-271. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 48-272. - Sewer charges and rates generally. 
(a)	Each premises required to pay use charge. Each premises abutting a public gravity sanitary sewer line within the city which is required to connect to the sanitary sewer line by the provisions of subsection 48-247(e) shall pay a use charge based on the following rates. Such use charge shall commence as of the date such premises are connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(b)	Basis for wastewater service charges. 
(1)	The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable. 
(2)	The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding loans by the number of users. Through further divisions, the monthly debt service charges can be computed. 
(3)	The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations: 
a.	A five-day, 20-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 milligrams per liter (mg/1); 
b.	A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l. 
(4)	lt shall consist of operations and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows: 
a.	Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories; 
b.	Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible; 
c.	Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of suspended solids and pounds of BOD to be treated; 
d.	Proportion the estimated cost to nonindustrial and industrial users by volume, suspended solids and BOD. 
e.	Compute costs per 100 cubic feet of metered water used for normal sewage strength. 
f.	Compute surcharge costs per pound in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and suspended solids. 
(c)	Surcharge. A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and suspended solids (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and suspended solids, respectively. 
(d)	Review of charges. The adequacy of the wastewater charge shall be reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the city in the certified public accountants' annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, in accordance to applicable federal regulations. 
(e)	Industrial cost recovery. When an industrial user, as defined in 40 CFR 35.905-8, requests connection to the public sewage collection and disposal system, an industrial cost recovery system must be developed in accordance with 40 CFR 35.928. 
(f)	Premises not connected to the city water system . Each premises abutting a public gravity sanitary sewer line within the city which is required to connect to the sanitary sewer line by the provisions of subsection 48-247(e) but is not connected to the city water system shall be charged on the following basis: 
(1)	A flat rate which shall be set by the council to reflect average sewer usage; or 
(2)	A meter may be installed at the request of the owner, and at the owner's expense, on the private water supply. All installation, repairs, maintenance and other service costs shall be paid for by the owner. 
(g)	Installation of sewage meter. At the discretion of the owner of the premises and at the owner's cost, a sewage meter may be installed in the sewer line of such premises which shall be used to establish the use charges and any other applicable rates. The meter shall be of the type approved by the director of public works. All installation, repairs, maintenance and other service costs shall be paid for by the owner. During periods when the meter is deemed inaccurate or is out of service, the rate structure shall revert to previous averages based on city records or on the basis of metered water. 
(h)	Free service. No free service shall be furnished by the sanitary sewer system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(i)	Effective date of charges and rates. The charges and rates established in this division shall be applied to each account commencing at the next full billing period following the effective date of this division. Any changes in charges and rates pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be applied to each account commencing at the next full billing period following the effective date of the change. 
(j)	Billing. 
(1)	Meters of all residential premises shall be read bimonthly and meters of all other premises shall be read monthly. Billings shall be rendered bimonthly for all residential premises and shall be rendered monthly for all other premises. Bills shall be due and payable at the office of the city treasurer not later than the day established by the council. Payments received after that day shall bear a service charge of ten percent of the amount of the bill. 
(2)	Sewer maintenance charges shall be billed in conjunction with and collected at the same time and in the same manner as water consumption charges. 
(Ord. No. 1979-5, § 3; Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-132) 
Sec. 48-273. - Other fees and charges. 
(a)	Roadway cutting fee and permits. When a connection is required to a sanitary sewer located within the public right-of-way where no service lateral has been installed to the property line, there shall be a street cutting permit obtained from the director of public works. At the time such permit is obtained, a fee shall be collected, such fee to cover the cost of restoring the street to its original condition. The permit shall be obtained and fee paid at the time application is made for such connection, with all fees being deposited in the street fund of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the plumbing contractor to install the lateral in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of this article. 
(b)	Connection fee. When a property owner has been assessed for a portion of the cost of laying a sanitary sewer main and where a lateral has been placed from the main to the property line but no assessment has been levied for the cost of placing such lateral, a connection fee of $600.00 shall be charged to the property owner in lieu of the assessment. This charge is due and payable at the time application is made for connection to the sanitary sewer system, such monies to be deposited in the sewer system fund of the city, provided, however, that for connections made on or before December 31, 2004, the connection fee referred to in this section may be paid in installments in the same manner as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section for fees in lieu of special assessment. 
(c)	Fee in lieu of special assessment. Those properties which have not been assessed for the laying of a sanitary sewer main in abutting streets shall be charged a fee in lieu of the special assessment per the following conditions: 
(1)	Those mains laid under special assessment 16-S shall be charged $3.28 per front foot of property, such fee due and payable at the time application is made to connect to the sanitary sewer system. Such money shall be deposited in the sanitary sewer fund of the city. 
(2)	Those mains laid under Western Calhoun County System 2-A (City of Springfield) under the terms of the contract with the county dated March 20, 1978, shall be charged $1,200.00, such fee due and payable at the time application is made to connect to the sanitary sewer system. Such money shall be deposited in the sanitary sewer fund of the city. It is further provided that for connections made on or before December 31, 2004, any fee in lieu of special assessment imposed by the provisions of this section may be paid in installments in accordance with the following: 
a.	Application for installment payment may be made to the city treasurer; 
b.	The fee or charge may be made in quarterly payments over not more than a five-year period, bearing interest on the unpaid installments to accrue from the date of billing by the city. The rate of interest shall be equivalent to the rate that was applicable to the bonds issued by governmental authority for the construction of that portion of the system to which the tax is made, or nine percent per annum, whichever is greater; 
c.	Quarterly installment payments shall be due according to such schedule as may be determined by the city council by resolution. 
(d)	Lien rights. All delinquent rates, charges, installment payments and fees for sewer service or connection shall constitute a lien upon the premises served which shall be subject to foreclosure in the same manner as mechanic's liens for nonpayment, or after three months delinquency, may be certified to the city treasurer and assessing officer of the city annually, on or before March 1 of each year and entered by such assessing officer upon the next tax roll against the property served, for collection in the same manner as the collection of taxes. In addition, the city treasurer shall have the right to pursue a collection action against the owner of the premises and may enforce the delinquency as a debt owed to the city. In any action brought under this section, the city may recover, in addition to the amount of any delinquency due at that time, its actual expenses, including attorney fees, to which the city has been put in connection with the collection action up to the entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-133) 
Sec. 48-274. - Establishment of charges. 
(a)	Action by resolution. 
(1)	The use rates, special rates, and any fees and/or surcharges to be imposed by this division shall be in accordance with the respective schedule for such charges as established by the council of the city from time to time. Any changes of such charges shall be established pursuant to resolution of the city council. 
(2)	Owners of property within the city whose property now is connected with any public sewer, and property owners whose property may hereafter be connected with any public sewer, shall pay a charge therefor to be computed in accordance with a schedule of rates established by resolution of the city council. The city council may, by resolution, establish separate rates of charges for industrial establishments having a connection with city sewers, where such industrial establishment uses water for other than sanitary sewer purposes. Such rate, as determined by the city council, shall be in lieu of any sewer charge which might be charged under the regular schedule of rates. 
(b)	Publication. The initial schedules and any changes shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and qualified under state law to publish legal notices. 
(c)	Effective date. The effective date of any changes shall not be less than 30 days after adoption by the city council, provided that publication shall be no less than ten days prior to the effective date of such changes. 
(Ord. No. 1979-5, § 3; Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-134) 
Sec. 48-275. - Fund and accounts of the system. 
(a)	Operating year. The sanitary sewer system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 of the following year. 
(b)	Monies. The treasurer of the city shall be custodian of all monies of the city belonging to, or associated with, this system and such monies shall be deposited in any state bank duly designated by the council of the city which is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(c)	Funds and accounts. The revenues of the system shall be set aside, as collected, and deposited in a separate depository account in a local bank duly qualified to do business in the state, in an account to be designated sewer system receiving fund (hereinafter, for brevity, referred to as the "receiving fund") and such revenues so deposited shall be transferred from the receiving fund periodically in the manner and at the times hereafter specified. 
(1)	Operation and maintenance fund. Out of the revenues in the receiving fund, there shall be first set aside quarterly into a depository account, designated operation and maintenance fund, a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next quarter's current expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order. 
(2)	Contract payment fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account to be designated contract payment fund, which shall be used solely for the payment of the city's obligations to the county pursuant to the contract. There shall be deposited in such fund quarterly, after requirements of the operation and maintenance fund have been met, such sums as shall be necessary to pay such contractual obligations that cannot be met by the 1978.1 sanitary sewer special assessment fund. Should the revenues of the system and special assessment fund prove insufficient for this purpose, such revenues may be supplemented by any other funds of the city legally available for such purpose. 
(3)	Replacement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account, designated replacement fund, which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system if needed. There shall be set aside into such fund, after provision has been made for the operation and maintenance fund and the contract payment fund, such revenues as the city council shall deem necessary for this purpose. 
(4)	Improvement fund. There shall next be established and maintained an improvement fund for the purpose of making improvement, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into such fund, after providing for such improvement fund, such revenues as the city council shall determine. 
(5)	Surplus moneys. Moneys remaining in the receiving fund at the end of any operating year, after full satisfaction of the requirements of the funds stated in subsections (c)(1)-(c)(4) of this section, may, at the option of the city council, be transferred to the improvement fund or used in connection with any other project of the city reasonably related to purposes of the system. 
(6)	Bank accounts. All moneys belonging to any of the funds stated in subsections (c)(1)-(c)(4) of this section or accounts may be kept in one bank account, in which event the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the city within this single bank account, in the manner set forth in this subsection (c)(6). 
If the moneys in the receiving funds are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the operation and maintenance funds, any moneys and/or securities in other funds of the system, except sums in the contract payment fund derived from tax levies, shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance fund, to the extent of any deficit therein. 
(d)	Investment. Moneys in any fund or account established by the provisions of this division may be invested in obligations of the United States of America in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in 1933 PA 94 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). If such investments are made, the securities representing the investments shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the fund from which such investments were made. 
(Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-135) 
Sec. 48-276. - Appeals. 
(a)	Hardship. The owner of any premises which have been assessed any charges under this division or any other ordinances with regard to the sewer system may submit a hardship application to the city seeking a deferment in the partial or total payments of the charges based upon a showing of financial hardship subject to and in accordance with the following: 
(1)	The owner of the premises shall complete a hardship application provided by the city council and file such application together with all other information and documentation reasonably required by the city, with the city council not less than 60 days prior to the date of the annual installment due. Any such deferment shall be for that annual installment only. An application shall be completed and filed by each and every legal and equitable interest holder in the premises so assessed, excepting financial institutions having security interest in the premises. 
(2)	Hardship applications shall be reviewed by the city council and after due deliberation of hardship applications, the city council shall determine in each case whether there has been an adequate showing of financial hardship and shall forthwith notify the applicant of such determination. 
(3)	An applicant aggrieved by the determination of the city council may request the opportunity to appear before the city council in person for the purpose of showing hardship and presenting any argument or additional evidence. Denial of hardship following such a personal appearance before the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(4)	If the city council makes a finding of hardship, the council shall fix the amount of deferment of partial or total charges so imposed and in so doing shall require an annual filing of financial status by each applicant, provided that, upon any material change of the financial status of an applicant, such applicant shall immediately notify the assessor so that a further review of the matter may be made by the city council, and provided further that the duration of the deferment granted shall be self-terminating upon the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
a.	Change of the applicant's financial status which removes the basis for financial hardship; 
b.	Any conveyance of any interest in the premises by any of the applicants, including the execution of a new security interest in the premises or extension thereof; 
c.	A death of any of the applicants. 
(b)	Appeals. Any decision of the city sewer or water department which adversely affects any user of the city sanitary sewer system may be appealed to the city council following procedures established by the city council for such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-136) 
Sec. 48-277. - Enforcement and interpretation. 
(a)	Report of delinquent sewer charges. All unpaid sanitary sewer charges which, upon March 1 of each year, have remained unpaid for three months or more, shall be reported by the city clerk to the city council at the first meeting thereof in the month of March. 
(b)	Lien. The city council shall thereupon order the publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and published at least weekly, of general notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid sewer rates, fees or charges which have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more as of March 1 which have not been paid by May 20 are a lien upon the property to which the sewer service had been furnished and will be transferred to the tax roll and assessed upon the city tax roll against the property to which the sewer service for which the unpaid rates, fees or charges accrued, to be collected in the same manner as city taxes on the tax roll. If the fees and charges shall remain delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer to be collected in the same manner as the lien created by taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. 
(c)	Shutoff of services. In addition to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the city shall have the right to shut off sewer service to any premises for which charges for sewer service are more than three months delinquent, and such service shall not be reestablished until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn-on charge to be specified by the city council have been paid. Further, such charges and penalties may be recovered by the city by court action. 
(Ord. No. 1979-6, § 3; Code 1972, § 18-137) 
Chapter 50 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for zoning of the city, § 2.1(n). 
Cross reference- Any rezoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-9(8); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; private swimming pools, § 6-211 et seq.; community development, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; telecommunications, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)	The particular shall control the general. 
(2)	ln the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)	A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)	The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(7)	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply; 
b.	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination; 
c.	The term "either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)	Terms not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 200; Code 1972, app. A, § 200) 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use and accessory mean a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. When the term "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but it not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers. 
(2)	Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence, or such occupants guests. 
(3)	Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, toolroom or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)	A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5)	Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)	Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district. 
(7)	Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(8)	Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9)	Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)	Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction of the type of occupancy or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to as "altered or reconstructed." 
    Apartment means a suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Automotive repair means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automotive storage, damaged, means any storage of inoperable vehicles not incidental to a service garage. 
    Automotive or trailer sales area means space used for the display, sale or rental of motor vehicles or trailers in new, used and operable condition. 
    Basement means the portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of such areas and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Board of appeals means a board consisting of five members, appointed by the city council, to hear and decide appeals and to provide interpretations in matters concerning the zoning ordinance of the city. 
    Building means a structure erected on site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a premanufactured or precut structure, above or below ground, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Building line means a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Code official means the zoning administrator. 
    Condominium means the individual ownership of a unit or parcel of real property within a multi-unit parcel or structure, located as a permitted use within a zoning classification and requirements of this chapter. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, or to provide self-service for patrons and food carryout. 
    Drive-in restaurant means a restaurant so developed that its retail or service character is primarily dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle or to permit patrons to eat while in the motor vehicle, as well as within a building or structure, or primarily to provide self-service for patrons and food carryout. 
    Driveway, residential, means an area surfaced with concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel which leads from an authorized curb cut to required parking spaces or a garage or carport. A driveway shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a maximum width of 24 feet. Within a residential district, no parking area shall be used for parking or storing of any commercial vehicle exceeding a rated hauling capacity of one ton. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building containing three or more dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all respects to the standards set forth in the definition for "Dwelling, single-family." 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, complying with the following standards: 
(1)	It complies with the minimum square footage requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
(2)	It has a minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation of 24 feet and complies in all respects with the single state construction code including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the single state construction code, then and in that event such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply. 
(3)	It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on site in accordance with the single state construction code and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required by the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. If the dwelling is a mobile home, as defined herein, such dwellings shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturers setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the state mobile home commission and shall have a perimeter wall as required by in this subsection. 
(4)	If a dwelling is a mobile home, as defined herein, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis. 
(5)	The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities approved by the county health department. 
(6)	The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, or in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 15 percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 200 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)	The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang or not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with windowsills and roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage along the side of the dwelling; with not less than two exterior doors, with one being in the front of the dwelling and the other being either in the rear or side of the dwelling; contains permanently attached steps connected to the exterior door areas or to porches connected to such door areas, where a difference in elevation requires the steps. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the city building inspector upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of appeals within a period of 15 days from the receipt of notice of the building inspector's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth within the definition of "dwelling," as well as the character of residential development outside of mobile home parks within 2,000 feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of such area; or, where the area is not so developed, by the character of residential development outside of mobile home parks throughout the city. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard-designed home. 
(8)	The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required in this chapter. 
(9)	The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation with and connected to the mobile home shall be of a similar type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards," as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
(10)	The longest side of the dwelling, being the natural front, shall be as closely parallel as possible to the street. 
(11)	The standards of subsections (1)-(10) of this definition shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the ordinance of the city pertaining to such parks. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing not more than two separate dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all respects to the standards set forth in the definition of "Dwelling, single-family." 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Exception means a use permitted only after review of an application by the board of appeals or city council or a modification in the standards of this chapter specifically permitted after review by the board of appeals, planning commission or city council; such review being necessary because the provisions of this chapter covering conditions precedent or subsequent are not precise enough to all applications without interpretation and such review and exception is provided for by this chapter. An exception is not a variance. 
    Family means one or two persons or parents, with such persons' or parents' direct lineal descendants and adopted or foster children, and including the domestic employees thereof, together with not more than three persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for purposes of this chapter. 
    Farm means the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income. 
    Floor area, residential, means, for the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable (for the purposes of computing parking), means that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles (with a rated hauling capacity of one ton or less), boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is necessary. 
    Garage, service, means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Grounding rod means a metal pole permanently positioned in earth to serve as an electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely pass and dissipate. 
    Home occupation means an activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit, which by its nature will not detract from the quality of residential neighborhoods. 
    Hotel means a building or part of a building, with a common entrance, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Junkyard means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, or partially dismantled, unregistered or inoperable automobiles. 
    Kennel, commercial, means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded for remuneration. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined in this section: 
(1)	Front lot line means, in the case of an interior lot, the line separating such lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, the front lot line is that line separating such lot from either street. 
(2)	Rear lot line means the lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)	Side lot line means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through, means any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Lot width means the horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the planning commission and/or the legislative body. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mini-warehouse/self-storage unit. A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customer's goods or wares. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle designed, or constructed so as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit permanent occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. 
    Mobile home (permanent) means a mobile home which is attached to a foundation from which it cannot be readily moved, and which is constructed in such a way that it meets all codes and ordinances of the city applicable to single-family dwellings. 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice that limits the use and/or enjoyment of property, is a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)	Noise; 
(2)	Dust; 
(3)	Smoke; 
(4)	Odor; 
(5)	Glare; 
(6)	Fumes; 
(7)	Flashes; 
(8)	Vibration; 
(9)	Shock waves; 
(10)	Heat; 
(11)	Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12)	Objectionable effluent; 
(13)	Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night; 
(14)	Passenger traffic; 
(15)	Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Nursery, plant materials, means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open-front store means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open-front store" shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width, such area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles and entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Petroleum bulk plant means an establishment for the storage of petroleum products in bulk and for distribution. 
    Pool, private swimming, means an artificially constructed basin for holding water for private family use on a residential lot. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public utility means a person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Radio antenna means a signal receiving device that receives radio broadcast from radio transmitters. 
    Room means, for the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. Plans presented showing one-bedroom, two-bedroom or three-bedroom units and including a den, library, or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Seasonal business means a retail business or service business that is not normally used as a business for eight months or less during any one calendar year. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain minimum front yard, side yard or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Sign means the use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession or business, and are visible to the general public. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign which is related to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign, nonaccessory, means a sign which is not related to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign, temporary, means a freestanding sign which is designed and constructed in such a way as to be readily movable and is not attached in a permanent fashion to the ground. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined in this section, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Story, half, means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet six inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Television antenna means a signal-receiving device, the purpose of which is to receive television signals from television transmitters in the area. 
    Temporary use or building means a use or building permitted by the board of appeals to exist during a specified period of time. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Used car lot means a lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display and sale of automobiles that are in driveable condition, as defined by the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance granted when strict enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are as follows: 
(1)	Undue hardship; 
(2)	Unique circumstances; and 
(3)	Applying to property. 
A variance is not justified unless all three elements are present in the case. A variance is not an exception. 
    Vehicle impound yard means an open space on a lot of record used for the temporary storage of legally confiscated motor vehicles or vehicles held for settlement or processing of insurance claims. 
    Wall, obscuring, means a structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as defined herein: 
(1)	Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)	Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)	Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
    Zoning administrator means the code official. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 201; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Ord. No. 1990-1, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-5, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 201; Ord. No. 2016-1, § 1, 3-7-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-3. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)	Generally. The city council may, from time to time, on recommendation from the planning commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or the regulations in this chapter, or subsequently established in this chapter pursuant to the authority and procedure established in 1921 PA 207 (MCL 125.581 et seq.). 
(b)	Rezoning changes. A person desiring a rezoning change in such person's property shall submit an application for rezoning to the city clerk on forms to be furnished by the clerk. The city council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for rezoning. At the time the application for rezoning is filed, such fee shall be paid to the city clerk which the clerk shall forthwith pay over to the city treasurer to credit to the general revenue fund of the city. 
(c)	Notice . If an individual property or ten or fewer adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the planning commission shall publish notice of the proposal in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall also give a notice of the proposed rezoning by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which rezoning is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning district. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)	Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)	Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
(3)	State when and where the request is to be considered. 
(4)	Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(d)	If 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the planning commission must only give notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, said notice to include the information in subsection (c) above, except that no individual addresses of properties are required to be listed under subsection (c)(2). 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art, XXIII; Ord. No. 1978-5, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXIII; Ord. No. 2006-5, § 2, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 50-4. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
    The zoning ordinance adopted by the city effective September 16, 1960, and all amendments thereto, is hereby repealed. The repeal of the ordinance stated in this section and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXIV; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXIV) 
Sec. 50-5. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the zoning ordinance described in section 50-4, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXV; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXV) 
Sec. 50-6. - Vested right. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject or subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXVI; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXVI) 
Sec. 50-7. - Enforcement, penalties and other remedies. 
(a)	Violations generally; municipal civil infraction. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided in section 1-56. 
(b)	Public nuisance per se. Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	Knowingly assisting in violations; municipal civil infraction. The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided by section 1-56. 
(d)	Each day a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(e)	Rights and remedies are cumulative. The rights and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXVII; Ord. No. 1997-5, §§ 11, 12, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXIV) 
Sec. 50-8. - Severance clause. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXVIII; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXVIII) 
Secs. 50-9-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-31. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the code official or by such deputies of the code official's department as the code official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1900; Code 1972, app. A, § 1900) 
Sec. 50-32. - Duties of code official. 
(a)	The code official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, and to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the code official's duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the code official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until the code official has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)	The code official shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 50-403. 
(c)	Under no circumstances is the code official permitted to make changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out the duties of the code official. 
(d)	The code official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1901; Code 1972, app. A, § 1901) 
Sec. 50-33. - Plot plan. 
    The code official shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1)	The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
(2)	The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved, and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)	The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1902; Code 1972, app. A, § 1902) 
Sec. 50-34. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)	Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)	Permits for new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)	Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the city building code, housing law (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the features listed in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1903; Code 1972, app. A, § 1903) 
Sec. 50-35. - Certificates. 
    No land, building or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)	Certificate not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Certificates required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or the occupation or use caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)	Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy, as required by the city building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(4)	Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Record of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the code official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(6)	Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(7)	Application for certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the code official on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within five days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within such five-day period. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1904; Code 1972, app. A, § 1904) 
Sec. 50-36. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building structure, or part thereof, shall notify the code official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1905; Code 1972, app. A, § 1905) 
Sec. 50-37. - Fees and performance guarantee deposits. 
(a)	Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the city treasurer in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)	To ensure compliance with this chapter and any conditions imposed under it, the city may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements be deposited with the city clerk to insure faithful completion of the improvements. The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee until it is prepared to issue the permit. The city council shall establish procedures by which a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements shall be made as work progresses. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1906; Code 1972, app. A, § 1906; Ord. No. 2006-5, § 3, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 50-38. - Zoning commission. 
    The planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 4 of 1921 PA 207 (MCL 125.584), and shall perform the zoning duties of such commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXI; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXI) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq. 
Sec. 50-39. - Planning commission approval. 
(a)	In cases where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by the planning commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
(b)	The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto, as required under its rules of procedure. 
(c)	The planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as may, in its judgment, be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(d)	Any approval given by the planning commission, under which premises are not used or work is not started within six months or when such use or work has been abandoned for a period of six months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, art. XXII; Code 1972, app. A, art. XXII) 
Secs. 50-40-50-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY COUNCIL ACTING AS ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, adopted October 17, 2016, amended division 2, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 50-56-50-63, pertained to a board of appeals, and derived from an ordinance of January 16, 1978; the Code of 1972, app. A, §§ 2000-2007; Ord. No. 2006-5, adopted August 21, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-3, adopted May 7, 2007 and Ord. No. 2015-1, adopted February 17, 2015. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 

Sec. 50-56. - Creation and membership. 
    Pursuant to the authority of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), the city council shall act as the zoning board of appeals subject to the rules as established herein. The following rules shall apply to the city council acting as zoning board of appeals: 
(1)	A member of the city council acting as a member of the zoning board of appeals may be paid a reasonable per diem and reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(2)	The terms of office for members shall correspond with their terms of office as members of the city council. 
(3)	The city council acting as zoning board of appeals shall annually elect its own chair, vice chair and secretary. These offices may, but shall not be required, to correspond to the offices of mayor or mayor pro tem. 
(4)	The city council acting as zoning board of appeals shall not conduct business until a majority of the regular members of the city council are present. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-57. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the city council acting as zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chair and at such times as the council may determine. All hearings conducted by the city council acting as board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. The city clerk, or the clerk's representatives, shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. Four members of the city council acting as board of zoning appeals shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The city council acting as board of zoning appeals shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-58. - Appeal and interpretation. 
(a)	An appeal to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by a person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the state or city. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the zoning board of appeals by general rule, by filing with the code official, and with the zoning board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Code officials shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals all of the papers constituting the record upon which an action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings and the furtherance of the action appealed from unless the code official certifies to the zoning board of appeals after notice of appeal has been filed with the code official that by reason of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the code official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a written request seeking an interpretation of the zoning ordinance or an appeal of an administrative decision, a notice stating time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall be sent to the person requesting the interpretation not less than 15 days before the public hearing. In addition, if the request for an interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision involves a specific parcel, written notice stating the nature of the interpretation request and the time, date, and place of the public hearing on the interpretation request shall be sent by first class mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. If a tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-59. - Fees. 
    The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. At the time the notice for appeal is filed, such fee shall be paid to the city treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-60. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)	The city council acting as the zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)	Administrative review. To hear and decide questions that arise in the administration of this chapter, including interpretation of zoning maps, and to adopt rules to govern its procedure serving as a zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall also hear and decide on matters referred to the zoning board of appeals or upon which the zoning board of appeals is required to pass under this chapter. 
(2)	Appeals. To hear and decide appeals from and review any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)	Variance. To grant variances under the following circumstances: 
a.	Nonuse variance. Zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to grant, upon appeal, a nonuse variance relating to the construction, structural changes, or alteration of buildings or structures related to dimensional requirements of this chapter or to any other nonuse related standard of this chapter where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, a strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to the owner of such property provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
b.	Use variance. To grant upon an appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the provisions of this chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land, will impose upon said owner unnecessary hardship, such variations of the strict application of this chapter as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the zoning board of appeals is satisfied that granting such variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unnecessary hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the master plan, as established by this chapter, and that the surrounding property will, at the same time, be properly protected. 
c.	Variance. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of the variance. 
(4)	Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board of appeals to pass. Any exception or special approval shall be subject to such conditions as the board of appeals may require to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
a.	Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning map. 
b.	Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the planning commission; 
c.	Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
d.	Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
e.	Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
f.	Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12-month extensions being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. The zoning board of appeals, in granting permits for the temporary uses stated in this subsection shall do so under the following conditions: 
1.	The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
2.	The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of such temporary permit. 
3.	All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be made at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
4.	In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the board of appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments, such as but not limited to golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
5.	The use shall be in harmony with the existing general character of the district. 
6.	No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the board of appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
(b)	In consideration of all appeals and proposed variations to this chapter, the zoning board of appeals shall, before making any such exceptions or granting any variances, in a specific case, first determine that the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)	That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property. 
(2)	That the proposed variation will not unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets. 
(3)	That the proposed variation will not increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety. 
(4)	That the proposed variation will not unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(5)	Variances may be granted only when it can be clearly demonstrated by the petition that hardship or practical difficulty will, in fact, exist if such variance is not granted. 
(6)	The mere fact that older, larger signs constructed under prior ordinances exist in the area shall not be sufficient reason to declare a hardship or practical difficulty. 
(7)	In no case shall a variance be granted if it is determined by the zoning board of appeals that the applicant has created the hardship or practical difficulty. 
(8)	Before a variance is granted, it must be shown that the alleged hardships or practical difficulties are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting a variance and result from conditions which do not generally exist throughout the city. 
(9)	The applicant for a variance shall be prepared to furnish documentation to indicate that the hardship or practical difficulties do, in fact, exist. 
(10)	The term "hardship" shall not be deemed financial hardship relating to the cost or size of a sign, the fact that a sign has already been erected, or the fact that a sign is only available in standard sizes. 
(11)	The alleged hardship or practical difficulty which will result from the failure to grant the variance must include substantially more than a mere inconvenience or mere inability to attain a higher financial return. 
(12)	It must be shown that allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the board to grant a variance and, especially, the rights of others whose property would be affected by allowing the variance. 
(13)	Every finding of fact of the board shall be supported in the record of proceedings of the board. 
(c)	The concurring vote of four members of the city council acting as the board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the code official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to give or grant to the board of appeals the power or authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the city council in its own capacity in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-61. - Orders. 
    In exercising the powers set out in section 50-60, the board of appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the orders, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the code official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-62. - Notice. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning district. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)	Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)	Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
(3)	State when and where the request is to be considered. 
(4)	Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 50-63. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)	No order of the board of appeals permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)	No order of the board of appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 50-64-50-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-101. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 One-Family Residential District R-2 One-Family Residential District R-3 One-Family Residential District RT Two-Family Residential District RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District OS-1 Office Service District B-1 Local Business District B-2 Community Business District B-3 General Business District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 General Industrial District P-1 Vehicular Parking District PRD Planned Residential District PDD Planned Development District  
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 300; Code 1972, app. A, § 300) 
Sec. 50-102. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this chapter, and which map with all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 301; Code 1972, app. A, § 301) 
Editor's note- Ordinances amending zoning district boundaries are listed in section 50-551. 
Sec. 50-103. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(4)	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(5)	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)	Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)	Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 302; Code 1972, app. A, § 302) 
Sec. 50-104. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the city, one of the following conditions will apply: 
(1)	Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as being in whichever district of this chapter most closely conforms with the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the planning commission to the city council and the council shall approve such recommendation by resolution. 
(2)	Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an R-1 district until a zoning map for such area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months, after the matter is referred to it by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 303; Code 1972, app. A, § 303) 
Sec. 50-105. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way, or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 304; Code 1972, app. A, § 304) 
Sec. 50-106. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of articles IV and V of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 305; Code 1972, app. A, § 305) 
Secs. 50-107-50-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1-R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-126. - Intent. 
    The R-1 through R-3 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent of the R-1 through R-3 one-family residential districts is to provide for an environment of predominantly medium-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 400; Code 1972, app. A, § 400) 
Sec. 50-127. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an R-1 through R-3 one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)	Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or assessor's plat, having an area of not less than ten acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the city and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises. 
(3)	Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(4)	Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(5)	Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 
(6)	State licensed residential facility licensed under 1979 PA 218 (MCL 400.701 et seq.) or 1973 PA 116 (MCL 722.111 et seq.), that provides resident services or care for six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervision for persons in need of that supervision or care, that is required to be a permitted use in a residential zone under section 3b of 1921 PA 207 (MCL 125.583b). 
(7)	Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the uses permitted in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 401; Code 1972, app. A, § 401) 
Sec. 50-128. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 through R-3 one-family residential districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed; 
b.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419. 
(2)	Public, parochial and private intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419. 
(3)	Utility and public service buildings and uses, without storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(4)	Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers, not including dormitories, provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419. 
(5)	Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The proposed site for any of the uses permitted in this subsection which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 50-419; 
b.	Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition; 
c.	Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage; 
d.	Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, it shall conform to the requirements of chapter 6, article VII of this Code. 
(6)	Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 50-419; 
b.	The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare or collector street and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; 
c.	Development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 100 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirement; 
d.	Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, it shall conform to the requirements of chapter 6, article VII of this Code. 
(7)	Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Any use permitted in this subsection shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat; 
b.	All access to such site shall be in accordance with section 50-419; 
c.	No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(8)	Extended care hospitals, including the main hospital building, staff housing, visitor sleeping accommodations, service buildings, storage buildings and the like, not to exceed two stories or 35 feet in height, when the following conditions are met: 
a.	Such hospital complexes shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least 40 acres in area; 
b.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419; 
c.	The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines, or streets shall be at least 150 feet, except that detached dwelling units for staff housing may be permitted with minimum setback distances equal to at least the minimum yard requirements for one-family dwellings as set forth in division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, for each applicable residential district; 
d.	An obscuring wall or berm shall be provided to screen storage areas, loading areas, parking areas, and the like from any adjacent residentially zoned area. 
(9)	Private pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only, provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.	Private pools shall not require planning commission review and approval; 
b.	There shall be a minimum distance of not less than six feet, between the adjoining property line, or alley right-of-way and the outside of the pool wall; 
c.	No swimming pool shall be located less than 35 feet from any front lot line; 
d.	No swimming pool shall be located in an easement; 
e.	Private pools shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 6, article VII of this Code. 
(10)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in subsections (1)-(9) of this section. 
(11)	Home occupations engaged in within a residential district by the resident of a dwelling unit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Such occupation shall be carried on by one occupant within the principal building, excluding all outdoor activities, with no employees. Examples of such home occupations are hairdressing, millinery, dressmaking, bookkeeping and accounting services, real estate and insurance sales, catalog sales, and instruction in a craft or a fine art within the residence. 
b.	Home occupations shall be operated in their entirety within the dwelling and not within any garage or accessory building located upon the premises except for incidental storage which may be allowed within a residential-type garage upon the premises. 
c.	There shall be no evidence other than a nameplate no more than two square feet in area, in accordance with the provisions of article VI, section 50-509 of this chapter, that indicates from the exterior that the dwelling is being used for anything other than residential purposes. 
d.	No home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling unless the home occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises for residential purposes. 
e.	No service shall be sold or conducted upon or from the premises which would constitute a nuisance to adjoining residents by reason of noise, smoke, odor, electrical disturbance, night lighting or the creation of unreasonable traffic to the premises. 
f.	No home occupation requiring warehousing of retail or wholesale merchandise or delivery of the retail or wholesale merchandise by large semitrailer-type trucks shall be allowed. 
g.	Paving of any yard area other than normal driveway areas to accommodate parking for home occupations is prohibited. 
h.	No home occupation shall be allowed which utilizes more than 20 percent of the interior gross floor area of the premises and not, in any event, more than 300 square feet. 
i.	In no instance shall the repair or sale of motor vehicles be determined to be a home occupation. 
j.	The permission for home occupations as provided in this subsection is intended to secure flexibility in the application of this chapter, but such permission is not intended to allow the essential residential character of a residential district in terms of use, traffic and appearance to be changed in the slightest degree by the occurrence of nonresidential activities. Furthermore, no addition shall be made to a structure for the accommodation of any home occupation, nor shall any alterations be made that are visible from the exterior of a structure. All activities, unless otherwise stated, shall be carried on indoors only within the principal building. 
k.	The regulation of home occupations shall not waive additional provisions that may be necessary to meet other local, state or federal requirements. 
l.	No home occupation under the terms of this chapter shall be allowed until a certificate of occupancy therefor has been issued by the building inspection department. Such certificate shall state that the home occupation complies with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 402; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Ord. No. 1990-1, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 402; Ord. No. 2006-5, § 7, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 50-129. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the R-1 through R-3 one-family residential districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 403; Code 1972, app. A, § 403) 
Secs. 50-130-50-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RT TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-146. - Intent. 
    The RT two-family residential districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. The RT two-family residential district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structure and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. The RT two-family residential district also allows the construction of new two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 500; Code 1972, app. A, § 500) 
Sec. 50-147. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the RT two-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family district shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings. 
(3)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 501; Code 1972, app. A, § 501) 
Sec. 50-148. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in RT two-family residential districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 502; Code 1972, app. A, § 502) 
Secs. 50-149-50-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-166. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and, related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family districts. The multiple-family residential district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, single-family community. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 600; Code 1972, app. A, § 600) 
Sec. 50-167. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RM-1 multiple-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	All uses permitted and as regulated in the RT two-family residential district. 
(2)	Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 601; Code 1972, app. A, § 601) 
Sec. 50-168. - Required conditions. 
(a)	In the case of multiple-family development in a multiple-family residential district, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
(1)	The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
(2)	All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as but not limited to channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with public safety equipment access. 
(b)	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 602; Code 1972, app. A, § 602) 
Sec. 50-169. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the RM-1 multiple-family residential districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.	All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least ten acres in area. 
b.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 50-419. 
c.	The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
(2)	Housing for the elderly with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.	All dwellings shall consist of at least 350 square feet per unit, not including kitchen and sanitary facilities; 
b.	Total coverage of all buildings, including dwelling units and related service buildings, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total site exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way for two-story buildings and 15 percent of the total site exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way for buildings over two stories in height; 
c.	For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
(3)	Convalescent homes and orphanages when the following conditions are met: 
a.	There shall be provided on the site not less than 1,500 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,500 square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings; 
b.	No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
(4)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in subsections (1)-(3) of this section. 
(5)	Mobile home parks in accordance with the provisions in subsection 50-409(3). 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 603; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 603) 
Sec. 50-170. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the RM-1 multiple-family residential districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 604; Code 1972, app. A, § 604) 
Secs. 50-171-50-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-186. - Intent. 
    The OS-1 office service districts are designed to accommodate uses, such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 700; Code 1972, app. A, § 700) 
Sec. 50-187. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an OS-1 office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales. 
(2)	Medical office, including clinics. 
(3)	Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes; subject to the density requirements of section 50-169. 
(4)	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only. 
(5)	Personal service establishments including barbershops, beauty shops and health salons. 
(6)	Off-street parking lots. 
(7)	Churches. 
(8)	Other uses similar to the uses in subsections (1)-(7) of this section. 
(9)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 701; Code 1972, app. A, § 701) 
Sec. 50-188. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the OS-1 office service districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as but not limited to a pharmacy or apothecary shop, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted. 
(2)	Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions; provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments. 
(3)	Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings, and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, or gas regulator stations. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 702; Code 1972, app. A, § 702) 
Sec. 50-189. - Required conditions. 
(a)	In the OS-1 office service districts, no interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(b)	In the OS-1 office service districts, the outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited. 
(c)	In the OS-1 office service districts, warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the permitted uses in this division, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 703; Code 1972, app. A, § 703) 
Sec. 50-190. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the OS-1 office service districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 704; Code 1972, app. A, § 704) 
Secs. 50-191-50-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-206. - Intent. 
    The B-1 local business districts are designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 800; Code 1972, app. A, § 800) 
Sec. 50-207. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1 local business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as but not limited to groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware; restaurants or other places serving food or beverages except those having the character of a drive-in. 
(2)	Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.) tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners. 
(3)	Dry cleaning establishments, or pickup stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Office building for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales. 
(5)	Medical offices, including clinics. 
(6)	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only. 
(7)	Post office and similar governmental office buildings, serving persons living in the adjacent residential area. 
(8)	Off-street parking lots. 
(9)	Other uses similar to the uses in subsections (1)-(8) of this section. 
(10)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 801; Ord. No. 1990-1, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 801) 
Sec. 50-208. - Required conditions. 
(a)	All business establishments in a B-1 local business district shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises in a B-1 local business district shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(b)	All business, servicing, or processing in a B-1 local business district, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 802; Code 1972, app. A, § 802) 
Sec. 50-209. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 local business districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line. 
a.	The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.	The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline service stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles, including lubricating facilities, may be permitted on lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other provisions required in this chapter. 
(2)	Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings and telephone exchange buildings; electric transformer stations and substations; gas regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards; water and sewage pumping stations. 
(3)	Seasonal business, in which any person who sells, offers for sale, exhibits, displays, demonstrates or takes orders for the retail sale of any personal property, produce, meats, fish or goods or services whatsoever from any stand, temporary structure, truck or vehicle; or any person who, for a period of eight months or less per year, hires, leases, rents, occupies or uses any place or places within the city, whether it is a building or not, for the purpose of taking orders for future delivery; or both. The following standards shall be applied prior to approval by the zoning official: 
a.	An application for a seasonal business license shall be obtained from the city clerk and fully completed prior to submittal to the zoning official; 
b.	All parking requirements shall conform to section 50-406, off-street parking requirement; 
c.	Signage shall conform to the requirements specified in article VI of this chapter; 
d.	Trash receptacles shall be provided; and the site shall be maintained in an appropriate fashion, including the removal of litter generated on the site and control of weeds, grass and vegetation; 
e.	If required by local health codes, appropriate sanitation facilities shall be provided; 
f.	Upon approval by the zoning official, proper fees shall be paid to the city clerk for the license, as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 803; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 803) 
Sec. 50-210. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the B-1 local business districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 804; Code 1972, app. A, § 804) 
Secs. 50-211-50-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-226. - Intent. 
    The B-2 community business districts are designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the B-1 local business districts, and are generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 900; Code 1972, app. A, § 900) 
Sec. 50-227. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 community business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1 districts, except gasoline service stations, subject to the regulations applicable in this division. 
(2)	All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as follows: 
a.	Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building; 
b.	Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature, of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct; 
c.	Restaurants or other places serving food or beverages, except those having the character of a drive-in; 
d.	Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings; 
e.	Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit. 
(3)	Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
(4)	Other uses similar to the uses in subsections (1)-(3) of this section. 
(5)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 901; Code 1972, app. A, § 901) 
Sec. 50-228. - Required conditions. 
(a)	All business establishments in the B-2 community business districts shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(b)	All business, servicing or processing in the B-2 community business districts, except for off-street parking, loading and those open-air uses indicated as being subject to special conditions in section 50-229, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 902; Code 1972, app. A, § 902) 
Sec. 50-229. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 community business districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	Open-air business uses when developed in planned relationship with the B-2 district as follows: 
a.	Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies provided further that such uses shall be located at the exterior end of the building mass located in a B-2 district. 
b.	Recreational space providing children's amusement park and other similar recreation when part of a planned development, provided further that such use be located at the exterior end of the building mass located in a B-2 district, but not at the intersection of two major thoroughfares. Such recreation space shall be fenced on all sides with a four-foot chainlink type fence. 
(2)	Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least 100 feet from any front yard, rear yard, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 
(3)	Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a larger planned shopping center designed so as to integrate the automobile service center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping center, and provided further that a building permit shall not be issued separately for the construction of any automobile service center within the B-2 district. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 903; Code 1972, app. A, § 903) 
Sec. 50-230. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the B-2 community business districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 904; Code 1972, app. A, § 904) 
Secs. 50-231-50-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-246. - Intent. 
    The B-3 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the B-1 local business district or the B-2 community business district. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1000; Code 1972, app. A, § 1000) 
Sec. 50-247. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-3 general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(2)	Auto wash when completely enclosed in a building. 
(3)	Bus passenger stations. 
(4)	New and used car salesroom, showroom, or office. 
(5)	Other uses similar to the uses in subsections (1)-(4) of this section. 
(6)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1001; Code 1972, app. A, § 1001) 
Sec. 50-248. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	Outdoor sales spaces for the exclusive sale of new or secondhand automobiles, rental of trailers and/or automobiles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, manufactured and modular housing not constructed on site, all subject to the following: 
a.	The lot area on which vehicles for sale are parked, along with required parking spaces and maneuvering lanes which access the showroom and/or sales area, shall be paved with asphalt or concrete materials in accordance with the provisions as provided in subsection 50-407(8); 
b.	Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets; 
c.	No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot; 
d.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
(2)	Motel, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare; 
b.	Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area; 
c.	No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than 30 days within any calendar year. 
(3)	Business in the character of a drive-in or open front store, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained; 
b.	Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets; 
c.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts; 
d.	A six-foot high completely obscuring wall or berm shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, OS-1, B-1, B-2 or B-3 districts. The height of the wall or berm shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Such wall or berm shall further meet the requirements of article IV of this chapter. 
(4)	Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed building and provided further that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting residential districts on the same side of the street. 
(5)	Commercial plant materials nursery for only the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The storage or display of any materials or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure; 
b.	All loading and parking shall be provided off-street; 
c.	The storage of any soil, fertilizer, equipment, tools and products shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses. 
(6)	Commercial greenhouse for the growing of plant material only to be sold at retail on the site, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The storage or display of plant materials shall meet all setback requirements; 
b.	Storage of soil, fertilizers, equipment, tools and products required for the growing of plant material shall be totally enclosed within the building; 
c.	All parking and loading shall be provided off-street. 
(7)	Automotive repair facilities which provide for general vehicle maintenance, such as tune-up, brake repair, shock replacement, muffler installation and tire repairs. It is intended that only minor repair facilities be allowed in this zone, minor repairs being defined as vehicle repairs which can be completed in an eight-hour period. Automotive repair facilities shall conform to the requirements as provided in subsection (1)a of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1002; Ord. No. 1990-1, § 2; Ord. No. 1997-1, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-1997; Code 1972, app. A, § 1002) 
Sec. 50-249. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the B-3 general business districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1003; Code 1972, app. A, § 1003) 
Secs. 50-250-50-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-266. - Intent. 
(a)	General intent. The I-1 light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way or create a nuisance to any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 light industrial district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. The I-1 light industrial district is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, shall not be permitted. 
(b)	General goals. The general goals of the I-1 light industrial districts include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)	Providing sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the city's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses. 
(2)	Protecting abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)	Promoting manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)	Protecting the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the city's tax revenue. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1100; Code 1972, app. A, § 1100) 
Sec. 50-267. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-1 light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any use permitted in the B-3 general business district, except that after May 9, 1988, no new dwelling may be erected and no existing structure may be converted for residential purposes in the I-1 district. 
(2)	Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall or berm on those sides abutting R-1 through R-3, RT, RM-1, OS-1, and B-1 through B-3 districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 50-415. In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall or berm may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall or berm shall not be less than four feet six inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of article IV of this chapter. A chainlink fence, with intensive greenbelt planting, at least 30 feet in width may be substituted for the obscuring wall or berm. The height of plant materials shall be determined in the same manner as the wall or berm height as set forth in this subsection: 
a.	Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities. This subsection is not intended to include self-storage facilities as described in section 50-287. 
b.	The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products, such as but not limited to bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge, machine shops, welding shops and cabinet shops; 
c.	The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheetmetal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns; 
d.	The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas; 
e.	Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded products; 
f.	Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs; 
g.	Laboratories-Experimental, film or testing; 
h.	Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheetmetal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like; 
i.	Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal directly with the consumer at retail; 
j.	All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses; 
k.	Except where specifically prohibited, uses permitted by this subsection (2) may provide for retail outlet on-site. This retail outlet shall be used for the sale of products manufactured at the location. The retail outlet shall be provided with parking and building entrances separate from those of the manufacturing operation. 
(3)	Warehouse, storage and transfer, and electric or gas service buildings and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations, water supply and sewage disposal plants, water and gas tank holders, railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way, and freight terminals. 
(4)	Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies; provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall, berm or fence and greenbelt on those sides abutting all residential or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 district, the extent of such wall, berm or fence and greenbelt may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such wall, berm or fence and greenbelt shall not be less than five feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chainlink type fence, with intensive greenbelt planting at least 30 feet in width inside of such fence, may be substituted for the wall or berm. 
(5)	Municipal uses such as water plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
(6)	Commercial kennels. 
(7)	Greenhouses, wholesale and retail. 
(8)	Trade or industrial schools. 
(9)	Freestanding nonaccessory signs. 
(10)	Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the uses set out in this section. 
(11)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1101; Ord. No. 1983-2, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1101; Res. No. 68-01, 12-3-2001) 
Sec. 50-268. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 light industrial districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)	Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when completely enclosed. Adequate space must be provided for storage of vehicles on the premises, exclusive of required off-street parking facilities. A maximum of five vehicles waiting to be repaired, in the process of being repaired or having completed repairs may be stored outside on the premises at any one time and shall conform to the required yard setbacks of the I-1 district. Vehicles in excess of five shall be located within the rear yard and shall be stored within the confines of a building or fence that is completely enclosed with a minimum height of eight feet. Such storage shall not comprise an auto junkyard or salvage operation. 
(2)	Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(3)	Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(4)	Uses which serve the convenience needs of the industrial district, such as but not limited to eating and drinking establishments, bank, savings and loan associations, credit union, automobile service station, motel or bowling alley, trade or industrial school or industrial clinic. 
(5)	Other uses of a similar character to the uses listed in this section. 
(6)	Liquefied petroleum (LP) gas may be stored, distributed, and sold from facilities within this zone when an earth berm of a height equal to the highest point of the storage tank has been constructed between the facility and any residential or commercial zone, and subject to all special codes and permits applicable to this type of facility. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1102; Ord. No. 1981-7, § 2; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1102; Ord. No. 2011-2, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 50-269. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the I-1 light industrial districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1103; Code 1972, app. A, § 1103) 
Secs. 50-270-50-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8. 

Sec. 50-286. - Intent. 
    The I-2 general industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities, including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1200; Code 1972, app. A, § 1200) 
Sec. 50-287. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-2 general industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 district. 
(2)	Heating and electric power generating plants. 
(3)	Any of the following production or manufacturing uses, not including storage of finished products, provided that they are located not less than 500 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 200 feet distant from any other district: 
a.	Junkyards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or within an eight-foot obscuring wall, berm or solid wooden or solid aluminum fence, and greenbelt 30 feet in width; or provided there exists a natural terrain feature or sufficient mature tree growth that effectively screens the operation; and, provided further that one property line abuts a railroad right-of-way; 
State Law reference- Screening for junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq. 
b.	Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant; 
c.	Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill; 
d.	Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris; 
e.	Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage; 
f.	Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore. 
(4)	Any other use which shall be determined by the board of appeals, after recommendation from the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the permitted uses in subsections (1)-(3) of this section. The board of appeals may impose any required setback and/or performance standards so as to ensure public health, safety and general welfare. 
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in subsections (1)-(4) of this section. 
(6)	Vehicle impound yards for the temporary storage of motor vehicles, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The perimeter of the lot on which vehicles are actively stored shall be enclosed in its entirety with an opaque fence with a minimum height of eight feet. 
b.	Adequate lighting shall be located near the perimeter of the storage area so as to deter vandalism. 
c.	Adequate fire suppression devices shall be located on the premises in accordance with the International Fire Prevention Code. 
d.	No more than one vehicle per 200 square feet of gross active storage area shall be allowed. 
e.	No vehicle will be allowed to be stored on the premises for a continuous period of 90 days or more. 
f.	No dismantling, repair or alteration of vehicles will be allowed on the premises. 
g.	No sale of vehicles or vehicle parts shall be allowed. 
h.	Impound yards shall be subject to periodic inspections for compliance with the requirements by the public safety and building departments of the city. 
(7)	Mini-warehouse/self-storage unit as defined in section 50-2. 
(8)	Self-storage facilities and mini-warehouses when operated within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 1955-9; Ord. No. 1956-4; Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1201; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Ord. No. 1991-5, § 2; Code 1972, § 8-56, app. A, § 1201; Res. No. 68-01, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 2016-1, § 1, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 50-288. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    For area and bulk requirements in the I-2 general industrial districts, see division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1202; Code 1972, app. A, § 1202) 
Secs. 50-289-50-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 

Sec. 50-306. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1300; Code 1972, app. A, § 1300) 
Sec. 50-307. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in the P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1301; Code 1972, app. A, § 1301) 
Sec. 50-308. - Required conditions. 
(a)	In the P-1 vehicular parking districts, the parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(b)	In the P-1 vehicular parking districts, such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RM-1 or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to the P-1 vehicular parking districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and the RM-1 or nonresidential districts. 
(c)	Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
(d)	No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(e)	No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(f)	No building, other than those for shelter or attendants, shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(g)	Applications for P-1 vehicular parking district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensional layout of the area requested, showing the intended parking plans in accordance with sections 50-407 and 50-417. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1302; Code 1972, app. A, § 1302) 
Sec. 50-309. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a)	Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 vehicular parking district is contiguous to the side or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall or berm shall be located along such lot line. 
(b)	Front yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage in the same block with residential structures or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for such residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is greater. The required wall or berm shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between such setback and street right-of-way lines shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1303; Code 1972, app. A, § 1303) 
Sec. 50-310. - Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1304; Code 1972, app. A, § 1304) 
Secs. 50-311-50-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PRD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 

Sec. 50-326. - Intent. 
(a)	The purpose of the PRD planned residential district is to permit a means of development which allows a mixture of types of residential units (one-family, two-family, multiple-family) planned and designed in such a manner so as to preserve and protect the character of abutting land as well as protecting uses within the PRD by preserving as much natural vegetation and terrain as possible. 
(b)	Development under this division shall be in accordance with a comprehensive physical plan establishing functional use areas, density patterns and a fixed system of residential collector streets. 
(c)	The regulations in this division shall apply to all PRD planned residential districts and shall be subject further to the provisions of articles IV and V of this chapter, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1400; Code 1972, app. A, § 1400) 
Sec. 50-327. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the PRD planned residential district, uses permitted and as regulated in the R-1 single-family district. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1401; Code 1972, app. A, § 1401) 
Sec. 50-328. - Uses permitted on special approval. 
    Planned residential development (PRD), as defined in section 50-329, may be permitted in the planned residential district. The following uses may be included in a planned residential development: 
(1)	One-family dwellings; 
(2)	Two-family dwellings; 
(3)	Multiple-family dwellings; 
(4)	Rental or management offices and club rooms accessory to the planned development; 
(5)	Churches; 
(6)	Public, parochial and private elementary schools or high schools offering courses in general education; 
(7)	Golf courses, subject to the provisions of subsection 50-218(6), except as otherwise modified in the approved plan; 
(8)	Public libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities; 
(9)	Private parks and recreation areas are for the use of the residents of the planned residential development; 
(10)	Accessory uses and accessory buildings including parks and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1402; Code 1972, app. A, § 1402) 
Sec. 50-329. - Definition; density computation. 
(a)	The term "planned residential development" means a specific parcel of land or several contiguous parcels of land, located entirely within the planned residential districts for which a comprehensive physical plan meeting the requirements of subsection 50-331(1), and establishing functional use areas, density patterns, a fixed system of residential collector streets, provisions for public utilities, drainage and other essential services and similar factors necessary or incidental to residential development has been approved by the city council in accordance with subsection 50-331(3), and which has been, is being, or will be developed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(b)	The site used for computing density shall consist of contiguous land under single ownership or control. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1403; Code 1972, app. A, § 1403) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-330. - Regulations limiting height, bulk, density and area by land use. 
(a)	In the PRD planned residential district, for purposes of computing and controlling population density, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)	The maximum density shall not exceed 17.1 rooms per acre; 
(2)	The number of dwelling units permitted per acre shall be determined by the following schedule: 
a.	All single-family detached dwellings and attached cluster dwellings, shall count as six rooms; 
b.	All four-bedroom units in multiple-family structures shall count as five rooms; 
c.	All three-bedroom units in multiple-family structures shall count as four rooms; 
d.	All two-bedroom units in multiple-family structures shall count as three rooms; 
e.	All one-bedroom units in multiple-family structures shall count as two rooms; 
f.	All efficiency units in multiple-family structures shall count as one room; 
(3)	For the purpose of determining the number of bedrooms in units in multiple-family structures, all plans showing one-bedroom, two-bedroom or three-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room, shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density; 
(4)	No more than 50 percent of the total rooms permitted on the site shall be in multiple-family dwelling units; 
(5)	No more than five percent of the total rooms permitted on the site as multiple-family dwelling units shall be efficiency type apartments; 
(6)	Public open space such as park sites and public and private road rights-of-way, except for major thoroughfare, may be included in computing the area of the parcel, and therefore, the related density. Nonresidential use areas and those areas proposed for the development of churches and related activities shall be excluded in computing the area of the parcel, and, therefore, the related density. A maximum of 50 percent of the horizontal surface of all natural or manmade bodies of water located entirely within the planned residential development project shall be permitted to be computed as a portion of the required 15 percent private common open space. The horizontal surface of all bodies of water shall be excluded from the computation of density. 
(b)	In order to protect abutting land on the periphery of the planned residential development, the following rules shall control: 
(1)	Where the adjacent land is zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, the planned residential development shall provide for single-family development to a depth of not less than 330 feet along such boundary so as to make this area conform to the abutting one-family area; provided that this 330-foot depth may be penetrated by an elementary school site, park, golf course or other related open space which is recorded in perpetuity for such purpose. The only building permitted in this 330 feet shall be a one-family residence; 
(2)	The requirement of subsection (b)(1) of this section may be waived by the planning commission where the abutting land is not platted and if the planning commission determines that there is a reasonable basis for believing that the adjacent land may be developed in other than single-family usage because the master plan indicates other than single-family, and the conditions of the land at such boundary indicate that multiple-family development would preserve the natural terrain and vegetation to a greater extent than single-family along this common boundary. 
(c)	Common open space shall be provided on the basis of at least 15 percent of the total acreage of the site area within the planned residential development, provided that if a golf course is provided in the development, at least 71/2 percent of the total land area must be put in open space other than golf course. No yard requirements for either single-family or multiple-family units shall count as part of this open space requirement. The common open space shall be centrally located as one site, or shall be well spaced throughout the development. 
(d)	All yards, height, bulk, minimum floor area, lot coverage, lot area and lot width and parking requirements for single-family and two-family developments shall be in conformance with division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, and article IV of this chapter for the R-1 and RT residential districts. 
(e)	Multiple-family structures shall be subject to the requirements of division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations, and article IV of this chapter for the RM-1 multiple-family district, except as otherwise modified in the approved plan. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1404; Code 1972, app. A, § 1404) 
Sec. 50-331. - Procedure for application for approval. 
    Application for a planned residential development shall be made to the city council for consideration under subsection (2) of this section. The applicant shall be required to submit the following materials to the city council: 
(1)	Submittal of proposed planned residential development plan. An application shall be submitted to the city manager for review and recommendation by the planning commission of the following: 
a.	A boundary survey of the exact acreage being requested, done by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet); 
b.	A topographic map of the entire area at a contour interval of not more than two feet. This map shall indicate all major stands of trees, bodies of water and unbuildable areas (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet); 
c.	A recent aerial photograph of the area shall be provided (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet); 
d.	A preliminary plan for the entire area carried out in such detail as to indicate the functional uses and dwelling unit types being requested; the proposed population densities; a traffic circulation plan; sites being reserved for schools, service activities, playgrounds, recreation areas, parking areas, and other open spaces and areas to be used for the public or by residents of the planned residential development (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet); 
e.	An indication of the contemplated storm and sanitary sewer plan, and a preliminary topographic map indicating how the land area is proposed to be shaped; 
f.	A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the sponsor, indicating the type of dwelling units contemplated, resultant population and providing supporting documentation such as: soil surveys, studies supporting land use requests, and the intended scheduling of the development. 
(2)	Review of proposed planned residential development. Upon receipt of an application as a preliminary submittal, the city manager shall refer such request to the planning commission for its report and recommendation. Prior to making its decision, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notification of the public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required under section 50-62. Within a reasonable time following the public hearing and after receipt of the planning commission's report and recommendation, the city council shall meet for final consideration of the request and deny, approve, or approve with conditions the request. The city council shall prepare a report stating its conclusion, its decision, and the basis for its decision and any conditions imposed on an affirmative decision. The council shall approve such application and accompanying plan upon finding that: 
a.	All applicable provisions of this division and this chapter have been met. Insofar as any provision of this division shall be in conflict with the provisions of any other section of this chapter, the provisions of this division shall apply to the lands embraced within a planned residential development area; 
b.	Adequate areas have been provided for all utilities, schools, walkways, playgrounds, recreation areas, parking areas and other open spaces and areas to be used by the public or by residents of the community; 
c.	Open space may include parks and recreation areas, wooded lots, schools, golf courses, water areas and any use of a similar nature approved by the city council; 
d.	There is or will be, at the time of development, an adequate means of disposing of sanitary sewage and of supplying the development with water, and that the road system and stormwater drainage system is adequate; 
e.	The plan provides for an efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the open areas, and the plan is in keeping with the physical character of the city and the area surrounding the development; 
f.	The applicant has made provision to ensure that those areas shown on the plan for use by the public or occupants of the development will be or have been committed for that purpose. The city council may require that conveyances or other documents be placed in escrow to accomplish this; 
g.	Provisions have been made to provide for the future financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open space areas, and common use areas which are to be included within the development and that maintenance of such improvements is assured by a means satisfactory to the city council; 
h.	Provision has been made for the installation of all streets and the necessary utilities by a means satisfactory to city council. 
(3)	Approval of planned residential development by city council. 
a.	If the city council shall determine to grant the application and approve the plan, it shall instruct the city attorney to prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract, after approval by resolution of the council, shall be executed by the city and the applicant and recorded in the office of the county registrar of deeds. Approval shall be effective upon recording; 
b.	Once an area has been included within a plan for planned residential development and such plan has been approved by the council, no development may take place in such area nor may any use thereof be made except in accordance with such plan or in accordance with a council approved amendment thereto, unless the plan is terminated as provided in this division; 
c.	An approved plan may be terminated by the applicant or the applicant's successors or assigns, prior to any development within the area involved, by filing with the city and recording in the county records an affidavit so stating. The approval of the plan shall terminate upon such recording; 
d.	No approved plan shall be terminated after development commences except with the approval of the city council and of all parties in interest in the land; 
e.	Within a period of two years following approval by the council, final plats and/or site plans for an area embraced within the planned residential development must be submitted as provided in section 50-332. If such plats or plans have not been submitted and approved within the two-year period, the right to develop under the approved plan shall terminate unless an extension of this time period is applied for by the proprietor in writing and granted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1405; Code 1972, app. A, § 1405; Ord. No. 2006-5, § 8, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 50-332. - Submission of final plats and site plans and development of planned residential development. 
(a)	Before any building permits shall be issued for buildings and structures within the area of planned residential development, final plats or site plans for a project area shall be submitted to the city manager for review and recommendation by the planning commission of the following: 
(1)	The site plans and plats shall be fully dimensioned and shall show a fully scaled plan view of all building (except detached single-family dwellings), all public rights-of-way, and private streets, areas within each project area and the proposed ultimate density thereof, parking areas, utilities, churches, schools and areas to be set aside for the use of the public or by residents within the development (scale: one inch equals 50 feet); 
(2)	The proposed topography (contour interval of not more than two feet) shall be superimposed on all plats and plans (scale: one inch equals 50 feet); 
(3)	Floor plans typical of all residential buildings except detached single-family shall be submitted and the site plan shall indicate which floor plan is applicable to each such building; 
(4)	Each final plat or site plan submitted within the planned neighborhood development shall, either individually or in combination with previously approved contiguous project areas, meet the standards of this division as to density, open space requirements and housing mixture requirements. 
(b)	Review and approval of site plans for multiple dwellings shall comply with section 50-417 as well as this division except as otherwise modified in the approved plan. Review and approval of plats shall comply with 1967 PA 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and chapter 26, article III of this Code, in addition to the requirements of this division. 
(c)	Before approving of any final plat or plan, the city council shall determine that: 
(1)	All portions of the project area shown upon the approved plan for the planned residential development for use by the public or the residents of lands within the planned residential development have been committed to such uses in accordance with the planned residential development contract; 
(2)	The final plats or site plans are in substantial conformity with the approved plan for the planned residential development; 
(3)	Provisions have been made in accordance with the planned residential development contract to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the project area for open spaces and common areas which are to be provided by the applicant and that maintenance of such improvements is ensured in accordance with the planned residential development contract; 
(4)	A dedication of public roads shall have been made so as to cause continuity of public access between the adjacent major thoroughfare and ingress and egress to all private development within the project area plan. 
(d)	If development of approved final plats or site plans is not substantially completed in three years after approval, further final submittals under the planned residential development shall cease until the part in question is completed or cause can be shown for not completing the planned residential development. 
(e)	In order to ensure the development of open space in conjunction with a planned residential development, the city council shall include in the contract recorded with the county registrar of deeds a schedule for the completion of portions of the open space so that it coincides with completion of dwelling units. The developer may suggest a schedule for review by the council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1406; Code 1972, app. A, § 1406) 
Sec. 50-333. - Fees. 
    Fees for legal, engineering and planning review of site plans shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1407; Code 1972, app. A, § 1407) 
Secs. 50-334-50-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - PDD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 

Sec. 50-351. - Intent. 
    The PDD planned development district is intended to permit the private or public development or redevelopment of areas throughout the city which shall be substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the master plan of future land use for the city. The reuse patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable environment and shall be harmonious to the general surrounding uses permitting flexibility in overall development while ensuring adequate safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1500; Code 1972, app. A, § 1500) 
Sec. 50-352. - Procedure for application for approval. 
    Application shall be made to the city council for consideration under the PDD planned development district. The applicant shall be required to submit the application to the city manager for review and recommendation by the planning commission. The application shall contain the following materials: 
(1)	A property area survey of the exact area being requested (scale: one inch equals 50 feet); 
(2)	A proof of ownership of land being requested for rezoning; 
(3)	A topography map of the entire area at a contour interval showing one foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural and manmade features (scale: one inch equals 50 feet); 
(4)	A preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as to show the land uses being requested, the densities being proposed where applicable, the system of collector streets, and off-street parking system; 
(5)	A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it relates to the type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant population; the extent of nonresidential development and the resultant traffic generated and parking demands created; and providing supporting documentation such as but not limited to market studies, supporting land use request, and the intended scheduling of development. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1501; Code 1972, app. A, § 1501) 
Sec. 50-353. - Preliminary approval. 
    Approval of the preliminary plan of the PDD planned development district by the city council shall be effective for a period of two years. In reviewing and approving the plan, the following conditions shall be set forth: 
(1)	The preliminary plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission relative to the plan's meeting the intent and the requirements of the master plan of future land use. 
(2)	Approval by the city council shall be given only after public hearing, and shall be granted by rezoning the area to the planned development district. Notification of the public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required by section 50-62. Within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the city council shall meet for final consideration of the request and deny, approve, or approve with conditions the request. The city council shall prepare a report stating its conclusions, its decision, the basis for its decision, and any conditions imposed on an affirmative decision. Approval under this subsection is based on the plan submitted and the supporting documentation, and the plan, therefore, is basic to the rezoning. 
(3)	Once an area has been included within the PDD by having been granted preliminary approval, no development shall take place therein nor use made of any part thereof except in accordance with the general plan as originally approved, or in accordance with an approved amendment thereto. 
(4)	Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall not constitute approval of the final site plan. It shall be deemed as approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of the final plan. 
(5)	The proposed PDD shall be of such area as to represent a sound carrying out of the master plan of land use, it not being the intention of this district that an unrelated parcel-by-parcel rezoning be effectuated. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1502; Code 1972, app. A, § 1502; Ord. No. 2006-5, § 9, 8-21-2006) 
Sec. 50-354. - Final plan submittal. 
    A presentation of the final site plan for a PDD planned development district shall be made to the city council for review and recommendation by the planning commission of the following: 
(1)	A final overall site plan, for the entire area being requested under this PDD, shall be submitted. This plan shall be worked out in detail showing specific uses, building location, off-street parking, street alignment changes, open spaces and other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting documentation in the form of building plans, and schedule of construction shall be submitted. 
(2)	The final plan shall reflect the use patterns as approved in the preliminary plan. Standards for building bulk and off-street parking shall be equal to at least the minimum standards set forth for like uses in the schedule of regulations of off-street parking requirements in section 50-406. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1503; Code 1972, app. A, § 1503) 
Sec. 50-355. - Final approval. 
    Approval of the final plan for a PDD planned development district shall be effective for a period of three years. If development is not completed in this period, the planning commission shall review progress to date and make a recommendation to the city council as to action relative to permitting continuation under original approval. In reviewing and approving the final plan, the following conditions shall be set forth: 
(1)	Approval shall be granted by the city council after review and recommendation is made by the planning commission. Public hearings shall not be required on the final plan. 
(2)	All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site. 
(3)	In residential reuse areas, any prorated open space shall be irrevocably committed by dedication to an association or residents, either as right-in-fee or easement, and retained as open space for park, recreation and related uses. All lands dedicated in fee or easement shall meet the requirements of the city council. 
(4)	Upon approval by the city council of this chapter amendment, the site plan, building elevations, and other development proposals, including the proposed uses, shall become an integral part of the zoning amendment to the PDD and for purposes of recordation, and shall be referred to as "Planned Development No. ____________ , which number shall correspond to the number of the amending ordinance. All approved plans shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1504; Code 1972, app. A, § 1504) 
Sec. 50-356. - Required conditions. 
    Before approving the plan for a PDD planned development district in either the preliminary or final submittal, the planning commission and the city council shall determine that: 
(1)	Provisions, satisfactory to the city council, have been made to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant, and that maintenance of such improvements is ensured by a means satisfactory to the city council. 
(2)	The cost of installing all streets and necessary utilities has been ensured by a means satisfactory to the city council. 
(3)	The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested shall terminate approval of the overall plan until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and approved as in the instance of the first submittal. 
(4)	Proceeding with a planned development district shall only be permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the city council and the developer. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1505; Code 1972, app. A, § 1505) 
Sec. 50-357. - Regulations limiting height, bulk, density and area by land use. 
    The planning commission, in reviewing the preliminary and final plans submitted under this PDD, shall use as a guide the standards set forth in division 14 of this article, schedule of regulations. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1506; Code 1972, app. A, § 1506) 
Sec. 50-358. - Fees. 
    Fees for legal, engineering and planning review of site plans shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1507; Code 1972, app. A, § 1507) 
Secs. 50-359-50-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-376. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 
Minimum Zoning Lot Size Per Unit Maximum Height of Structures Minimum Yard Setback 
(Per Lot in Feet) Minimum Floor Area Per Unit (Square Feet) Maximum Percent of Lot Area Covered (By All Buildings) Zoning District Area in Square Feet Width in Feet In Stories In Feet Front Each Side Rear R-1 One-Family Residential 10,000(a) 80(a) 2 25 30(b) 10(b,c) 35(b) 900 25 R-2 One-Family Residential 7,500(a) 60(a) 2 25 25(b) 8(b,c) 35(b) 800 25 R-3 One-Family Residential 5,000(a) 50(a) 2 25 25(b) 8(b,c) 35(b) 720 25 RT Two-Family Residential 3,000 30 2 25 25(b) 8(b,c) 35(b) 500 25 RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential (d) (d) 21/2 35 50(e) 30(e) 30(e) 1 BR-500 
2 BR-700 
3 BR-900 
4 BR-1,100 25 OS-1 Office Service (n) (n) 30 25(f) 15(j) 20(h) None (n) B-1 Local Business (n) (n) 30 25(f) (g,j) 20(h) None (n) B-2 Community Business (n) (n) 30 75(f,i) 30(i,j) 20(h) None (n) B-3 General Business (n) (n) 30 30(f) (g,j) 20(h,i) None (n) I-1 Light Industrial (n) (n) 40 40(k) 20(j,l) 20(l,m) None (n) I-2 General Industrial (n) (n) 75 60(k) 30(j,l) 30(l,m) None (n) P-1 See division 11 of this article for height, layout and screening regulations PRD Planned Residential See division 12 of this article for height, layout and screening regulations PDD See division 13 of this article for height, layout and screening regulations  
Notes to Schedule of Regulations: 
(a)	See section 50-377, averaged lot size, section 50-378, subdivision open space plan, and section 50-379, one-family clustering option, regarding flexibility allowances. 
The minimum lot area per dwelling is 1,200 sq. ft.
(b)	For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in section 50-128, or this division 14, whichever is greater. 
(c)	In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which it is located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply. 
(d)	In an RM-1 multiple-family district, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 1,200. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units maybe of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency ..... 1 room  
One bedroom ..... 2 rooms 
Two bedroom ..... 3 rooms 
Three bedroom ..... 4 rooms 
Four bedroom ..... 5 rooms 
Plans presented showing one-bedroom, two-bedroom or three-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
The area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. 
Maximum height of building shall not exceed 35 feet, regardless of the number of stories constructed. 
(e)	In all RM-1 multiple-family residential districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. Parking may be permitted within a required side yard or rear yard but shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of any required yard, or any minimum distance between buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings in all RM-1 districts is as follows: 
S = L A + L B + 2(H A + H B ),  where 
6    S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. L A = Total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion of a wall of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. L B = Total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion of a wall of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. H A = Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion of a wall along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion of the wall along the total length of the building. H B = Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion of a wall along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion of the wall along the total length of the building.  
(f)	Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard; provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. Where 30 percent or more of a block front is improved with buildings, then no part of any new building or addition shall project beyond a line joining with the two adjacent corners of the buildings on either side thereof, or where there is a building on only one side, beyond a line projected from the corresponding adjacent corners of the two nearest buildings. 
(g)	No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. On a corner lot which has a rear yard abutting a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of 20 feet on the residential side street. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 
(h)	Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements; except in the instance of OS-1 districts loading space shall be provided in the ratio of five square feet per front foot of building. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of such alley. 
(i)	No building shall be closer than 75 feet to any adjacent residential district or to any major thoroughfare. 
(j)	Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback. 
(k)	Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under section 50-406, may be permitted within the required front yard; provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the front lot line. 
(l)	No building shall be located closer than 50 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such property line abuts any residential district. 
(m)	All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or berm, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink-type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. 
(n)	The minimum lot area and width, and the maximum percent of building coverage, shall be determined on the basis of off-street parking and loading, screening and yard setback requirements as required in this chapter for the respective uses and use districts indicated. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1600; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1600) 
Sec. 50-377. - Averaged lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in this division for the R-1 and R-2 one-family residential districts. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)	In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations, and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
(2)	Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
(3)	All computations showing lot areas and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1601; Code 1972, app. A, § 1601) 
Sec. 50-378. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a)	The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the following objectives: 
(1)	Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets; 
(2)	Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas; 
(3)	Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site; 
(4)	Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(b)	Modification to the standards outlined in this division may be made in the R-1 and R-2 one-family residential districts when the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The lot area in all one-family residential districts, which are served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to 20 percent. In the R-1 district, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to ten feet. In the R-2 district, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to five feet. These lot area reductions shall be permitted, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each one-family district under this division. All calculations shall be predicated upon the one-family districts having the following gross densities (including roads): 
R-1 = 3.3 dwelling units per acre; 
R-2 = 4.4 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)	Rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet when such lots border on land dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space purposes, provided that the width of such dedicated land shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the adjacent lot; 
(3)	Under the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in this division, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in a manner approved by the city; 
(4)	The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall in no instance be less than four acres and shall be in a location and shape approved by the planning commission; 
(5)	The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation. All land dedicated shall be so graded and developed so as to have natural drainage. The entire area may, however, be located in a floodplain; 
(6)	This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is mutually agreeable to the legislative body and the subdivider or developer; 
(7)	This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be started within six months after having received approval of the final plat and must be completed in a reasonable time. Failure to start within this period shall void all previous approval; 
(8)	Under this subdivision open space approach, the proprietor shall dedicate sufficient park area so that each final plat is within maximum density requirements; provided, however, that any entire park within a single block shall be dedicated as a whole. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1602; Code 1972, app. A, § 1602) 
Sec. 50-379. - One-family clustering option. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the development of one-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical handling of site plans in situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise be restrictive. To accomplish this development, the following modifications to the one-family residential standards, as outlined in this division, shall be permitted subject to the conditions imposed in this section: 
(1)	In all one-family residential districts, one-family clustering shall be permitted in those parcels having at least one of the following characteristics: 
a.	In all one-family residential districts, one-family clustering shall be permitted in an area generally parallel to, and not to exceed 360 feet in depth, on those unsubdivided parcels of land having frontage on a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet and being so located as to provide transition, through site plan flexibility, between such major thoroughfare and adjacent one-family development. 
1.	The planning commission may vary this 360 feet of depth wherein it shall find that the parcel is of a narrow dimension and would not permit sound development of that portion remaining after the 360 feet of depth were subtracted from the total depth. 
2.	The planning commission may vary the 360 feet of depth when the development of the remaining portion of the parcel in question would, due to topography or existing abutting development, more properly be related to the development on the 360 feet of depth. 
b.	An unsubdivided parcel which would make sound physical development under the normal subdivision approach impractical due to shape and/or dimension. 
c.	An unsubdivided parcel which contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which results in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or documented evidence must be submitted to the planning commission in order to substantiate the parcel's qualification for cluster development. 
d.	Those parcels of land containing major topographic problems which, in the opinion of the planning commission, would make sound physical development under the normal subdivision approach impractical. 
e.	An unsubdivided area which the planning commission finds to be characterized by major stands of trees, streams, or other watercourses, which, as significant natural assets, ought to be preserved, such conditions making sound development of the site, under normal subdivision approaches undesirable. Requests for qualification under these conditions must be supported by documented evidence which indicates that the natural assets would qualify the parcel under this option. 
(2)	Under this section, attached one-family homes shall be permitted when such homes are attached through a common party wall which does not have over 50 percent of its area in common with an abutting dwelling wall; by means of an architectural wall detail which does not form interior room space; or through a common party wall in only the garage portion of adjacent structures, there being no common party wall relationship permitted through any other portion of the residential unit. The maximum number of units attached in the manner described shall not exceed four in a cluster. 
(3)	The maximum density permitted under this section, including roads, shall be as follows: 
R-1 = 3.3 dwelling units per acre. 
R-2 = 4.4 dwelling units per acre. 
R-3 = 6.5 dwelling units per acre. 
(4)	The minimum floor area for all units constructed on any portion of the site under this option shall be at least equal to the minimum floor area required for the one-family residential district in which the cluster is to be constructed. 
(5)	Yard requirements shall be provided as follows: 
a.	Spacing between any grouping of four clustered one-family units or less and another grouping of such structures shall be equal to at least 30 feet, measured between the nearest points of the two groupings; 
b.	All such clusters shall be so situated as to have one side of the grouping abutting onto a common open space; 
c.	That side of a cluster adjacent to a private service drive or private lane shall not be nearer to such drive or lane than 20 feet with the garage portion of the structure and not nearer than 25 feet with the living portion of the structure; 
d.	That side of cluster adjacent to a dedicated street shall not be nearer to such street than 30 feet, except that on lands immediately adjacent to an interior dedicated street which is part of the comprehensive site plan submitted under this section and having slopes in excess of 15 percent; for each one percent over 15 percent, the front yard may be reduced by five feet, and in no instance shall a structure be closer to the road right-of-way line than ten feet; 
e.	This nature of cluster, when abutting a front yard of an existing recorded subdivision, which is not a part of the comprehensive site plan submitted under this section, shall cause all dwelling units facing such subdivision to relate through its front or entrance facade and shall treat the side of the cluster as a front yard; 
f.	No building shall be located closer than 30 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of the site. 
(6)	The area in open space, including recreation and water areas, accomplished through the use of one-family clusters shall represent at least 15 percent of the horizontal development area of a one-family cluster development. 
(7)	The maximum height of buildings shall be 25 feet provided that the height of any individual dwelling unit in a cluster on a slope in excess of 15 percent, when the unit is constructed on stilts, shall not compute the first ten feet of height in the stilts. Application of the definition of "building height" shall apply over and above this ten feet of stilt height. 
(8)	In reviewing the plans and approving the application of this section to a particular site, the planning commission shall require the following: 
a.	A landscaped berm, at least five feet high, shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the major thoroughfare. This berm may be included within a required side yard or rear yard. The planning commission shall find that the slopes on such berms are gentle enough as not to erode when planted in grass and shall review the design of the berm as it relates to street intersections, finding that the horizontal view of oncoming traffic is not obscured; 
b.	Street ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare, and shall not be permitted through adjacent subdivision streets unless the planning commission shall find such major thoroughfare access impassable or impractical due to physical or traffic safety conditions. 
(9)	In submitting a proposed layout under this section, the sponsor of the development shall include, along with the site plan, typical building elevations and floor plans, topography drawn at two-foot contour intervals, main floor grade elevations relative to the existing topography, all computation relative to acreage and density, details relative to the proposed berm, and any other details which will assist in reviewing the proposed plan. Approval of a site plan under this section shall be effective for a period of one year. Development for which building permits have not been taken during this period shall be considered as abandoned and authorization shall expire requiring that any proposed development thereafter shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. Any proposed change in site plan or building plans, after approval is had, shall require review and approval by the planning commission prior to effecting such change. 
(10)	Further site plan review by the planning commission shall be provided as required in section 50-417 insofar as such review provided for therein is not inconsistent with the provisions provided in this section. 
(11)	Following its review, the planning commission shall forward its report and recommendation to the city council. Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall, by resolution, either approve or disapprove the site plan. If the city council approves the proposed site plan, it shall instruct the city attorney to prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract, after approval by the city council, shall be entered into between the city and the applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit for any construction in accordance with the site plans. 
(12)	As a condition for the approval of the site plan by the city council, the applicant shall deposit a cash or corporate surety bond in the amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such improvement within a time to be set by the city council, and provided further that maintenance of such improvements is ensured by a means satisfactory to the city council. Actual development of the open space shall be carried out concurrently with the construction of dwelling units. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1603; Code 1972, app. A, § 1603) 
Secs. 50-380-50-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-401. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1700; Code 1972, app. A, § 1700) 
Sec. 50-402. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1701; Code 1972, app. A, § 1701) 
Sec. 50-403. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(b)	Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This subsection shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
(c)	Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
(2)	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
(3)	If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(d)	Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	The expansion of or addition to a structure, legally classified as a nonconforming structure on the same building lot, shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the original structure at the time it was designated as a nonconforming structure; provided that all requirements of section 50-376 are adhered to. It is further intended that accessory structures may be allowed under this subsection (d)(1) in accordance with the provision of section 50-404, accessory buildings; 
(2)	Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is removed. 
(e)	Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(2)	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(3)	If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use; 
(4)	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(5)	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision; 
(6)	Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(f)	Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(g)	Uses under exception; provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(h)	Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures, or of structures and land in combination. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1702; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1702) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 50-404. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
(2)	All detached accessory buildings shall be confined to the rear yard area. 
(3)	An accessory building shall not exceed in square footage more than 25 percent of the required rear yard, or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less; provided that in a residential area all accessory buildings exceeding 144 square feet shall be similar in outward appearance to that of the main building. In addition, whenever an accessory building is constructed on an abutting buildable lot which does not contain the principal building, such structure shall be placed so as to allow the construction of a dwelling of the minimum size as required by this chapter. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed on singular lots which do not abut the zoning lot upon which the principal use is located. Accessory buildings shall not exceed two in number. 
(4)	No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5)	No detached accessory building in R-1 through R-3, RT, RM-1, OS-1, B-1 and P-1 districts shall exceed one story or 14 feet in height. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts, subject to board of appeals review and approval if the building exceeds one story or 14 feet in height. 
(6)	When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than 20 feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(7)	When an accessory building in any residential, business or office district is intended for other than the storage of private motor vehicles, the accessory use shall be subject to the approval of the board of appeals. 
(8)	The parking of a mobile home on lands not approved for mobile home parks shall be expressly prohibited. 
(9)	Reserved. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1703; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1703) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-405. - Regulation of dish-type satellite signal-receiving antennas, television antennas and radio antennas. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means any device used for the receipt of video programming services, including TVBS, MDS, DBS, ITFS and LMDS, and MMDS. A reception antenna that has limited transmission capability designed for the viewer to select or use video programming is a reception antenna provided that it meets the Federal Communications Commission standards for radio frequency emissions. A mast, cabling or other accessory necessary for the proper installation, maintenance and use of a reception antenna shall be considered part of the antenna. 
    Antenna user means the person or entity that has a direct or indirect ownership interest in, and exclusive use or control over, the property upon which the antenna is located. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application within the meaning of this article. 
    Application means any proposal, submission or request to install a satellite disk. An application includes an applicant's initial satellite plan, any and all subsequent amendments or supplements to the satellite plan, relevant correspondence, and all written and oral representations, and/or material made or provided to the city. 
    Code means the construction code adopted by the state pursuant to the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
    Commission and FCC mean the Federal Communications Commission or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
    Communications Act means the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 151 et seq., as the Act has and may hereafter be amended. 
    Large satellite dish means any satellite earth station antenna that is not defined as a small satellite dish. 
    Mast means a structure to which an antenna is attached that raises the antenna height. 
    National Historic Preservation Act means the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 16 USC 470 et seq., as the Act has and may hereafter be amended. 
    Permit means the authorization expressly granted by the city to an antenna user to install an antenna on the property wherein the user has a direct or indirect ownership interest. The term does not include any other authorization, including, but not limited to, a franchise, license or permit that may be covered by other laws, ordinances or regulations of federal, state or any local government entity including other laws or regulations of the city. 
    Satellite plan means a proposal, submission or request to install a satellite dish that includes: 
(1)	A description of how the dish is installed; 
(2)	A description of how the dish is mounted; 
(3)	A description of how the dish will be maintained; 
(4)	The name and address of the antenna user; and 
(5)	A photograph or sketch of the dish and its surrounding location once it is installed. 
    Small satellite dish means any receive-only satellite earth station antenna that is two meters or less in diameter and located or proposed to be located in any area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted by nonfederal land use regulation, or a satellite earth station antenna that is one meter or less in diameter in any area regardless of land use or zoning category. 
    Temporary or moveable dish means an antenna which is not anchored in the ground which is not affixed to a permanent structure. 
    VSAT means a commercial satellite service that may use satellite antennae less than one meter in diameter but that is not used to provide over-the-air video programming. 
(b)	Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish rules and regulations consistent with federal policy with respect to the installation, placement, maintenance and use of satellite dishes designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals that: 
(1)	Ensure that consumers have access to a broad range of video programming services; 
(2)	Foster full and fair competition among different types of video programming services; 
(3)	Satisfy the city's legitimate governmental interests in protecting lives and property and promoting the public's safety, health and including, but not limited to: 
a.	Reducing the likelihood that satellite dishes will become windblown storm hazards; 
b.	Reducing crime and the opportunity for crime; and 
c.	Reducing the negative aesthetic consequences which may result from the unregulated placement of satellite dishes in residential areas. 
(4)	Ensure compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act 1972 PA 230 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(c)	Small satellite dish regulation. 
(1)	Small satellite dish antennas are subject to the following application requirements: 
a.	The satellite antenna installation shall require the approval of the zoning official or the zoning official's designee. 
b.	The approval of the zoning official or the zoning official's designee is contingent upon the compliance by the satellite antenna with the regulations of the city. 
c.	Where the construction, connection or installation of an antenna requires a permit under the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (the "code"), a permit shall be obtained. 
d.	Installation of satellite dish prior to obtaining a permit. 
1.	To avoid any possibility of delay with respect to the deployment of an antenna, any person who wishes to install or have installed an antenna may do so without the advance filing of an application, the advance filing of a satellite plan, the advance payment of the application fee and the filing and obtaining in advance of a permit, as such are required in this section; provided, however, that the installer or the person for whom the antenna is installed must provide written notice to the city within 48 hours after any such installation (exclusive of weekends and legal holidays) reporting the facts of such installation (i.e., the address of the installation, identity of the person responsible for the antenna at the installation site and location of the antenna as installed). Failure to provide such notice is a violation of this article. 
2.	As soon as staff resources permit, the city will inspect the installation to determine if it complies with the requirements of this article and the code (if such code is also applicable). Neither the approval of the zoning official or the zoning official's designee nor a permit under the code will be unreasonably withheld to delay antenna deployment. 
3.	If an antenna is deployed in advance, but does not comply with this section, the code or both in any respect, the city shall not be responsible for any costs incurred in connection with any alteration, modification, redeployment or reinstallation of an antenna in order for it to achieve full compliance. 
e.	Installation of satellite dish subsequent to obtaining a permit. 
1.	Alternatively, the person who wishes to install an antenna may file the application, submit the satellite plan, pay the fee and obtain the permit, if one is required, in advance of the installation. 
2.	If a satellite plan is in compliance with federal and local rules, approval of the zoning official or the zoning official's designee and a permit under the code will be issued within 20 days of application, absent exceptional circumstances. 
f.	Such permitting shall be no more burdensome than is necessary to ensure public health and safety. 
g.	Review and approval shall be required on an annual renewal basis and at such time the applicant may be required to submit photos of the antenna taken from the street and adjacent properties. This is necessary to ensure continued compliance and to keep the city appraised of the status of satellite communications within the city. 
(2)	Small satellite dish antennas are subject to the following installation requirements: The zoning official or the zoning official's designee shall review all installations and applications for small satellite antenna approvals within 20 days of receipt of applications, absent exceptional circumstances, to determine that the installation meets the following permit conditions: 
a.	The installation or modification of a satellite earth station shall be in accordance with all applicable construction and safety codes and procedures and shall meet the requirements of the code. 
b.	No antenna shall be permitted in a front yard or on the front part of any roof which runs parallel with the front property line, except in the instance of corner lots where only one side will be designated the front property line (the "front" shall be the same as the street address of the property as assigned by the United States Post Office). 
c.	Every reasonable effort must be made to locate the antenna in a manner where it is effectively screened by a fence, near a structure or near another protective barrier which will decrease the likelihood of a broken or dislodged antenna becoming a windblown storm hazard. 
d.	The city shall charge a $20.00 administration fee for review of each application and installation. Such fee shall be remitted with the application. 
e.	The antenna shall be ground mounted or located on the side of a structure as close to the ground as is reasonably possible. 
f.	Ground-mounted satellite earth stations shall conform to the minimum setback requirements as are required for the principal building on the building site pursuant to the code and any applicable city zoning code provision. 
g.	Ground-mounted satellite earth stations shall conform to the minimum setback requirements from water as may be required for the principal building location on the property pursuant to the code and any applicable city zoning code provision. 
h.	Ground-mounted satellite earth stations shall conform to minimum setback requirements from power lines which shall be, at minimum, no less than eight feet from any power line over 250 volts. 
i.	Except as provided in subsection (c)(5) of this section, no antenna shall be placed upon a roof area that is supported by trusses. 
j.	Each antenna and antenna installation shall be required to be painted in a fashion so that it blends into the background against which it is mounted. 
k.	The provisions of this subsection shall apply to "temporary or moveable" dish antennas. All temporary or moveable dish antennas must be permanently installed within six months after a temporary permit has been issued absent the receipt of approval as provided by this subsection. 
(3)	VSAT is not within the purview of this section because it is not used to provide over-the-air video programming. 
(4)	If, as a result of compliance with this section's requirements, reception is impaired, the cost to comply is or would be unreasonable, or the installation may be unreasonably delayed, the code official may approve plans which deviate from the requirements of this article. The following list enumerates the hierarchy of deviations in order of the most acceptable deviation to least. The code official must attempt to deviate from requirement of subsection (c)(4)a of this section before attempting to deviate from requirement of subsection (c)(4)b of this section, the code official must attempt to deviate from requirements of subsections (c)(4)a and (c)(4)b of this section before attempting to deviate from requirement of subsection (c)(4)c of this section, and must attempt to deviate from requirements of subsections (c)(4)a-(c)(4)c of this section before attempting to deviate from requirement of subsection (c)(4)d of this section. 
a.	The antenna shall not be located in a historic district, or on a historic site, building or structure, landmark or object, listed or eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended; 
b.	The antenna shall be ground mounted or located on the side of a structure as close to the ground as is reasonably possible; 
c.	An antenna shall not be placed on a roof area which is supported by trusses; 
d.	No antenna shall be permitted in a front yard area or on the front part of any roof which runs parallel with the front property line, except in the instance of corner lots where only one side will be designated the front property line. The "front" shall be the same as the street address of the property as assigned by the United States Post Office. 
(5)	Any other deviation from the requirements of this article must be justified, taking into consideration the location and surrounding structures, fences, landscaping and other features. 
a.	Rooftop installation of satellite dish or dish antennas will only be permitted where: 
1.	A zoning official/truss manufacturer approves the method of attachment proposed by the applicant; 
2.	The antenna is anchored to the roof in conformance with the requirements of the code; and 
3.	A professional engineer certifies as safe any infrastructure improvements made to fortify the truss system or the truss system as designed to which the antenna will be installed. Such certification must be obtained, absent exceptional circumstances, within 20 days of installation. 
b.	The installation of any antenna structure mounted on the roof of a building shall not be erected nearer to the lot line than the total height of the antenna structure above the roof, nor shall such structure be erected near electric power lines or encroach upon any street or other public space. 
c.	Antenna users must obtain a special permit as described in subsection (6)b. of this section, in cases in which the antennas extend more than 12 feet above the roof line in order to receive signals. 
(6)	Mast installation shall be as follows: 
a.	Mast height may be no taller than absolutely necessary to receive acceptable quality signals. 
b.	Masts that extend 12 feet or less beyond the roof line may be installed subject to the regular notification process. Masts that extend more than 12 feet above the roof line must be approved before installation due to safety concerns posed by wind loads and the risk of falling antennas and masts. Any application for a mast that extends more than 12 feet above the roofline must include a detailed description of the structure and anchorage of the antenna and the mast, as well as an explanation of the necessity for a mast higher than 12 feet. If this installation will pose a safety hazard to the public, then the city may prohibit such installation. The notice of rejection shall specify these safety risks. 
c.	Masts must be installed by a licensed and insured contractor. 
d.	Masts must be painted the appropriate color to blend into the masts' surroundings. 
e.	Masts installed on a roof shall not be installed nearer to the lot line than the total height of the masts and antenna structure (combined height) above the roof. The purpose of this regulation is to protect persons and property that would be damaged if the mast were to fall during a storm or from other causes. 
f.	Masts shall not be installed nearer to electric power lines than the total height of the mast and antenna structure above the roof. The purpose of this regulation is to avoid damage to electric power lines if the mast should fall in a storm. 
g.	Masts shall not encroach upon another owner's lot or common property. 
h.	Masts installed on the ground must sustain a minimum of 70-mile per hour winds, or such speeds as otherwise provided in the state construction code and this chapter, if applicable. 
(7)	The regulations in this section shall be applied in a nondiscriminatory manner to other appurtenances, devices and fixtures that are comparable in size, weight and appearance to the subject antennas and to which local regulations would normally apply. 
(d)	Large satellite dish regulation. The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall apply to large satellite dish antennas. Any provision of subsection (c) of this section that: 
(1)	Materially limits transmission or reception by satellite earth station antennas; or 
(2)	Imposes more than minimal costs on users of such antennas; 
shall not apply unless the city can demonstrate that such regulation is reasonable. 
(e)	Violation of section. Violation of specified conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the antenna is approved, or the various provisions of this section, shall be deemed grounds for revocation of permit and/or punishable as a civil infraction provided for in section 1-56. 
(f)	Contact. 
(1)	The antenna user shall provide the zoning official with the name and address of the contact designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, amendments and other types of correspondence or information that relate to administration and/or enforcement of this section. 
(2)	The zoning official may be contacted at the Springfield City Hall, which is located at the following address: 601 Avenue A, Springfield, Michigan 49015. 
(3)	All notices affecting the legal rights of the parties and all other filings, reports, records, documents and other types of correspondence shall be in writing, and shall be deemed served when delivered by hand or personal service, certified mail, return receipt requested, registered mail, or express delivery by the designated contact. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1703; Code 1972, app. A, § 1703) 
Sec. 50-406. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as prescribed as follows: 
(1)	Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a side yard which is in excess of the minimum side yard setback, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a minimum front yard nor within a minimum side yard setback, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)	Recreational vehicles, such as travel trailers, campers, motor homes and similar vehicles owned by residents of the city and stored on their individual lots, shall be stored either in the confines of the rear yard or within the side yard behind the front building line of the main building; provided a minimum distance of five feet is maintained between the recreational vehicle and the nearest side or rear lot line. If for valid reasons, as defined in subsection 50-60(a)(2), the recreational vehicle cannot be stored in the rear or side yard of the property in question, the property owner may request a variance from the zoning board of appeals to park vehicles in the designated front off-street parking spaces as required by this chapter. Any recreational vehicles, parked or stored, shall not be connected to sanitary sewer facilities and shall not be occupied. 
(3)	Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
(4)	Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the provisions of section 50-404, accessory buildings. 
(5)	Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(6)	Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than required in this chapter for a similar new building or new use. 
(7)	Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(8)	In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(9)	The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. The parking of tractor/trailer trucks and van trucks over 20 feet in length, other than for loading and unloading of cargo and material, shall be prohibited in all residential zones. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the planning commission considers is similar in type. 
(10)	When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(11)	For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of usable floor area in section 50-2 shall govern. 
_____ 
(12)	The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Uses Number of Minimum Parking Spaces 
per Unit of Measure a. Residential (1) Residential, one-family and two-family Two for each dwelling unit. (2) Residential, multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit. (3) Housing for the elderly One for each two units, and one for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be provided. (4) Mobile home park Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. b. Institutional (1) Churches or temples One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship. (2) Hospitals One for each one bed. (3) Convalescent or nursing homes One for each four beds. (4) Elementary and junior high schools One for each one teacher, employee or administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (5) Senior high schools One for each one teacher, employee or administrator, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (6) Private clubs or lodge halls One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local fire codes. (7) Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. (8) Golf courses open to the general public, except miniature or "par-3" courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each one employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. (9) Fraternity or sorority One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. (10) Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly One for each three seats or six feet of benches. (11) Theaters and auditoriums One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. (12) Nursery school, day nurseries or child care centers One for each 350 square feet of usable floor space. c. Business and commercial (1) Planned commercial or shopping center One for each 100 square feet of usable floor area for the first 15,000 square feet. One for each 125 square feet for the next 15,001 to 450,000 square feet of usable floor area. One for each 150 square feet for that area in excess of 450,000 square feet of usable floor area (2) Auto wash (automatic) One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20. (3) Auto wash (self-service or coin-operated) Five for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself. (4) Beauty parlor or barbershop Three spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 11/2 spaces for each additional chair. (5) Bowling alleys Five for each one bowling lane plus accessory uses. (6) Dancehalls, pool or billiard parlors, roller skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local fire codes. (7) Establishment for sale and consumption on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshments One for each 75 square feet of usable floor space or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local fire codes. (8) Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) (9) Gasoline service stations Two for each lubrication stall, rack, pit or service bay. (10) Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners One for each two washing and dry cleaning machines. (11) "Par-3" golf courses Three for each one hole plus one for each one employee. (12) Drive-in restaurant One for each 25 square feet of usable floor area. (13) Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of usable floor space. (14) Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishments One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each one employee. (15) Motor vehicle sales and service establishments One space of each 100 square feet of showroom floor area plus two for each service bay plus one space for each two employees on the maximum work shift and one space for each new and/or used car. (16) Retail stores except as otherwise specified in this section One for each 150 square feet of usable floor space. d. Offices (1) Banks One for each 100 square feet of usable floor space. (2) Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item (3) One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space. (3) Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions One for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms, and one for each examining room, dental chair or similar use area. e. Industrial (1) Industrial or research establishments, and related accessory offices Five plus one for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift. Space on-site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. (2) Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or five plus one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater.  
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1704; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Ord. No. 1990-1, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1704) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 46-31 et seq. 
_____
Sec. 50-407. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 50-406 require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 vehicular parking districts (article III, division 11 of this chapter) are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)	No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the building inspector. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the building department in such form as may be determined by the building inspector and shall be accompanied by two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
(2)	Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking Pattern Maneuvering Lane Width Parking Space Width Parking Space Length Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane Total Width of Two Tiers of Space Plus Maneuvering Lane 0° (parallel parking) 12 feet 8 feet 23 feet 20 feet 28 feet 30° to 53° 12 feet 8 feet 6 inches 20 feet 32 feet 52 feet 54° to 74° 15 feet 8 feet 6 inches 20 feet 36 feet 6 inches 58 feet 75° to 90° 20 feet 9 feet 20 feet 40 feet 60 feet  
_____ 
(3)	All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
(5)	All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(6)	Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
(7)	The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall or berm not less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district. When a front yard setback is required, all land between such wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(8)	The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphalt or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the building inspector prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface waste accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or towards the building. If the parking area cannot be paved in accordance with the surfacing specifications due to inclement weather conditions, a temporary extension may be granted by the building inspector. 
(9)	All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(10)	In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(11)	The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1705; Ord. No. 1988-8, § 2; Code 1972, app. A, § 1705) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 46-31 et seq. 
Sec. 50-408. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	All spaces shall be provided as required in article III, division 14 of this chapter, schedule of regulations, under minimum rear yards (footnote (h)), except as provided for in this section for I districts. 
(2)	Within an I district, all spaces shall be laid out in the dimensions of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area: 
Gross Floor Area 
(In Square Feet) Loading and Unloading Space Required 0-1,400 None 1,401-20,000 One space 20,001-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet 100,001 and over Five spaces  
(3)	All loading and unloading in an I district shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in such exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1706; Code 1972, app. A, § 1706) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 46-31 et seq. 
Sec. 50-409. - Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
    Because the uses referred to in this section possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they may be permitted by the city council, under the conditions specified, and after public hearing, and after a recommendation has been received from the planning commission. In every case, the uses referred to in this section shall be specifically prohibited from any residential districts, unless otherwise specified. These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the city or require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
(1)	Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-1 districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the building inspector and the city manager as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects; 
b.	Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare; 
c.	All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way; 
d.	The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfare. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(2)	Telecommunication towers. 
a.	Purpose. It is the general purpose and intent of this subsection to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communications systems. It is the further purpose and intent of this subsection to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communication towers and antennas. The goals of this subsection are to: 
1.	Protect residential areas adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
2.	Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 
3.	Minimize the negative visual impact of towers throughout the community; 
4.	Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
5.	Require the disclosure of information about plans for wireless communication facilities so as to permit the city to effectively plan for the location of such facilities; and 
6.	Minimize the adverse affect of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
b.	Definitions. As used in this subsection (2), the following terms shall have the meanings set forth as follows: 
    Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structures and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals, or other com- munication signals. 
    Backhaul network means the lines connecting a telecommunication provider's tower site and antennas to one or more cellular telephone switching officers, and/or long distance telephone providers, or the publicly switched telephone network. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
    Lot means a parcel of land consisting of a lot of record and any contiguous lots of record or contiguous portions of lots of record held in single or common ownership. 
    Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and unexpired. 
    Tower and communications tower mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice or skeleton towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The terms "tower" and "communications tower" also include radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The terms "tower" and "communications tower" include the structure and any support thereof. 
c.	Applicability. All towers or antennas erected in the city after the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection (2) is derived shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection (2) except as otherwise provided in this subsection. 
d.	Exceptions. 
1.	This subsection shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under 75 feet in height and is either wholly owned and used by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
2.	Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this subsection other than to conform with the FAA, FCC and applicable state construction, building and electrical codes. 
3.	For the purpose of this subsection (2), an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer parameter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the parameter of the AM array by right. 
e.	General requirements. 
1.	Uses. Antennas and towers may be considered either principle or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
2.	Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, land division requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
3.	Inventory of sites. 
i.	Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the zoning department an inventory of its existing towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are either within the city or within one mile of the corporate limits thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. 
ii.	The zoning department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this subsection or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the city. However, the zoning department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable for collocation. 
4.	Franchise required. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that any franchise required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communications system in the city has been obtained and shall file a copy of the franchise with the city clerk. 
5.	Public notices. For the purposes of this subsection (2), any special use request, variance request or appeal of an administratively approved use or special use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of property located within 300 feet from the lot upon which a tower is proposed to be located. 
6.	Multiple use desired. The city encourages users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. 
f.	General standards. 
1.	Towers and antennas shall meet the following aesthetic requirements: 
i.	Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
ii.	At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use the material, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural settings and surrounding buildings. 
iii.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color as identical or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structures so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.	Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to surrounding views. 
3.	All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with authority to regulate towers and antennas. Should such standards and regulations be changed, then the owners of towers and antennas governed by this subsection (2) shall bring such owners towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective dates of such revised standards and regulations unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds of nonconformance with this chapter and the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
4.	To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with the standards contained in state construction, building and electrical codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended. If upon inspection the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards, and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice provided to the owner, the tower shall be brought into compliance with such standards within 30 days following notice. Failure to bring the tower into compliance within 30 days shall constitute grounds of nonconformance with this chapter and the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
5.	No advertising or identification signs visible from off-site shall be allowed or permitted on an antenna or tower. 
6.	Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements set forth in this subsection (2). 
g.	Permitted uses. The following uses listed in this subsection are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or special use permits: 
1.	Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city council. 
2.	Receive-only antennas less than 75 feet in height. 
3.	Antennas and towers less than 75 feet in height when wholly owned and used by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator. 
h.	Administratively approved uses. 
1.	The following uses may be approved by the zoning department after conducting an administrative review: 
i.	Locating an antenna on existing structures other than a tower may be approved by the zoning department as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional or multifamily structure of eight or more dwelling units provided that: 
The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure; 
The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
ii.	Locating an antenna on an existing tower may be approved by the zoning department and, to minimize adverse visual impact associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
Modifications. A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower unless the zoning department allows reconstruction as a monopole; 
Height. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height only to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna. The height change permitted by this section may only occur one time per communication tower. The additional height permitted by this section shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. The tower's premodification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations. 
On-site relocation. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on a lot within 50 feet of its existing location. After such tower is rebuilt to accommodate the collocation, only one tower may remain on the lot. A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to other provisions of this subsection (2). The on-site relocation of a tower under this section shall not be deemed to be a violation of those provisions of this subsection (2) regarding separation of distances between towers. However, the on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to off-site uses and designated areas as set forth at subsection (2)l of this section shall be permitted only when a variance has been approved by the zoning board of appeals. 
iii.	Installing a cable micro cell network through the use of multiple low powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wire line systems such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or utility poles or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
2.	The following procedures shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas: 
i.	Each applicant for administrative approval shall submit the following information, along with a nonrefundable fee as established by city council to reimburse the costs to the city for reviewing the application: 
A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the structure or existing or relocated on-site tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the structure or existing or relocated on-site tower and any other proposed structures, and topography of the lot. 
A legal description of the lot and the leased parcel as applicable. 
Evidence of the tower or structure owner's consent to place the proposed antenna. 
The setback distances between the existing or relocated on-site tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residential zoned property, and any unplatted residentially zoned property. 
The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites set forth at subsection (2)e.3 of this section. 
A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
Method of fencing and finish color and, if applicable, method of camouflage and illumination. 
A signed and notarized statement by the applicant certifying compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
A signed and notarized statement of the applicant as to whether the collocation of the proposed antenna will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users. 
Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower and antennas. 
ii.	The zoning department shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with the general standards set forth in subsection (2)f of this section as well as the setback and separation distance established by in subsections (2)k and (2)l of this section. 
iii.	In connection with any administrative approval, the zoning department may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction. 
iv.	The zoning department shall respond to each application within 63 days after its receipt by approving with or without modification or denying the application. If the zoning department fails to respond to the applicant within 63 days, the application shall be deemed approved. 
v.	If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall be required to file an application for a special use permit pursuant to this subsection (2) prior to filing any appeal that may be available under this chapter. 
i.	Special use permits. 
1.	Generally. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the planning commission: 
i.	If a tower or antenna is not permitted under subsection (2)g or (2)h of this section, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
ii.	Applications for special use permits under this subsection (2) shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set out elsewhere in this section. In granting a special use permit, the planning commission may recommend the city council impose conditions to the extent the planning commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
iii.	Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
iv.	An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this section, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the special use application. 
2.	Information required. In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to this chapter, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following additional information: 
i.	A scaled site plan clearly showing the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses, adjacent land uses and zoning, zoning classification of the site, adjacent roadways, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, and the topography of the parcel. 
ii.	A legal description of the parent lot and leased parcel, if applicable. 
iii.	Evidence of the lot owner's consent to place the proposed tower. 
iv.	The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned property and unplatted residentially zoned property. 
v.	The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing tower sites set forth in subsection (2)e of this section. 
vi.	A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
vii.	The method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
viii.	Certification of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
ix.	A sworn statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users. 
x.	Other tower and antenna sites owned, or leased or operated by the applicant in the city. 
xi.	Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the proposed tower. 
xii.	A description of the suitability for the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed tower. 
xiii.	A description of feasible locations of future towers or antennas within the city based upon existing physical engineering technological or geographical limitations if the proposed tower is approved. 
xiv.	A statement by the applicant that the proposed tower is needed: 
Because of proximity to an interstate or state highway, or its proximity to areas of population concentration or commercial, business or industrial centers; or 
Because there are areas where signal interference occurs due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions; 
Because the proposed antenna is needed to complete a communications grid as it relates to the needs of the city and surrounding areas; and 
The telecommunications provider is not able to collocate its antenna on another tower. 
j.	Factors to be considered in granting special use permit. 
1.	In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to this chapter, the planning commission shall also consider the following factors in determining whether to recommend the city council issue a special use permit for a tower. The planning commission is empowered to waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning commission concludes that the goals of this subsection (2) are better served thereby. The factors to be considered as follows: 
i.	Height of the proposed tower does not exceed that which is minimally required to function in accordance with federal requirements and permit the collocation of additional antennae; 
ii.	Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
iii.	Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
iv.	Surrounding topography; 
v.	Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
vi.	Design of the tower with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
vii.	Proposed ingress and egress; 
viii.	Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures; and 
ix.	A willingness to permit other communication service providers to collocate antennae on the tower, upon agreement to reasonable terms and conditions. This factor does not require the tower owner to permit access where doing so will interfere with the owner's ability to provide or receive signals. 
2.	No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant can demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence submitted on the record to the planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The applicant shall submit information to the planning commission relating to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
i.	No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
ii.	Existing towers and structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
iii.	Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
iv.	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
v.	The fees, costs or other contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
vi.	The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
vii.	The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures such as cable micro cell network using multiple low powered transmitters/ receivers attached to a wire line system is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology would exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
k.	Setbacks. 
1.	The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which either administrative approval or a special use is required; 
2.	Towers must be set back a distance equal to the fall zone for the tower proposed, or at a distance of least 75 percent of the height of the tower, whichever is greater, from any adjoining lot line; and 
3.	Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
l.	Separation. 
1.	The separation requirements in this subsection (2)l shall apply to all towers and antennas for which either administrative approval or a special use permit is required. 
2.	Separation from off-site uses and designated areas shall be as follows: 
i.	Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line at the off-site use or designated area. 
ii.	A tower shall be located 200 feet or three times the height of the tower, whichever is greater, from any single-family residential units or vacant single-family residentially zoned land which is platted or has received preliminary subdivision plan approval which is not expired. 
iii.	A tower shall be located 100 feet or two times the height of the tower, whichever is greater, from any vacant unplatted residentially zoned land or existing multiple-family residential units. 
iv.	A tower shall comply with the setback distance set forth at subsection (2)k of this section for any nonresidentially zoned land or nonresidential use. 
3.	Separation of distances between towers shall be as follows: 
i.	Separation distances between towers shall be measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. Separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base as indicated on the site plan of the proposed tower. 
ii.	Separation distances between towers shall be based upon tower construction as follows: 
The distance between a proposed lattice or guyed tower and existing lattice or guyed tower shall be 5,000 feet; between the proposed lattice or guyed tower and an existing monopole 75 or more feet in height shall be 1,500 feet, and for a monopole less than 75 feet in height, 750 feet. 
The distance between a proposed monopole 75 or more feet in height and an existing lattice or guyed tower or monopole 75 or more feet in height shall be 1,500 feet, and an existing monopole less than 75 feet in height shall be 750 feet. 
For a proposed monopole less than 75 feet in height, its distance from any existing tower shall be 750 feet. 
m.	Fencing, landscaping and equipment. 
1.	The tower shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device, provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if it deems appropriate. 
2.	The tower facility shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The buffer shall consist, at a minimum, of a landscaped strip four feet wide outside the perimeter of the tower compound. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible so as to permit any natural growth surrounding or on the site to provide a sufficient buffer. In locations where the visual impact of a tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements set forth in this subsection (2) may be reduced or waived by the planning commission. 
3.	Any unmanned equipment structure associated with a communications tower shall not exceed 600 square feet and be located on the lot in accordance with the height, yard, and building coverage requirements for the applicable zoning district classification of the parcel. 
n.	Removal of abandoned antennas and towers; notification by owner of discontinuance required. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove such antenna or tower within 90 days after receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned tower or antenna within 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this subsection (2) shall not become effective until all owners cease using the tower. 
o.	Nonconforming uses. 
1.	Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (2) shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of the nonconforming use or structure. 
2.	Towers existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection (2) is derived shall be allowed to continue such tower's use as they presently exist. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height, shall be permitted on preexisting towers. New construction, other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower, shall comply with the requirements of this subsection (2). 
3.	Notwithstanding subsection (2)n of this section, nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit without having to meeting separation requirements specified within this subsection (2). The type, height and location of the tower on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approved. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall be complied with the applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or such permit expires, the tower and antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified by this subsection (2). 
(3)	Mobile home park and manufactured home park. Mobile homes which do not conform to the standards of the definition of "dwelling, single-family," in section 50-2, shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the city unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home plat zoned for such uses. All mobile home parks and manufactured home parks shall comply with the applicable requirements of 1987 PA 96 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.), and the provisions of the Michigan Administrative Code R 125.1101 et seq.; provided further that such developments meet the following standards and conditions, and all other provisions as established in this subsection: 
a.	All applications for manufactured home parks must be approved by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (3). 
b.	The business of selling new and/or used manufactured homes as a commercial operation in connection with the operation of a manufactured home development is prohibited. New or used manufactured homes located on lots within the manufactured home park may be sold by a licensed dealer and/or broker. This subsection shall not prohibit the sale of a new or used manufactured home by a resident of the manufactured home development provided the development permits the sale. 
c.	Mobile home parks may be permitted within the I-1 and RM-1 districts subject to the following conditions and locational requirements: 
1.	Mobile home parks shall not abut one-family residential districts; 
2.	Parcels being proposed for mobile home parks in the I-1 districts shall not be surrounded on more than three sides by the I-1 districts, provided further that the mobile home site shall have one entire side abutting an RM-1 multiple-family district; 
3.	Locational requirements in RM-1 districts shall be as follows: 
i.	Parcels being proposed for mobile home parks in RM-1 districts may be permitted when such mobile home park affords a buffer between the remainder of the RM-1 district, railroads, I-1 and/or I-2 districts. Mobile home parks shall not, therefore, be permitted as a principal use in any RM-1 district which does not directly abut either a railroad, I-1 and/or I-2 district; 
ii.	In an RM-1 district, the mobile home park shall not be any nearer to the outer limits of the RM-1 district than 450 feet. Outer limits as used here shall not include the edge along a railroad, public road or I-1 or I-2 district; 
iii.	The mobile home park shall provide a 12-foot greenbelt between itself and an RM-1, I-1 or I-2 district, unless such property is occupied by another mobile home park. The greenbelt shall provide a continuous year-round obscuring screen. A five-foot obscuring wall or berm may be substituted for the greenbelt with the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1706; Code 1972, app. A, § 1706) 
Sec. 50-410. - Greenbelts and plant materials. 
(a)	Wherever a greenbelt or planting screen is required under the provisions of this chapter, such greenbelt or planting screen shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	The required greenbelt or planting screen shall be planted with permanent plant materials within six months from the date of occupancy and shall thereafter be maintained in presentable condition, and shall be kept free from refuse and debris; provided further that all plant materials shall be continuously maintained in a sound, healthy and vigorous growing condition, and shall be kept free of plant diseases and insect pests; 
(2)	The selection, spacing and size of plant material shall be such as to create, within a five-year period from the date of planting, a horizontal obscuring effect for the entire length of the required greenbelt area, and a vertical obscuring effect of such height as is determined adequate by the planning commission for proper screening between land uses; 
(3)	The minimum horizontal dimensions of required greenbelt shall be as set forth under the provisions of this chapter for the respective land uses and districts indicated; 
(4)	In no instance shall the minimum dimensions of plant materials at initial planting be less than the following: 
a.	Deciduous shrubs: Two feet in height; 
b.	Deciduous trees: 11/2 inches in caliper; 
c.	Evergreen shrubs: Two feet in height; 
d.	Evergreen trees: Four feet in height; 
e.	Where under the provisions of this chapter an option is provided to the developer relative to the substitution of a greenbelt for a required wall or berm, the minimum starting height of plant materials in such greenbelt shall be equivalent to the required wall height; 
f.	Requirements as to spread, ball size, number of canes, etc., for the respective starting sizes of all plant materials shall be in accordance with the minimum recommended standards set forth in the latest edition of Horticultural Standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. 
(b)	Whenever a greenbelt or planting screen is required under the provisions of this chapter, a site plan of the parcel to be developed, together with a detailed planting plan of such greenbelt, shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall indicate, to scale, the proposed location and height of buildings and other structures, the location of public walks, roadways and utilities, and the proposed location of off-street parking, loading, service and outside storage areas and points of ingress/egress to the site. The planting plan shall indicate, to scale, the location, spacing, starting size, and description for each unit of plant material proposed for use within the required green belt area, together with the finished grade elevations proposed therein. The planning commission shall review such planting plan relative to: 
(1)	The proper spacing, placement and location of plant materials relative to the length and width of greenbelt so as to ensure that the required horizontal and vertical obscuring effect of proposed land uses will be achieved; 
(2)	The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that root system will not interfere with public utilities and that fruit and other debris, other than leaves, will not constitute a nuisance within public rights-of-way, or to abutting property owners; 
(3)	The proposed relationship between deciduous and evergreen plant materials so as to ensure that a maximum obscuring effect will be maintained throughout the various seasonal periods; 
(4)	The size of plant material (both starting and ultimate) to ensure adequate maturity and optimum screening effect of proposed plant materials. 
(c)	The planning commission shall furnish a list of suggested plant materials upon request of any developer and/or property owner of any parcel requiring the construction of a greenbelt or planting screen. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1708; Code 1972, app. A, § 1708) 
Sec. 50-411. - Signs. 
    All restrictions relating to the use and display of signs in the city are contained in article VI, section 50-501 of this chapter, also known as the sign code of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1709; Code 1972, app. A, § 1709) 
Sec. 50-412. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)	All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare, and shall be so arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(b)	All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots. 
(c)	All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature such buildings, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(d)	Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(e)	All illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1710; Code 1972, app. A, § 1710) 
Sec. 50-413. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so-called entranceway structures, including but not limited to walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects, may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 50-414, corner clearance, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the city, and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1711; Code 1972, app. A, § 1711) 
Sec. 50-414. - Corner clearance. 
    No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of three feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from the point of intersection of such right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1712; Code 1972, app. A, § 1712) 
Sec. 50-415. - Walls and berms. 
(a)	For those use districts and uses listed in this subsection, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall or landscaped berm as required in this section. The height of the wall or berm shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall. 
_____ 
Use Height Requirements (1) RM-1 districts (on those sides adjacent to one-family residential districts) 4 feet 6 inches to 6 feet 0 inches high (2) P-1 Vehicular parking districts 4 feet 6 inches high (3) Off-street parking area (other than vehicular parking districts) 4 feet 6 inches high (4) Office and commercial districts 4 feet 6 inches to 6 feet 0 inches high (5) Industrial districts 4 feet 6 inches to 8 feet 0 inches high (6) Hospital-Ambulance and delivery areas 6 feet 0 inches high (7) Utility buildings, stations and/or substations 6 feet 0 inches  
_____
(b)	In the case of variable wall or berm height requirements such as in subsections (a)(1), (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section, the extent of obscuring wall or berm shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of land usage provided further that no wall or berm shall be less than the required minimum listed in subsection (a) of this section, nor greater than the required maximum height listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter requires conformance with yard setback lines. Required walls may, upon approval of the board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
(d)	Required walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the building inspector. All walls required in this section shall be constructed of face brick or comparable nonporous facing materials on the exterior sides facing a residential district and shall be approved by the building inspector to be durable, weather resistant, rustproof and easily maintainable; and wood or wood products shall be specifically excluded. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20 percent of the surface. Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the building inspector. 
(e)	Required berms shall be constructed as landscaped earth mounds with a crest area at least four feet in width. The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as an earthen slope. The interior face of the berm may be constructed as an earthen slope, or retained by means of a wall, terrace or other means acceptable to the building inspector. Whenever an earthen slope is provided, it shall be constructed with an incline not to exceed one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal distance. Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion by sodding or seeding. If slopes are seeded, such slopes shall be protected with a straw mulch held in place by jute netting until the seed germinates and a permanent lawn is established. The straw mulch is not required if the seeded slope is protected by a net that is specifically designed to control erosion. The berm area shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn, and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition. A planting plan and grading plan shall be prepared for the berm and shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Plant materials within the berm area shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for greenbelts and plant material contained in section 50-410. 
(f)	The board of appeals may waive or modify the requirements of subsection (e) of this section where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served, provided that in no instance shall a required wall or berm be permitted to be less than four feet six inches in height. In consideration of request to waive wall or berm requirements between residential and nonresidential districts, the board of appeals shall refer the request to the planning commission for a determination, as to whether or not the residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future. In such cases as the planning commission determines the residential district to be a future nonresidential area, the board of appeals may temporarily waive wall or berm requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination, as described in this subsection, for each subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1713; Code 1972, app. A, § 1713) 
Sec. 50-416. - Fences. 
(a)	Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "fence" means any permanent fence, partition, structure or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure, and not a part of a structure for which a building permit is required. 
(b)	Permit required to construct fence. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a fence within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(c)	Application for permit; contents. Application for a permit required by this article shall be made to the code official and shall contain all information, including drawings, required for the determination of whether the erection of such fence would be contrary to the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. 
(d)	Permit fees. The fee for a permit required by this section shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and a copy of such resolution shall always be available in the offices of the city clerk and treasurer. 
(e)	Height and construction requirements in residential districts. Fences located in residential districts shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Such fences shall not exceed four feet in height in the required front yard or setback and shall not exceed six feet in height in any part forward from the extreme rear line of the dwelling if the fence is built on the property line or within five feet thereof. 
(2)	Such fences shall not be of closed construction, except as provided in subsection (e)(3) of this section. 
(3)	Fences located in the rear yard on the lot line or within five feet thereof may be built to a height of eight feet without restriction on being of closed construction. 
(f)	Height and construction requirements in nonresidential districts. In other than residential districts, fences may be 12 feet in height without restrictions as to being of closed construction. 
(g)	Materials and maintenance generally: 
(1)	All fence material shall be approved by the code official. 
(2)	Any fence, wall or landscape screen shall be of uniform design, construction and appearance and sturdily constructed to withstand normal weather conditions. The method of construction and type of materials and design shall be of a kind normally and customarily associated with the uses permitted in the zoning district. Woven wire or chainlink fences with plastic slats or plastic inserts shall not be permitted. 
(3)	All fences, walls and landscape screens shall be constructed and maintained so as not to become a visual nuisance, or pose a safety hazard to nearby residents, passersby or the general public. 
(h)	Additional requirements and provisions. Additional requirements and provisions are as follows: 
(1)	All fences and walls shall be erected so that the finished face of the fence or wall faces outside the property. 
(2)	Fences parallel to one another shall be prohibited unless special provision is made to specifically provide for the proper maintenance of both fences, including but not limited to adequate distances between fences and construction design details. 
(3)	Gates in fences or walls shall not open over public property, into alleys, or over adjoining properties. 
(4)	A fence shall not be constructed or maintained that is charged or connected with an electrical current. 
(5)	Barbed wire fences are prohibited in all zoning districts, except in the industrial district the use of barbed wire strands is permitted provided the strands are at least eight feet above the bottom of the fence. 
(6)	Essential service structures and buildings such as electrical substations may be protected by a fence up to ten feet in height with barbed wire strands located at least eight feet above the bottom of the fence. 
(7)	Fences higher than permitted by the zoning district may be permitted by the planning commission if it is demonstrated that such fence is necessary for public safety or proper screening, or is necessary for the proper operation of the principal use. 
(8)	All vertical support members for a fence shall not exceed the maximum permitted fence height by more than four inches. 
(9)	A fence, wall or landscape screen shall not be constructed within or over any public right-of-way. 
(10)	The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the average finished grade within ten feet of the fence or wall. 
(11)	Fences for swimming pools shall also comply with the single state construction code. 
(12)	The provisions of this section shall not interfere with the erection of temporary fences around construction sites erected or maintained according to the building code or other ordinances of the city. 
(i)	Temporary fences to comply with building code; period of maintenance. Temporary construction fences and fences required for construction around excavations shall comply with the building code. Such fences shall not be maintained for a period greater than one year without special permission from the zoning board of appeals. 
(j)	Dangerous fences prohibited; declared a nuisance. No fences shall be maintained so as to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction or otherwise, endangers life or property is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(k)	Power of board of appeals to alter requirements of article; application; hearing. Upon application, in writing, by any person directly or indirectly affected by the provisions of this article, the zoning board of appeals may, after a hearing in accordance with the established procedure of the board in its sound discretion and in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the community, reduce or remit the requirements of this article in individual cases. 
(l)	Notice to repair, modify or remove unsafe fences. If an unsafe condition exists in regard to a fence, the building inspector shall serve upon the owner, agent or person in control of the property upon which such fence is located a written notice describing the unsafe condition and specifying the required repairs or modifications to be made to render the fence safe or requiring the unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed. The notice shall provide a time limit for such repair, modification or removal. 
(m)	Code official may promulgate rules and regulations. The code official may make such rules and regulations, not in conflict with this section or inconsistent with public safety, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section. 
(n)	Resolution of conflicts. Where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with any other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city relating to zoning, building, fire, safety or health, the provisions which establish the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1964-8, §§ 1-7, 9, 11; Ord. No. 1980-8, § 2; Code 1972, §§ 3-58-3-72) 
State Law reference- Fences and fence viewers, MCL 43.51 et seq. 
Sec. 50-417. - Site plan review. 
(a)	A site plan, together with ten copies, are to be submitted for review by the planning commission for approval of: 
(1)	Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this chapter; 
(2)	Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as required in section 50-406, off-street parking requirements; 
(3)	Any use in an RM-1, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, I-2, PRD or PDD district lying contiguous to, or across a street from a single-family residential district; 
(4)	Any use except single-family or two-family residential which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street; 
(5)	All residentially related uses permitted in single-family districts such as, but not limited to, churches, schools and public facilities; 
(6)	Building additions or accessory buildings shall not require planning commission review unless off-street parking in addition to that already provided on the site is required. 
(7)	All principal uses subject to special conditions under this chapter (i.e., special land uses) 
(8)	Developments created under Division 12 (PRD-Planned Residential Districts) and Division 13 (PDD-Planned Development District) of this chapter. 
(b)	(1)	Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved until the site plan has been reviewed by the building department in coordination with the public safety department, for compliance with the standards of the department. Except for special land use requests, site plans shall be submitted no later than 14 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which approval is sought. Upon receipt of an application for a special land use, the city shall provide notice of the request in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall indicate that a public hearing on the special land use request may be requested by any property owner or the occupant of any structure located within 300 feet of the property being considered for a special land use regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the city. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the city. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. The notice shall do all of the following: 
a.	Describe the nature of the request. 
b.	Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
c.	State when and where the request is to be considered. 
d.	Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(2)	At the initiative of the planning commission or upon request of the applicant, a real property owner whose real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property, or the occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the property, a public hearing shall be held before a discretionary decision is made on the special land use request. 
(3)	The planning commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions a request for a special land use approval. The decision on the special land use shall be incorporated in the statement of findings and conclusions relative to the special land use which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. 
(4)	Incomplete site plans will not be considered. Site plan approval shall expire, and be of no effect, 180 days after the date of issuance thereof, unless within such time construction shall commence. The applicant may seek and obtain, at the planning commission's discretion, an additional 180-day extension upon application to the planning commission with suitable explanation. Should construction not commerce prior to the extension deadline, the site plan is null and void. 
(c)	The site plan presented is to be of minimum draftsman quality. A plot or sketch plan is unacceptable. The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)	The name, address and phone number of the applicant; 
(2)	Identification of present zoning; 
(3)	A general written description of the proposed use of the development depicted in the plan; 
(4)	The area of the parcel in question in square feet or acres; 
(5)	The legal description of the site; 
(6)	The property identified by lot lines and location, including dimensions, angle and size of all lot and property lines to correlate with the legal description of the property. Such plan shall further show the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties; 
(7)	The site plan of a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property is less than three acres, and one inch equals 100 feet if three acres or more; 
(8)	Date, north point and scale; 
(9)	The elevation of all finished floor grades; 
(10)	The topography of the site at ten-foot contours; 
(11)	The height and square footage of all proposed and existing buildings together with the square footage of individual floor areas; 
(12)	The location of all existing and proposed drives, parking areas and delivery/loading areas; 
(13)	The location of site lighting, sidewalks and signage, if any; 
(14)	The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys; 
(15)	Illustrate proposed open space, landscaping, screening, fencing, topographical changes, and other natural features; 
(16)	Include copies of such earth change plans or permits as may be required by state law; 
(17)	The location of surface water drainage and grading plan with stormwater disposal on site, if there is no storm drainage; 
(18)	Indicate the applicant's intention to connect to the public sanitary and water system or, if none, the location of the proposed well and septic field and tank; 
(19)	The location of screened opaque trash receptacles (minimum three sides); 
(20)	The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan; 
(21)	Any other information deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(d)	In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
(1)	The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic; 
(2)	The traffic circulation features within the site, and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will ensure: 
a.	Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets; 
b.	Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(3)	The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences and walls in pursuance of these objectives and landscaping, fences and walls shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant; 
(4)	Marginal access roads shall be required in those instances where the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress/egress points may occur with relation to a major thoroughfare thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, and where a general plan showing the location of such marginal access roads has been approved by the city council. Where marginal access roads are required, the following conditions shall be met: 
a.	The marginal access road shall be at least 22 feet in width and shall be located 60 feet from the centerline of the thoroughfare. The marginal access road shall be either dedicated as public right-of-way or shall be an easement which will permit the use of the marginal access road for traffic circulation from one property to another. Such easement shall be in a form acceptable to the city council, and approved by the council prior to the issuance of a building permit. No permanent structures such as curbs shall be permitted within the easement or right-of-way although temporary features such as wheel stops may be permitted. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the easement so that it remains usable as a means of vehicular travel from one property to another. The easement shall be recorded with the city clerk and the county registrar of deeds prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit; 
b.	In reviewing the site plan, the planning commission may permit parking in the easement area provided that the layout is such that the parking can be removed at a later date when the marginal access road is needed for access to adjacent properties, without disrupting the layout of the parking area. Temporary parking spaces permitted within the marginal access drive shall not be included in computing the minimum off-street parking requirements under section 50-406; 
c.	Where marginal access roads are required, the entire 22-foot area shall be paved up to the abutting properties. Backing from parking spaces onto the marginal access road shall not be permitted except on a temporary basis. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the marginal access road at the property line and the building inspector shall maintain a record of all marginal access road elevations so that such road grades and elevations can be coordinated. Marginal access road elevations shall conform to elevations established by the city council. Paving of the marginal access road shall meet construction specifications set forth by the city council; 
d.	Temporary entrances and exits may be approved for individual sites provided money is placed in escrow to ensure future elimination of such temporary entrances and exits. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until such monies have been deposited with the city. In determining which entrances and exits will be permanent and which will be temporary, the planning commission shall generally be guided by a minimum distance of 400 feet between entrances and exits and the location of existing drives on the opposite side of the thoroughfare. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1715; Ord. No. 1994-1, § 1; Code 1972, app. A, § 1715; Ord. No. 2006-5, §§ 10, 11, 8-21-2006) 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 
Sec. 50-418. - Frontage on a public street. 
    No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless such lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1716; Code 1972, app. A, § 1716) 
Sec. 50-419. - Access to major thoroughfare or collector street. 
    For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or collector street. Provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare or collector street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement to a thoroughfare. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1717; Code 1972, app. A, § 1717) 
Secs. 50-420-50-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 50-441. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the interpretations and exceptions in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1800; Code 1972, app. A, § 1800) 
Sec. 50-442. - Essential services. 
    Essential services serving the city shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the city shall receive the review and approval, after a public hearing, of the board of appeals. Such review of the board of appeals shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights-of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers, and further shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1801; Code 1972, app. A, § 1801) 
Sec. 50-443. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1802; Code 1972, app. A, § 1802) 
Sec. 50-444. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flag poles or public monuments; provided, however, that the board of appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1803; Code 1972, app. A, § 1803) 
Sec. 50-445. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used for any principal use permitted in the district in which such lot is located, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use may be made provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1804; Code 1972, app. A, § 1804) 
Sec. 50-446. - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area and setback requirements of this chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1805; Code 1972, app. A, § 1805) 
Sec. 50-447. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where the application of such regulations cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1806; Code 1972, app. A, § 1806) 
Sec. 50-448. - Porches. 
    An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch, deck, paved terrace or fixed canopy may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1807; Code 1972, app. A, § 1807) 
Sec. 50-449. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1808; Code 1972, app. A, § 1808) 
Sec. 50-450. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front yard or side yard so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1809; Code 1972, app. A, § 1809) 
Sec. 50-451. - Lots having lake frontage. 
    Those residential lots or parcels having lake frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the yard on the water side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a covered and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 1-16-1978, § 1810; Code 1972, app. A, § 1810) 
Secs. 50-452-50-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 

Sec. 50-501. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide standards to safeguard life, public health, property, and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance, and quality of all materials of all signs and outdoor advertising structures within the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, preamble, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, preamble) 
Sec. 50-502. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of sign means the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed but including any sign tower. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area, except marquee signs will be permitted two faces each having maximum area. 
    Auxiliary product sign means a sign which directs attention to a product sold upon the premises where such sign is located. 
    Banner means a canvas, plastic or vinyl, single-face nonilluminated sign intended for temporary attachment to a building or pole, and displaying information regarding a temporary promotion or event. 
    Business center means a group of four or more contiguous stores or contiguous industrial businesses or an industrial subdivision developed as a planned complex. 
    Community special event means an event sponsored by a nonprofit association or corporation for a charitable, educational or public purpose. 
    Display time means the amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an electronic message sign. 
    Dissolve means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, in which the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility with a gradual reappearance and legibility of the second message. 
    District means a zoning district as established in this chapter. 
    Dynamic frame effect means an electronic message sign frame effect in which the illusion of motion and/or animation is used. 
    Fade means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible, and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
    Flash means a visual effect, including but not limited to undulating, pulsing, blinking, expanding, contracting, bouncing, rotating, spinning, twisting, or continuous scrolling and/or traveling, that does not hold a constant message or graphic for eight seconds or longer. A transition period lasting longer than three seconds is also considered flashing. 
    Frame means a complete, static display screen on an electronic message sign. 
    Frame effect means a visual effect on an electronic message sign applied to a single frame. See also Dynamic frame effect. 
    Gasoline filling station means a space, structure, or building or part of a building for the retail sale or supply of motor fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other customary facilities and service for the installation of such commodities in or on such motor vehicle, but not including special facilities for the painting, repair or similar servicing thereof. 
    Height of ground pole sign and entranceway sign mean the vertical distance measured from the natural surface grade of the land without including any berm, landscaping, grading, or other artificially or unnaturally constructed or raised portion of land beneath the midpoint of the face of the sign to the highest point of the sign or supporting structure. Where setback regulations require a ground pole or entranceway sign to be behind or on top of a landscaped berm mandated by this chapter, the zoning board of appeals, upon review with the city's planning consultant, may permit a variance to the height measurement, but only to the extent necessary to prevent the sign from being obscured by the landscaped berm. 
    Lineal feet, when used in determining the area of a sign, means the length of the first floor business frontage of the business premises on which the sign is located. 
    Noncommercial means not related to or connected with trade and traffic or commerce in general. 
    Parcel of land means a unit of contiguous real property under common ownership. 
    Required setback means the minimum setback required for the respective district as specified in this chapter. However, setback, when used in determining sign area, shall be the distance the sign is from the nearest street centerline measured along a perpendicular line to that street line. 
    Scroll means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign in which the message appears to move vertically across the display surface. 
    Sign means a name, identification, description, display, device or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or otherwise represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land, and which directs attention to a service, product, activity, person, institution, organization or business. Types of signs are as follows: 
(1)	Billboard or off-premises advertising sign means a sign which contains a message or advertises an establishment, product, service, space or activity not available on the lot on which the sign is located. 
(2)	Business center sign means a sign which gives direction, name, and identification to a business center and which does not contain any additional information regarding individual stores, businesses, institutions, organizations or industries located within the planned complex or contiguous stores. 
(3)	Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a product, service or activity sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(4)	Electronic message center or sign (EMC) means an electronically activated, changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programed by computer from a remote location. Also known as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. (See also the following terms principally associated with electronic message centers: Display time, dissolve, dynamic frame effect, fade, frame, frame effect, scroll, transition, travel). 
(5)	Entranceway sign means a sign that designates the street entranceway to a residential or industrial subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development, or permitted institution, from a public right-of-way. 
(6)	Flashing sign means any illuminated sign, or element thereof, on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when the sign is in use such that the sign appears to flash, undulate, pulse, blink, expand, contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise move. 
(7)	Ground pole sign means a sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, braces or some other structure, placed in the ground surface and not attached to any building. 
(8)	Identification sign means a sign containing the name of a business operating on the premises where located, the type of business, owner or resident, and/or the street address and sets forth no other advertisement display. 
(9)	Illuminated sign means a sign that provides artificial light by either emission or reflection. 
(10)	Marquee sign means an identification or business sign attached to a marquee, canopy, or awning projection from the building. 
(11)	On-premises advertising sign means a sign which contains a message related to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or activity, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(12)	Portable sign means a freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to, electrical or nonelectrical signs that are mounted on a trailer type frame with wheels or skids or portable wood or metal frame and not permanently attached to the ground; A-frame poles temporarily driven into the ground; and T-shaped and inverted T-shaped sign structures. 
(13)	Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to any building or structure other than a marquee and projects in such a way that the message is not parallel to the wall to which it is attached. 
(14)	Roof sign means a sign which is erected above the roof of a building. 
(15)	Temporary sign means a display sign or advertising device with or without a structural frame intended for a limited period of display, including displays for holidays or public demonstrations. 
(16)	Tourist-oriented directional sign means a sign used to provide motorists with advance notice of a lawful cultural, historical, recreational, educational, or commercial activity that is annually attended by 2,000 or more people and for which a major portion of the activity's income or visitors are derived during the normal business season for motorists not residing in the immediate area of the activity. 
(17)	Wall sign means a sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall which does not project more than 18 inches from such building or wall. The exposed face of the sign must be in a plane parallel to the building wall or structure, such as a water tower. The sign must not extend above the height of the building, wall or structure. 
    Sign function category means the usage of a sign and/or the premises using a sign. Function categories are as follows: 
(1)	Business category means a business sign located at a premises upon which a business or profession is conducted or a product, service or activity is sold or offered for sale. 
(2)	Business center category means a business center sign located at a business center. 
(3)	Identification category means an identification sign. 
    Thoroughfare means a major thoroughfare or thoroughfare as established in the master plan adopted by the city pursuant to 1931 PA 285 (MCL 125.31 et seq.). 
    Transition means a visual effect used on an electronic message sign to change from one message to another. Transitions are limited to three seconds or less. 
    Vending machine means a currency operated machine for selling small articles or services. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 1, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 1; Ord. No. 2-2005, § 1, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2016-2, §§ 1, 2, 3-21-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-503. - Rules and regulations to interpret and implement article. 
    The planning commission shall have the power, as may be necessary in the interest of the public safety, health and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement provisions of this article and to secure the intent thereof. Such rules and regulations shall become effective upon publication, after filing with the council within 20 days after being filed. These rules and regulations shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of this article as if such rules and regulations were specifically set forth in this article. The violation of any such regulation so adopted shall be deemed a violation of this article. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be published by the city clerk and placed in file in the city clerk's office for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 2, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 2) 
Sec. 50-504. - Permits. 
(a)	Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate or maintain, by structural change or changing the display of the face of the sign, within the city any sign or other advertising structure, except where specifically exempted by this article, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the zoning official and payment of a fee provided for in this section. 
(b)	Application. Application for erection permits shall be made upon forms provided for by the zoning official, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)	Location of the building, structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)	Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures and property lines; 
(4)	Two drawings of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground; 
(5)	Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with regulations adopted by the zoning official; 
(6)	Name and address of the person erecting the structure; 
(7)	Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign; 
(8)	Insurance policy or bond as required by this article; 
(9)	Such other information as the zoning official may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the city and the state; 
(10)	In the discretion of the zoning official when, in the zoning official's opinion, the public safety requires it, material required by this section shall, in addition, bear the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit; 
(11)	In all applications for entranceway signs, the zoning official shall require the appropriate provisions have been made to ensure continued maintenance of the sign. 
(c)	Fee. A permit fee shall be paid to the city for each permanent permit and each temporary permit required by this article as shall be set by resolution of the council. 
(d)	Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this article shall not apply to banners, the ordinary servicing or repainting of an existing sign message, cleaning of a sign, nor to changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed for periodic change of message without change in structure, such as billboard, bulletin board or similar type of sign. 
(e)	Effect of issuance. No permit for a sign issued under this article shall be deemed to constitute permission to maintain an unlawful sign, nor shall any permit issued under this article constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 3, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 3) 
Sec. 50-505. - Liability insurance for certain signs. 
    If any wall, projecting pole, or roof sign is suspended over a public street or property or if the vertical distance of such sign above the street is greater than the horizontal distance from the sign to the street property line or parapet wall and so located as to be able to fall or to be used onto public property, then the owner of such sign shall keep in force a public liability insurance policy, approved by the city attorney, in the amounts set by resolution of the city council. The policy shall indemnify the owner from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the owner for or on account of injuries or damages to persons or property received or sustained by any person through any act of omission or negligence of the owner, the owner's servants, agents or employees regarding such sign. In lieu of an insurance policy, an owner may present proof satisfactory to the city attorney that the owner is financially capable of self-insurance in that amounts required by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 4, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 4) 
Sec. 50-506. - Liability insurance for sign erectors. 
    Every person before engaging or continuing in the business of erecting, repairing or dismantling signs, poster boards or other display signs in the city shall first furnish the city a public liability insurance policy approved by the city attorney, in the amounts set by resolution of the city council. The policy shall indemnify the erector from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the erector for or on account of injuries or damages to persons or property received or sustained by any person through any act of omission or negligence of the erector, such person's servants, agents or employees in the erection, repair or dismantling of any sign, poster board or other display sign. The policy shall contain a clause whereby the policy cannot be canceled until after a written notice of intention to cancel has been filed with the city clerk at least ten days prior to the date of cancellation. The policies shall be renewed annually on or before May 1 of each year and certificates of renewal or new policies shall be filed with the city clerk. In lieu of an insurance policy, an erector may present proof satisfactory to the city attorney that the erector is financially capable of self-insurance in the amounts required by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 5, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 5) 
Sec. 50-507. - Permitted according to district. 
    The following types of signs, illuminated or unilluminated, shall be permitted in the following districts and in limited number, in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)	Types of signs permitted in each district. Types of signs permitted in each district according to the function category of such signs shall be as follows: 
a.	In any residential district and planned residential development district (R-1, R-2, R-3, RT, RM-1, PRD): 
1.	Identification category signs on churches, schools, residential subdivision entrance-ways, apartment complex entranceways, condominium entranceways, and permitted institutions other than residential, and on barns, identifying farm name and ownership (ground pole, wall or marquee). 
2.	Temporary signs as noted in section 50-508. 
3.	Signs as noted in section 50-509. 
4.	Tourist-oriented directional signs provided such signs are otherwise permitted by the state transportation department pursuant to 1996 PA 299, as amended. 
5.	Electronic message centers are allowed as a special use only and only on properties engaged in permitted nonresidential uses in a residential district or planned residential development district. Electronic message centers are prohibited on residential properties and on subdivision, apartment, multi-family dwellings, and condominium properties as provided in section 50-510. 
b.	In any office district (OS-1) and planned development district (PDD), on-premises advertising signs as follows: 
1.	Business sign: Ground pole sign or wall sign in business category. 
2.	Identification sign: Ground pole sign, wall sign or marquee sign in identification category. 
3.	Business center sign: Ground pole sign in business center category. 
4.	Temporary signs as noted in section 50-508. 
5.	Signs as noted in section 50-509. 
6.	Electronic message centers as a special use only as provided in section 50-510. 
c.	In any industrial district (I-1, I-2), on-premises advertising signs as follows: 
1.	Business sign: Ground pole sign or wall sign in business category. 
2.	Identification sign: Ground pole sign, wall sign or marquee sign in identification category. 
3.	Business center sign: Ground pole sign in business center category. 
4.	Temporary signs as noted in section 50-508. 
5.	Signs as noted in section 50-509. 
6.	Electronic message centers as provided in section 50-510. 
d.	In any business district (B-1, B-2, B-3), on-premises advertising signs as follows: 
1.	Business sign: Ground pole sign, wall sign or marquee sign (on theater only) in business category. 
2.	Identification sign: Ground pole sign, wall sign or marquee sign in identification category. 
3.	Business center sign: Ground pole sign in business center category. 
4.	Temporary signs as noted in section 50-508. 
5.	Signs as noted in section 50-509. 
6.	Electronic message centers as provided in section 50-510. 
e.	In any parking district (P-1): 
1.	Temporary signs as noted in section 50-508. 
2.	Signs as noted in section 50-509. 
3.	Electronic message centers as provided in section 50-510. 
f.	In any I-1 light industrial or B-3 general business district: 
1.	Auxiliary product signs. 
2.	Tourist-oriented directional signs provided such signs are otherwise permitted by the state transportation department pursuant to 1996 PA 299, as amended. 
3.	Electronic message centers as provided in section 50-510. 
g.	In any commercially classed district (RM-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, I-2): 
1.	Banners. 
2.	Electronic message centers as provided in section 50-510. 
(2)	Area, height and placement regulations. Area, height, and placement regulations shall be as follows: 
a.	Ground pole sign: 
1.	Area: Where a business is located on a divided four-lane road, having at least 250 feet of road frontage on said road, it shall be permitted a ground pole sign with a maximum area of 100 square feet. On all roads, businesses shall be permitted a ground pole sign with a maximum area of 50 square feet. 
2.	Height: The height of the ground pole sign shall not be greater than as follows: 
i.	Business center category located on four-lane roads, a maximum height of 30 feet. 
ii.	All others, a maximum of eight feet (see measurement method, section 50-502). 
3.	Placement: No portion of any sign shall be placed nearer than five feet from the right-of-way line or property line. The sign shall be placed not closer than 50 feet from any residential district. 
b.	Wall sign: 
1.	Area: For businesses with 48 feet or less of lineal feet of business frontage, up to 27 square feet of wall signage is permitted. For businesses with more than 48 lineal feet of frontage, up to 50 square feet of wall signage is permitted. Where a business is located on a divided four-lane road, having at least 250 lineal feet of road frontage on said road, it shall be permitted a maximum of 100 square feet of wall signage. 
2.	Height: Not to exceed the height of the wall on which the sign is located. 
3.	Placement: In accordance with the definition. Further, where more than one separately owned and operated business occupies a building or parcel of land, those wall signs permitted for individual businesses shall be located on the same side of the building as the respective business front entrances, and within the lineal frontage of the respective businesses. Provided further, that where such a building is oriented so that the front entrances to the business do not face the adjacent thoroughfare, a business occupying that portion of the building nearest the thoroughfare may place its sole wall sign upon that wall facing the thoroughfare. 
c.	Marquee sign: 
1.	Area: Maximum 24 square feet on either or both sides of the marquee. 
2.	Height: Maximum 12 feet, maximum not to exceed top of face or valance of the marquee, awning or canopy on which the sign is located. 
3.	Placement: Shall be attached to and contained within the perimeter of the face or valance of a marquee, awning or canopy. 
d.	Entranceway sign: 
1.	Area: One square foot of sign for one foot of setback, measured from the centerline of the fronting street with a maximum of 24 square feet. Setback is to be measured to the center of the sign. 
2.	Height: Maximum of five feet. 
3.	Placement: Not less than ten feet from any street right-of-way and only in yards adjacent to streets at the entrance to the subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development or permitted institution. 
e.	Auxiliary product sign: 
1.	Area: Maximum of eight square feet. 
2.	Height: Maximum of four feet. 
3.	Placement: Limited to one sign not less than 15 feet from the road right-of-way. No permit required. 
f.	Banners: 
1.	Area: Maximum of 30 square feet each. 
2.	Height: Not to exceed height of building on the property. 
3.	Placement: Not less than 5 feet from road right-of-way. 
(3)	Number of on-premises advertising signs permitted. The number of on-premises advertising signs permitted shall be as follows: 
a.	No parcel of land shall be allowed more than one sign permitted under this section, except as follows: 
1.	A single business occupying a single building shall be permitted one of the following combinations of signs or singular signs: 
i.	One ground pole sign and one wall sign. If the property is located on a corner lot, one wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. In addition, one identification category wall sign not greater than two square feet in area at the rear entrance to a business establishment is permitted. 
ii.	One entranceway sign and one wall sign. If the property is located on a corner lot, one wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. In addition, one identification category wall sign not greater than two square feet in area at the rear entrance to a business establishment is permitted. 
iii.	One marquee sign and one wall sign. If the property is located on a corner lot, one wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. In addition, one identification category wall sign not greater than two square feet in area of the rear entrance to a business establishment is permitted. 
iv.	One ground pole sign and one marquee sign. If the property is located on a corner lot, one wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. In addition, one identification category wall sign not greater than two square feet in area at the rear entrance to a business establishment is permitted. 
v.	One roof sign and one ground pole sign. If the property is located on a corner lot, one wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. In addition, one identification category wall sign not greater than two square feet in area at the rear entrance to a business establishment is permitted. 
vi.	Banners. No parcel shall display more than two banners. 
2.	Where four or more separately owned and operated businesses occupy a one-story building on a single parcel of land, the parcel is permitted one business center sign. 
3.	Each separately owned and operated business occupying a one-story building on a single parcel of land, where such business has a separate direct entrance to that business establishment from outside the building, is entitled to one identification wall sign. 
4.	Where separately owned businesses occupying a single building or a single parcel of land utilize individual identification wall signs, all such signs on the building or within the center shall be of a common style-i.e., individual freestanding letters shall be utilized with other signs composed of individual freestanding letters, box signs (framed wall signs) shall be utilized with other box signs. Where premises have lawfully developed with signs not of a common style, future signs shall be of a style common to a majority of signs within the development. 
5.	In the case of a corner lot occupied by a single business and situated on two or more thoroughfares, signs may be permitted on each thoroughfare in accord with this article, except that if a ground pole sign is selected and placed on the premises, only the ground pole sign shall be permitted. 
6.	In the case of a building utilized solely for office purposes within the OS-1 and PDD districts, a second wall sign or ground pole sign may be utilized to identify a major tenant provided the following conditions are met: 
i.	The building is no less than three stories in height and no less than 50,000 square feet in size; 
ii.	The tenant for whom the additional signage is sought leases no less than 50 percent of the gross leasable space within the building; 
iii.	The building otherwise has a separate name different than the name of the major tenant. 
7.	A single business occupying a single building, and having at least 250 feet of road frontage on a divided four-lane road, will be permitted two ground pole signs and two wall signs facing said four-lane road. The total combined area for all signs may not exceed 250 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 6, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 1998-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-5-1998; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 6; Ord. No. 2-2005, §§ 2, 3, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2007-8, §§ 1-3, 11-19-07; Ord. No. 2016-2, § 3, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 50-508. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs may be erected in accordance with the use, area, height and placement regulations of this section. Unless specifically exempted, permits for such signs shall be required and shall specify a maximum length of time such sign may be used. 
_____ 
Use, Area, Height and Placement Regulations for Temporary Sign Sign Function District Type of 
Structure Area 
(Square Feet) Height, 
Placement and 
No. of Signs Max. Permit Duration 
or Exemption (1) 
Construction identification sign which identifies the name of the project developers, contractors, engineers and architects on a site being developed. Permitted only for projects that require site plan approval under the "Zoning Ordinance." All Groundpole or wall. 64 Not less than required setback nor higher than 15 feet. One sign. Not to be issued prior to building permit and is valid until issuance of last certificate of occupancy or for a period of 12 months, whichever occurs first. (2) 
Subdivision business sign advertising residential or commercial or industrial subdivision under development and the name of developer, architects, builders and sales brokers. All Groundpole. 64 Not less than required setback nor higher than 15 feet. One sign at each platted entranceway from a public street. When subdivision does not have an entranceway from a major arterial, arterial or minor arterial, placement may be at an off-premises location which is an access point to the nearest major arterial, arterial or minor arterial, provided permission is obtained from the owner of such property. Not to be issued prior to a first building permit and is valid for 12 months or until 75 percent of the subdivision lots are issued certificates of occupancy, whichever occurs first. (3) 
Residential business sale, rental or lease sign which identifies the sale, rental, or lease of the property upon which the sign is located or the model name of the building for sale, but not including signs on vacant unplatted property. No permit. All Portable signs secured by driving post in ground. 6 Not less than one-half the distance between the principal building and adjacent street and not higher than five feet. One sign. Until and 30 days after sale or lease of property without permit. (4) 
Residential business sale, rental or lease sign which identifies the sale, rental or lease of vacant unplatted property upon which the sign is located. No permit. All Portable signs secured by driving post in ground. 16 Not less than one-half the required setback and not higher than five feet. One sign. 
Until and 30 days after sale or lease of the property without permit. (5) 
One or two signs directing the public to seasonal sales of farm produce grown on the property, where sale of produce is permitted by the "Zoning Ordinance." No permit. All Groundpole. 6 Within property lines, not higher than five feet. Period of seasonal sale. (6) 
One sign advertising a temporary use permitted pursuant to section 50-60 of the "Zoning Ordinance". No additional permit required. All Groundpole or portable. 24 No greater than five feet in height. Placement: Not less than 63 feet from the centerline of a major arterial or arterial; on all other roadways not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way lines, and not less than one-half the required yard setback of the zoning district. Until expiration of the temporary use permit granted pursuant to section 50-60 of the "Zoning Ordinance." (7) 
Open house signs to advertise showing of a single-family residential dwelling, including attached or detached condominium units, to potential purchasers. Residential Groundpole or portable. 4 Not higher than five feet. One sign at the residence for sale, not less than one-half the distance between the principal building and the adjacent street. No more than five additional signs may be placed at the entrance way to the subdivisions within which the open house is being conducted and at intersections within that subdivision to provide directions to the house for sale, provided such signs are at least ten feet from the traveled portion of the street or road; provided further that if there is a sidewalk and curb at such location, directional signs shall be located between the sidewalk and curb. Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time; solely during duration of open house. No permit required. (8) 
Special promotion sign intended for temporary attachment to a building or pole, and displaying information regarding a temporary promotion or event. I-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 Portable sign. 16 Minimum five feet from road right-of-way may not be secured to any utility, traffic or street signpost, two signs maximum. Permit required. Duration of promotion not to exceed 30 days at which time the permit will expire. Permits to be granted to businesses not more than four times per year with at least 30-day intervals between issuance.  
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 7, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 1998-1, § 3, 1-5-1998; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 7) 
_____
Sec. 50-509. - Permitted in all districts. 
    The following types of signs shall be permitted in all districts where the principal use to which they are related is permitted by this chapter: 
(1)	House numbers, nameplates (fraternity, sorority, apartment and professional) identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land and not exceeding two square feet in area. No permit is required. 
(2)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material. No permit is required. 
(3)	Identification signs painted on or permanently attached to motor vehicles which are legally licensed and primarily used upon the highways for the transporting of persons, goods or equipment; provided that no vehicle displaying a sign may be parked solely or primarily for the purpose of advertising any product or service of a business on the premises where parked, and provided such signs are not constructed so as to extend in height greater than one foot above the vehicle's roof or body line, whichever is more closely contiguous to the part of the vehicle to which such sign is attached, and provided such vehicle with sign is not parked within the zoned setback for the premises where parked. No permit is required. 
(4)	Flags bearing the official designation of the United States of America when displayed on a flagpole, but not more than one such flagpole per parcel of land. This limitation shall not apply on any day designated as a holiday by the United States or by the state. Each parcel of land may display not more than two additional flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, city, educational institution or commercial or noncommercial organization, not exceeding 24 square feet when displayed on a flagpole. Flags shall be permitted without limitation at any single-family residence and at any apartment dwelling when located within an area leased to a resident and not within any common area. No permit is required. 
(5)	Traffic or other municipal signs such as legal notices, railroad crossing, danger, and other emergency signs as may be approved by the city council or the city manager. No permit is required. 
(6)	Community special event signs. The sign, place of display, and time period of display must be approved by the code official. 
(7)	Signs not greater than ten square feet in area and displays for the purpose of promoting or advertising the initial opening of a commercial business on or immediately adjacent to the premises of that business within 60 days after the initial opening for a period not to exceed 30 days as approved prior to erection in writing by the zoning official. A permit shall be required, however, only the minimum permit fee shall be paid. 
(8)	Gasoline filling stations only may display the following special signs which are deemed customary and necessary to such stations' respective businesses: 
a.	Customary lettering or other insignia on a gasoline pump consisting of the brand of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, and any other sign required by law and not exceeding a total of three square feet on each pump. No permit shall be required. 
b.	A single nonilluminated double-faced sign per gasoline pump island, each of which shall not exceed four square feet in area, may be placed on a gasoline pump island. Such sign may extend a maximum of two feet above the pumps. No permit shall be required. 
(9)	Where exterior racks or showcases are permitted, signs on such racks or showcases may be displayed on the exterior of business establishments. Each such rack or showcase may contain a single sign not exceeding ten percent of the largest visible rack area and shall meet the placement requirements set forth for ground pole signs. Such signs must contain a message relating only to the merchandise for sale on such rack or showcase. No permit shall be required. 
(10)	Signs not exceeding two feet which contain only noncommercial messages including designation of restrooms, telephone location, and direction of door openings. No permit shall be required. 
(11)	Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirement of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, published in accord with section 608 of 1949 PA 300 (MCL 257.608). A permit shall be required. 
(12)	Private parking lot and drive identification signs based upon the following standards: One ground pole sign per entrance not to exceed three square feet in area and six feet in height may be located within the minimum setback area. Information naming or describing the business, as distinguished from parking and driving information, shall occupy no more than 30 percent of the sign area and shall consist of letters, numbers, and symbols no larger or more conspicuous than those used for parking or driving information. A permit shall be required. 
(13)	Vending machines on the exterior of business establishments, where permitted, shall be permitted two signs. The total area of such signs shall not exceed ten percent of the wall surface area of the side of the vending machine on which such signs are located, but not to exceed a maximum area of ten square feet for all such signs. All portions of such signs shall be located within the face of the vending machine. No permit shall be required. 
(14)	Business signs displayed through building glass area where such sign: 
a.	Covers not more than 25 percent of all the glass area of the frontage of the building premises displaying the sign. 
b.	Is not illuminated. 
c.	Contains a message referring to current, temporary merchandising or promotional activities such as a sale. 
d.	Is removed from the glass area not more than 30 days after its first display. No permit shall be required. 
(15)	Elections signs. As used in this section, an election sign is a sign advocating or opposing a candidate for public office or a position on an issue to be determined in an election. 
a.	Pursuant to section 50-511, election signs, as noncommercial signs, shall be permitted on any sign structure otherwise permitted under this article as an on-premises advertising sign or an off-premises advertising sign. 
b.	In addition, election signs consisting of ground pole signs not in excess of six square feet in area or five feet in height are permitted on private property only within the city. Election signs are not permitted on public property nor in the public right-of-way. Election signs shall be located no less than 15 feet from the traveled portion of any public street or road. For purposes of this regulation, the traveled portion of the road includes any road shoulder. The zoning official may permit a sign closer than 15 feet to the traveled portion of the road where all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.	There is less than 15 feet of space between the traveled portion of the street or road and any principal or accessory building on the property so that it is not possible to place a sign in conformance within the 15-foot limit; 
2.	The sign is located as far away as possible from the traveled portion of the street or road while remaining visible; 
3.	The sign does not obstruct the vision of drivers, obstruct or detract from the visibility of any traffic sign or traffic control device or otherwise constitute a traffic hazard; and 
4.	The sign is not within the public right-of-way. 
In addition, within any residential zoning district, election signs not in excess of six square feet are permitted as window signs. Under this subsection, the number of election signs on a given lot or parcel of land, including any appurtenant right-of-way, shall be limited to one sign for each candidate and ballot issue. No election signs shall be located in such a manner so as to obstruct the vision of drivers, or obstruct or detract from the visibility of any traffic sign or traffic control device, or otherwise constitute a traffic hazard. 
c.	The placement of election signs shall be limited in time to a period commencing 30 days prior to the primary election and ending five days after the general election. All election signs must be removed within five days after the election. An unlawful election sign on public property may be removed by the city pursuant to the procedures contained in section 50-517. In addition to the remedies provided under section 50-517, the city may remove any election sign remaining on public property more than five days after a general election. Any costs incurred by the city in removing such sign shall be assessed against the candidate, the committee designated pursuant to section 24 of 1976 PA 388 (MCL 169.224), and such other person or entity responsible for erecting the sign. No permit shall be required for election signs. 
d.	In any prosecution for violation of this subsection, proof that a sign contains a message advocating the election of a candidate shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such candidate is responsible for the erection and maintenance of such sign. In addition, where an election sign is located on private property, proof that a person or entity is the owner or is in control of such property shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such person or entity is responsible for the erection and maintenance of such sign. 
(16)	Portable signs directing the public to a real estate development may be erected with the consent of the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall not grant such consent if the sign shall be detrimental to the surrounding area. No permit shall be required. 
(17)	Help wanted signs soliciting employees for the place of business where posted. Signs shall not exceed two square feet, and shall not contain information other than information relating to the solicitation of employees. Signs shall only be posted at times when employees are actively being sought. Signs shall be limited to wall signs or window signs complying with subsection (14) of this section. Within an industrial zoning district (I-1, I-2), ground pole signs of no more than six square feet for such solicitation of employees for businesses permitted under sections 50-267, 50-268 and 50-287. Such signs shall comply with the height and placement requirements of subsection 50-507(2)a.3. No establishment shall have more than one help wanted sign. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 8, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 8) 
Sec. - 50-510. Electronic message centers. 
(a)	Electronic message centers where permitted shall be subject to the sign areas set forth in section 50-507(2). 
(b)	Additional general EMC regulations: 
(1)	An EMC sign may be a portion of a building sign or freestanding sign, or may comprise the entire sign area. 
(2)	All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell (hardwired) or via software settings. 
(c)	EMC regulations by zone: 
(1)	In all residential, planned residential development, and office districts, EMC signs are permitted only in certain circumstances by special use permit in accordance with section 50-507 of this code. They are otherwise prohibited in these districts. 
(2)	In residentially zoned districts and planned residential districts, where permitted, EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of 12 seconds. 
(3)	In residentially zoned districts and planned residential districts, where permitted, the following EMC display features and functions are prohibited: scrolling, traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, fade, dissolve, any other moving effects, and all dynamic frame effects or patterns of illusory movement or simulated movement. 
(4)	In office districts (OS-1), planned development districts (PDD), business districts (B-1, B-2, B-3), industrial districts (I-1, I-2), and parking districts (P-1), EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of eight (8) seconds. The transition time between messages and/or message frames is limited to three (3) seconds, and these transitions may employ fade, dissolve, and/or transition effects. 
(5)	In business districts (B-1, B-2, B-3), industrial districts (I-1, I-2), and parking districts (P-1), all EMC display features and functions are permitted, with the exception of: 
a.	Flashing, which is prohibited. 
b.	Full motion video or film display via an electronic file imported into the MC software or streamed in real time into the EMC. Full motion video as described shall be permitted by special exception only. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2, § 4, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 50-511. - Noncommercial message permitted. 
    Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, a sign structure permitted in this article as an on-premises advertising sign or an off-premises advertising sign may contain a noncommercial message. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 10, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 10) 
Sec. 50-512. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)	A sign not expressly permitted is prohibited. 
(b)	The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any district, anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding: 
(1)	Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights, including signs which attempt to simulate light or fluid by wind directed flaps or panels known in the industry as "spangles" or "light catchers"; provided, however, time and temperature signs which show both time and temperature simultaneously, on each face, or time only or temperature only in each face are permitted. 
(2)	In other than I-1 industrial districts, pennants, spinners and streamers are not permitted. 
(3)	String lights used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than holiday decorations. All holiday decorations shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 75 days. 
(4)	Any sign which has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, by action of normal wind current or by any other means. 
(5)	Any sign or sign structure which: 
a.	Is structurally unsafe; 
b.	Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; 
c.	Is not kept in good repair; 
d.	Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it; 
e.	Has peeling paint on any surface; 
f.	Has any parts broken, missing letters or nonoperational lights. 
(6)	Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads. Signs which make use of the words such as "Stop," "Look," "Danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(7)	Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exitway. 
(8)	Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
(9)	Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold. 
(10)	Portable signs except where expressly permitted in this article. 
(11)	Real estate signs no longer valid due to sale, rental or lease of the property, except where permitted in section 50-508. 
(12)	Billboards and off-premises advertising signs. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 11, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 11) 
Sec. 50-513. - Construction materials. 
(a)	Generally. Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for structures in the state construction code, 1972 PA 230 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(b)	Combustible materials. All signs and sign structures erected shall conform to the state construction code relating to combustibility. 
(c)	Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastics or any combination thereof. 
(d)	Fastenings. Signs erected to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied. All building fastenings must be of noncorrosive materials. Lightweight sign letters may be attached by means of an approved adhesive. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 12, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 12) 
Sec. 50-514. - Windloads. 
    For the purpose of design, wind pressure shall be taken upon the gross area of the vertical projection of all signs and sign structures at not less than 15 pounds per square foot for those portions above the ground. In calculating wind pressure or curved surfaces such as cylindrical or spherical signs or sign structures, this pressure shall be assumed to act on six-tenths of the projected area. In all open frame signs or sign structures, the area used in computing wind pressure shall be one-half times the net area of the framing members exposed to the wind. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 13, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 13) 
Sec. 50-515. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Every permanent, legally existing sign which does not conform to the height, size, area or location requirements of this article as of September 1, 1994, is hereby deemed to be nonconforming. 
(b)	Nonconforming signs may not be expanded, enlarged or extended; however, such signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign. 
(c)	For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign may be diminished in size or dimension, or the copy of the sign may be amended or changed without jeopardizing the privilege of nonconforming use. 
(d)	Any nonconforming sign, sign structure, or frame substantially destroyed by fire or other casualty loss shall not be restored or rebuilt. 
(e)	When a nonconforming sign or portion of such sign is removed, it shall be replaced only with a sign that conforms with all requirements of the zoning district within which that property is located. A sign which may be removed for maintenance or repair purposes in accordance with subsection (b) of this section following a permit from the zoning official or authorized representative shall be reinstalled within 90 days of removal or the right of nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 14, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 14) 
Sec. 50-516. - Appeals. 
(a)	Appeal from the ruling of any officer, department, board or bureau of the city concerning the enforcement of the provisions of this article may be made by any aggrieved party within 30 days of the ruling to the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)	The zoning board of appeals shall have the same jurisdiction as is granted to the board pursuant to article II, division 2 of this chapter. 
(c)	The zoning board of appeals may revoke any grant of a variance for violation of such grant upon the giving of 30 days' notice of such violation to the owner of the premises and a hearing held thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 15, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 15) 
Sec. 50-517. - Violations; signs in violation declared public nuisance. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge, alter, move or convert any sign in the city, or cause or permit such work to be done on such person's property contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any sign which is erected, constructed, maintained, enlarged, altered, moved or converted in violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	In addition to the remedies otherwise provided, the city may remove an unlawful sign on public property, in accordance with the following procedures. Unlawful signs on public property may be removed by the city. Upon removal, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the sign, or the person or entity responsible for erecting the sign, that the sign may be retrieved upon payment of the cost incurred by the city for the removal of the sign. The notice shall advise that upon the request of such person, the director of public services will conduct a hearing at which the person may contest the propriety of the removal of the sign or the cost of such removal. If the director of public services determines at such hearing that the sign was not properly removed or that the cost of removal was incorrect, the payment required for return of the sign shall be adjusted accordingly. If the owner or person or entity responsible for erecting a sign cannot be determined by reasonable effort, or if a sign is not retrieved or a hearing requested within 20 days after notice to such person, the sign may be treated as abandoned and be discarded. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 16, 12-19-1994; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 16) 
Sec. 50-518. - Penalties and sanctions; municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction as provided in section 1-56. 
(Ord. No. 1994-5, § 17, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 1997-5, § 10, 12-1-1997; Code 1972, app. A-2, § 18) 
Secs. 50-519-50-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- The ordinances listed in this schedule in section 50-551 are amendments to the zoning district boundaries as shown on the zoning map, incorporated by reference in section 50-102. The zoning map is available in the office of the city clerk, as are copies of the ordinances enumerated in section 50-551. 

Sec. 50-551. - List of amendments to zoning district boundaries. 
    The following ordinances are amendments to the zoning district boundaries: 
Ordinance 
Number Date 1978-6 November 20, 1978 1979-1 April 3, 1979 1979-2 March 5, 1979 1979-7 December 3, 1979 1980-4 June 16, 1980 1982-1 February 16, 1982 1982-8 July 19, 1982 1983-1 February 22, 1983 1984-3 August 20, 1984 1986-5 October 20, 1986 1987-2 April 7, 1987 1987-3 July 5, 1987 1988-7 April 18, 1988 1989-1 July 17, 1989 1989-2 November 20, 1989 1990-2 May 21, 1990 1990-4 August 20, 1990 1991-3 April 15, 1991 1994-3 September 19, 1994 1997-2 February 18, 1997 1997-3 June 16, 1997 2005-5 August 15, 2005 2006-1 March 6, 2006 2006-3 April 17, 2006 2007-5 June 18, 2007 2007-6 July 16, 2007 2007-9 December 3, 2007 2008-1 May 5, 2008 2008-2 June 2, 2008 2012-1 February 6, 2012 2013-3 June 17, 2013  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
    The following are the franchises granted by the city that are currently in full force and effect: 
Grantee Ordinance 
Number Term (1) Consumers Power Company (Electric) 1973-3 30 years (2) Battle Creek Gas Company (Gas) 1983-5 30 years (3) SEMCO Energy Services, Inc. (Electric) 1998-2 30 years (4) Nordic Electric, LLC (Electric) 1999-5 5 years (5) Consumers Energy Company (Electric) 2005-6 30 years (6) SEMCO Energy Gas Company, Inc. (Gas) 2013-2 30 years  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 8; community development, ch. 12; telecommunications, ch. 44. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated through January 4, 2000 which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted, see the table immediately following this table. 
1972 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-31 2-26-2-29 2-116-2-119 2-41-2-44 42-1-42-4 2-51 2-156 21/2-4- 
21/2-8 4-3-4-7 21/2-25 4-51 21/2-26 4-31 21/2-27 4-1 21/2-28- 
21/2-35 4-52-4-59 21/2-36 4-2 3-18 6-81 3-26 6-82 3-28, 3-29 6-101, 6-102 3-31 6-103 3-58-3-72 50-416 3-104-3-109 6-151-6-156 3-110 6-131 3-111 6-154 3-112-3-115 6-132-6-135 4-1-4-9 10-1-10-9 4-21-4-26 10-31-10-36 4-37, 4-38 10-61, 10-62 4-40-4-43 10-63-10-66 41/2-11- 
41/2-13 24-31-24-33 41/2-13 24-35 24-37 41/2-14 24-34 24-36 41/2-15, 
41/2-16 24-39, 24-40 43/4-11- 
43/4-14 12-31-12-34 43/4-21- 
43/4-26 12-61-12-66 4 7/8 -1- 
4 7/8 -6 14-1-14-6 5-3 6-181 5-12 6-182 5-22, 5-23 6-183, 6-184 6-2, 6-3 20-31, 20-32 6-3.1 20-33 6-4-6-6 20-34-20-36 7-1-7-5 36-11-36-15 7-6.2 36-32 7-6.4- 
7-6.14 36-34-36-44 7-7 36-61 7-7.1- 
7-7.6 36-62-36-67 7-8.1- 
7-8.7 36-86-36-92 7-9.1- 
7-9.9 36-111-36-119 7-10.1- 
7-10.3 36-136-36-138 7-10.5 36-139 7-10.6 36-146 7-10.7 36-140 7-10.9- 
7-10.13 36-141-36-145 7-11 36-16 8-1-8-19 8-31-8-49 8-21-8-26 8-50-8-55 8-36-8-39 8-81-8-84 8-40 30-92 8-41 8-85 8-52-8-54 34-31-34-33 8-56 50-287 8-58-8-60 34-34-34-36 8-71-8-80 8-111-8-120 8-81 18-92 8-82, 8-83 8-121, 8-122 8-96-8-98 44-31-44-33 8-99-8-113 44-61-44-75 8-113.1, 
8-113.2 44-76, 44-77 8-113.4 44-78 8-114-8-119 16-31-16-36 8-201, 8-202 8-151, 8-152 8-211 36-171 8-212, 8-213 36-191, 36-192 8-214 36-172 8-216 36-173 8-217 36-196 8-218-8-220 36-193-36-195 81/2-1- 
81/2-8 6-51-6-55 9-17 46-2 9-20(8.25), 
9-20(8.26) 46-33, 46-34 9-21(5.61) 46-31 9-31, 9-32 18-31, 18-32 9-46-9-51 46-51-46-56 9-61-9-63 46-111-46-113 10-1 30-2 10-2(a)(1) 30-125 10-2(a)(2) 30-151 10-2(a)(3)a, 
10-2(a)(3)b 30-221, 30-222 10-2(a)(4) 30-93 10-2(a)(5) 30-124 10-2(a)(6)- 
10-2(a)(9) 30-152-30-155 10-2(a)(10) 30-31 10-2(a)(11) 30-94 10-2(a)(12) 30-225 10-2(a)(13), 
10-2(a)(14) 30-122, 30-123 10-2(a)(15) 30-121 10-2(a)(16) 30-126 10-2(a)(17) 30-124 10-2(a)(18) 30-32 10-2(a)(19) 30-127 10-2(a)(20) 30-95 10-2(b) 30-1 10-3 30-224 10-4(a), 10-4(b) 30-251, 30-252 10-5 30-223 10-16- 
10-21 30-271-30-276 10-22, 10-23 32-1, 32-2 10-31-10-34 30-171-30-174 10-41-10-45 30-191-30-195 13-1-13-4 38-1-38-4 13-4.1- 
13-4.18 38-5-38-22 13-5-13-7 38-23-38-25 13-7.1- 
13-7.6 38-26-38-31 13-8 38-32 13-8.1, 13-8.2 38-33, 38-34 13-9-13-12 38-35-38-38 14-1 30-91 14-17-14-29 40-31-40-43 14-40-14-44 40-71-40-75 15-16-15-22 6-211-6-217 15-26-15-30 6-218-6-222 15-32 6-223 151/2-1- 
151/2-3 42-31-42-33 16-16-16-20 28-31-28-35 16-21 46-32 16-22-16-26 28-36-28-40 17-16 18-61 17-21-17-26 18-62-18-67 18-1 48-1 18-17-18-27 48-31-48-41 18-34-18-45 48-61-48-72 18-51-18-70 48-91-48-110 18-75-18-80 48-126-48-131 18-86, 18-87 48-151, 48-152 18-89-18-93 48-153-48-157 18-99-18-105 48-176-48-182 18-106- 
18-111 48-201-48-206 18-113 48-207 18-115- 
18-123 48-246-48-254 18-132- 
18-137 48-272-48-277 19-1-19-8 1-51-1-58 app. A, art. XXI, 
app. A, art. XXII 50-38, 50-39 app. A, art. XXIII, 
app. A, art. XXIV 50-3, 50-4 app. A, art. XXIV 50-7 app. A, art. XXV, 
app. A, art. XXVI 50-5, 50-6 app. A, art. XXVIII 50-8 app. A, § 200, 
app. A, § 201 50-1, 50-2 app. A, § 300- 
app. A, § 305 50-101-50-106 app. A, § 400- 
app. A, § 403 50-126-50-129 app. A, § 500- 
app. A, § 502 50-146-50-148 app. A, § 600- 
app. A, § 604 50-166-50-170 app. A, § 700- 
app. A, § 704 50-186-50-190 app. A, § 800- 
app. A, § 804 50-206-50-210 app. A, § 900- 
app. A, § 904 50-226-50-230 app. A, § 1000- 
app. A, § 1003 50-246-50-249 app. A, § 1100- 
app. A, § 1103 50-266-50-269 app. A, § 1200- 
app. A, § 1202 50-286-50-288 app. A, § 1300- 
app. A, § 1304 50-306-50-310 app. A, § 1400- 
app. A, § 1407 50-326-50-333 app. A, § 1500- 
app. A, § 1507 50-351-50-358 app. A, § 1600- 
app. A, § 1603 50-376-50-379 app. A, § 1700- 
app. A, § 1703 50-401-50-404 app. A, § 1703- 
app. A, § 1706 50-405-50-408 app. A, § 1706 50-409 app. A, § 1708- 
app. A, § 1713 50-410-50-415 app. A, § 1715- 
app. A, § 1717 50-417-50-419 app. A, § 1800- 
app. A, § 1810 50-441-50-451 app. A, § 1900- 
app. A, § 1906 50-31-50-37 app. A, § 2000- 
app. A, § 2007 50-56-50-63 app. A-1, § A-1.1- 
app. A-1, § A-1.11 22-1-22-11 app. A-2, preamble 50-501 app. A-2, § 1- 
app. A-2, § 8 50-502-50-509 app. A-2, § 10- 
app. A-2, § 16 50-511-50-517 app. A-2, § 18 50-518 app. A-4, § A-4.1- 
app. A-4, § A-4.5 8-181-8-185 app. D, § 1.010 26-61 app. D, § 1.020 26-62 app. D, § 1.030 26-63 app. D, § 1.040 26-64 app. D, § 1.050 26-65 app. D, § 1.060 26-66 app. D, § 1.070 26-67 app. D, art. II 26-68 app. D, art. III 26-86 app. D, § 3.010 26-87 app. D, § 3.020 26-88 app. D, § 3.030 26-89 app. D, § 3.040 26-90 app. D, § 3.050 26-91 app. D, § 4.010 26-111 app. D, § 4.020 26-112 app. D, § 4.030 26-113 app. D, § 4.040 26-114 app. D, § 4.050 26-115 app. D, § 4.060 26-116 app. D, § 5.010 26-136 app. D, § 5.020 26-137 app. D, § 5.030 26-138 app. D, § 5.040 26-139 app. D, § 5.050 26-140 app. D, § 6.010 26-156 app. D, § 6.020 26-157 app. D, § 6.030 26-158 app. D, § 6.040 26-159 app. D, § 7.020 26-69 app. E, § II- 
app. E, § IX 26-31-26-38  
;CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 1953-10 2 30-1, 30-2 30-94, 30-95 30-121-30-127 30-151-30-154 30-221, 30-222 30-225 1953-11 1 30-91 1953-12 3-5 42-2-42-4 1953-15 1, 2 10-1, 10-2 3 10-31-10-33 
10-35 4 10-36 
10-61-10-65 5 10-4-10-7 10-34 6, 7 10-8, 10-9 8 10-3 1953-19 40-31-40-41 40-43 40-71-40-75 1954-3 6-81, 6-82 1954-5 30-224 1954-6 48-151-48-157 1954-9 8-31-8-54 1955-1 48-31-48-41 48-61-48-65 48-67-48-72 48-91-48-107 48-109 48-126-48-131 1955-9 34-31-34-36 50-287 1956-4 50-287 1957-3 2-117-2-119 1958-6 1 18-61 2 18-62, 18-63 3 18-66 4 18-64, 18-65 1959-1 48-1 48-176-48-181 1959-3 6-211-6-223 1960-5 8-81-8-85 30-92 1964-2 1 8-112 8-114 2 8-111 3 8-113 4 8-115 5 8-116, 8-117 6-8 8-118-8-120 9 18-92 10, 11 8-121, 8-122 1964-4 1 30-223 1964-6 1 30-251, 30-252 2 30-251, 30-252 1964-8 1-7 50-416 1964-9 1 30-271, 30-272 2, 3 30-273, 30-274 5 30-275, 30-276 1965-1 1 44-31 2, 3 44-33 5 44-32 1965-2 28-31-28-39 46-32 1968-1 1 40-42 1969-1 46-2 46-31 46-33, 46-34 1969-4 4 42-1 1970-3 1 18-31 1971-3 1 46-51-46-56 1972-2 11-20-1972 3 1-9 1973-1 1 30-1 30-94, 30-95 30-121-30-127 30-151-30-154 30-221, 30-222 30-225 1973-2 1 18-32 1974-5 1 46-31 46-33, 46-34 1975-8 1 48-182 1975-13 1 6-102, 6-103 1977-1 1 2-156 1977-3  5-16-1977 22-1-22-11  1-16-1978(Ord.) 200, 201 50-1, 50-2 300-305 50-101-50-106 400-403 50-126-50-129 500-502 50-146-50-148 600-604 50-166-50-170 700-704 50-186-50-190 800-804 50-206-50-210 900-904 50-226-50-230 1000-1003 50-246-50-249 1100-1103 50-266-50-269 1200-1202 50-286-50-288 1300-1304 50-306-50-310 1400-1407 50-326-50-333 1500-1507 50-351-50-358 1600-1603 50-376-50-379 1700-1703 50-401-50-404 1703-1706 50-405-50-408 1706 50-409 1708-1713 50-410-50-415 1715-1717 50-417-50-419 1800-1810 50-441-50-451 1900-1906 50-31-50-37 2000-2007 50-56-50-63 art. XXI, 50-38, 50-39 art. XXII art, XXIII 50-3 art. XXIV- 50-4-50-8 art. XXVIII 1978-4 2 48-201-48-207 1978-5 2 50-3 1979-3 2 46-2 46-31 46-33, 46-34 1979-4 3 48-246-48-254 1979-5 3 48-272 48-274 1979-6 3 48-272-48-277 1980-6 3 6-81 1980-7 3 6-101, 6-102 1980-8 2 50-416 1980-13 2 32-1, 32-2 1981-1 3 6-181-6-184 1981-3 3 24-31-24-37 24-39, 24-40 1981-5 2 6-213 8-82 8-113 34-32 40-33 40-73 1981-6 12- 7-1981 1.010 26-61 1.020 26-62 1.030 26-63 1.040 26-64 1.050 26-65 1.060 26-66 1.070 26-67 art. II 26-68 art. III 26-86 3.010 26-87 3.020 26-88 3.030 26-89 3.040 26-90 3.050 26-91 4.010 26-111 4.020 26-112 4.030 26-113 4.040 26-114 4.050 26-115 4.060 26-116 5.010 26-136 5.020 26-137 5.030 26-138 5.040 26-139 5.050 26-140 6.010 26-156 6.020 26-157 6.030 26-158 6.040 26-159 7.020 26-69 1981-7 2 50-268 1982-3 2 6-101-6-103 1982-6 3.1 4-51 3.3 4-31 3.4 4-1 3.5-3.7 4-52-4-54 3.8-3.11 4-56-4-59 3.12 4-55 3.14-3.18 4-3-4-7 1982-10 2 20-31 20-33 1983-2 2 50-267 1983-3 3 46-2 1983-4 3 6-131-6-135 6-151-6-156 1983-6 2 30-251, 30-252 3 30-251, 30-252 1984-1 2 6-182 1984-2 2 12-31-12-33 3 12-34 1985-1 2 8-151, 8-152 1985-4 3 36-11-36-16 36-32 36-34-36-44 36-61-36-67 36-86-36-92 36-111-36-118 36-136-36-146 1985-5 4 12-61-12-66 1986-2 2 20-31 1986-3 2 6-181 1986-4 2 6-101-6-103 1987-1 2 18-61-18-66 1987-4 2 16-31-16-36 1987-5 2 36-15 36-119 1988-2 2 6-101-6-103 1988-3 2 20-31 1988-5 3-7 6-51-6-55 1988-8 2 50-2 50-128 50-169 50-209 50-267, 50-268 50-287 50-376 50-403, 50-404 50-406, 50-407 1990-1 2 50-2 50-128 50-207 50-248 50-406 1990-3 1-6 14-1-14-6 1991-1 2(A), 2(B) 42-33 1991-2 38-1-38-38 1991-5 2 50-2 50-287 1991-6 1 30-1 30-94, 30-95 30-121-30-127 30-151-30-154 30-221, 30-222 30-225 1991-7 1 46-31 46-33, 46-34 1992-2 2, 3 18-31, 18-32 1992-3 1-3 46-111-46-113 1992-4  4-20-1992 1-4 30-171-30-174 1992-5  5-18-1992 1-5 8-181-8-185 1993-1  4-19-1993 1 46-51-46-53 46-56 1993-2 1 46-31 46-33, 46-34 1993-3 1 30-1 30-94, 30-95 30-121-30-127 30-151-30-154 30-221, 30-222 3 30-225 1993-4 1 42-4 1993-5 1 44-61-44-78 1994-1 1 50-417 1994-5 12-19-1994 preamble 50-501 50-518 1-8 50-502-50-509 10-16 50-511-50-517 1995-3 1, 2 20-31 3 20-33 1995-6 1, 2 6-101 3 6-102 1995-8 1 48-107 3, 4 48-104, 48-105 1996-1  3- 4-1996 1 36-171-36-173 36-191-36-196 1996-3 10-21-1996 1-5 30-191-30-195 1997-1  3- 6-1997 1 50-248 1997-4  8- 4-1997 1, 2 42-31, 42-32 1997-5 12- 1-1997 1 4-2 3 6-135 4 36-16 5 8-55 6 18-32 7 28-40 8 18-67 9 48-110 10 50-518 11 50-7 1997-6 12- 1-1997 1 1-2 2 1-31 1997-7 12- 1-1997 1 1-51-1-58 1997-8 12- 1-1997 1 18-61 1998-1  1- 5-1998 1 50-507 3 50-508 1998-3  6- 1-1998 1 6-31 3(B) 6-101 3(D), 3(E) 20-31, 20-32 1998-10 2 42-33 1999-2 11-15-1999 1 6-102 2 1-56 1999-3 12- 6-1999 II-IX 26-31-26-38 68-01(Res.) 12- 3-2001 50-267(2)a.       Added 50-287(8) 2002-1  4-15-2002 1-7       Added Adopt. Ord., p. xi 2002-3 11-18-2002 1       Added 44-91-44-110 2003-1  7-21-2003 1       Added 1-58(f)-(l) 2       30-124 2004-1  7- 6-2004 1       Added 46-201, 46-202 2004-2  7-19-2004 1 6-101, 6-102 2004-3  8-16-2004 1 30-251 2-2005  6- 6-2005 1 50-502 2       Added 50-507(1)a.4 3 50-507(1)f. 4-2005  6-20-2005 1 42-1 2005-5  8-15-2005 2 50-551 2005-6 10- 3-2005 10 app. A 2006-1  3- 6-2006 1 50-551 2006-3  4-17-2006 2 50-551 2006-4  7- 3-2006 1 18-61-18-69 2006-5  8-21-2006 1 2-119 2       Added 50-3(c), (d) 3 50-37 4 50-56 5 50-58 6 50-62 7 50-128(11)(a) 8 50-331(2) 9 50-353(2) 10 50-417(a) 11 50-417(b) 2007-1  2-20-2007 1       Rpld 6-181-6-184 2007-2  3-19-2007 1       Added 30-96 2007-3  5- 7-2007 1 50-60 2007-4  5-21-2007 1, 2 20-31, 20-32 2007-5  6-18-2007 2 50-551 2007-6  7-16-07 2 50-551 2007-8 11-19-07 1 50-507(2)a.1. 2 50-507(2)b.1. 3 50-507(3)a.7. 2007-9 12- 3-07 2 50-551 2007-10 12-17-07 1 48-202 2       Added 48-208 2008-1  5- 5-2008 2 50-551 2008-2  6- 2-2008 2 50-551 2008-3  7- 7-2008 1 6-102 2008-4  9-12-2008 1-5       Added 2-126-2-130 2009-1  5-18-2009 1-6       Added 18-111-18-116 2009-2  9-21-2009 1, 2 42-33(1) 2010-3  1- 4-2010 1-13       Rpld 2-116-2-119       Added 2-116-2-125.3 2011-1  4- 4-2011 1-3       Added 6-61-6-63 2011-2  5- 9-2011       Added 50-268(7) 2011-3  5- 9-2011       Added 8-186-8-207 2011-4  8-15-2011       Rpld 46-3       Added 46-3-46-5 2011-5 11- 4-2011       Rpld 4-1-4-7, 4-31, 4-51-4-59       Added 4-1-4-4 4-31-4-41 2011-6 12- 5-2011 46-33(b) 2012-1  2- 6-2012 2 50-551 2012-2  3-19-2012       Rpld 4-1-4-4, 4-31-4-41       Added 4-1-4-6, 4-30-4-40 2013-1  3-18-2013 1       Added 46-1a 2013-2  5-20-2013 App. A 2013-3  6-17-2013 2 50-551 2013-4  6-17-2013 1 6-102, 18-62 2 18-63 3 18-64 2013-6 11-18-2013 1       Added 30-291-30-295 2014-1  4-21-2014 1       Added 8-208 2015-1  2-17-2015 1 50-57 2015-2  9-21-2015 1 8-208 03-15 12-21-2015 I-XVIII 18-121-18-138 2016-1  3- 7-2016 1 50-2, 50-287(7), (8) 2016-2  3-21-2016 1, 2 50-502 3 50-507(1) 4       Added 50-510 2016-3 10-17-2016 1 50-56-50-63 2016-4 12- 5-2016 1       Added 8-301-8-308 2017-1  4- 3-2017 1       Rpld 8-186-8-208 2017-2  4-17-2017 1       Rpld 50-268(7)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL 
Section Section  
this Code 8.4 et seq. 1-4 8.4b 1-3 8.6 1-2 15.181 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 15.231 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 15.231-15.246 2-130 44-94 44-107 15.261 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. IV Char. § 3.1 Char. § 4.15 Char. § 5.3 Char. § 7.13 15.265 Char. § 5.3 15.321 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 4.32, 
Char. § 4.33 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 4.32, 
Char. § 4.33 15.401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 28.451 et seq. 30-292 29.1 et seq. Ch. 20 29.26 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 16-32, 16-33 29.41 et seq. Ch. 20 29.417 et seq. Ch. 36 29.471 et seq. 36-36 37.1102 et seq. 24-38 37.2101 et seq. Ch. 24 37.2102 Ch. 2, Art. III 37.2103 24-32 37.2501 24-32 37.2501 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. II 37.2502- 
37.2506 24-33-24-37 37.2506a 24-38 38.1501 et seq. Char. § 5.20 41.181 et seq. 26-62 43.51 et seq. 50-416 46.401 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 54.211 26-34 68.31 et seq. Ch. 38 109.11 Char. § 5.16 117.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 2 Char. § 3.9 117.3(a) Char. § 4.2 Char. § 5.3 Char. § 7.11 117.3(b) Char. § 4.13 117.3(c) Char. § 4.6 Char. § 4.8, Char. § 4.9 117.3(d) Char. § 4.4 Char. § 5.4 117.3(f) Char. § 7.7 117.3(g) Char. § 7.5 117.3(h) Char. § 7.3 Char. § 7.6 117.3(i) Char. § 7.7 Char. § 7.10 Char. § 7.12 Char. § 7.22 117.3(j) Char. Ch. 2 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 2 
6-101 Char. Ch. 6 Char. § 6.4, 
Char. § 6.5 Char. § 6.8 20-31 117.3(m), 
117.3(n) Char. § 5.8 117.4a Char. § 7.37 117.4b(2) Char. § 2.1 117.4e(1)- 
117.4e(3) Char. § 2.1 117.4h(1)- 
117.4h(3) Char. § 2.1 117.4h(6) Char. § 2.1 117.4i(b)- 
117.4i(d) Char. § 2.1 117.4i(d) Ch. 8 117.4i(f) Char. § 2.1 117.4i(g) Char. § 4.28 Char. § 6.10 117.4i(j) Char. § 2.1 117.4i(k) 1-31 117.4j(3) Char. § 2.2 117.5b 1-1 Char. § 6.9 117.5(d) Char. § 4.30 117.5h Ch. 30, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 117.6 et seq. Char. § 1.1 117.14 Char. Sched. § 9 117.18 et seq. Char. § 3.9 117.26 Char. Sched. § 9 123.51 et seq. Ch. 32 123.161 et seq. Char. § 10.6 123.165 48-107 123.331 et seq. 48-151 123.335, 
123.336 48-153, 48-154 123.338 48-154 123.340, 
123.341 48-155, 48-156 123.361 et seq. Ch. 36 124.1 et seq. Char. § 2.3 124.151 Ch. 18, Art. III 124.281 et seq. Ch. 48 124.501 et seq. 6-51 16-31 124.531 et seq. Char. § 2.3 125.31 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 Ch. 50 50-502 125.71 et seq. Ch. 12 125.401 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. III 6-81 50-34 125.408 Ch. 6, Art. III 125.523 et seq. 6-102 125.538- 
125.542 6-81 125.581 et seq. Ch. 50 50-3 125.582 Ch. 6, Art. III 125.583a 50-403 125.583b 50-127 125.584 50-38 125.584b Ch. 50, Art. III, 
Div. 12, 
Ch. 50, Art. III, 
Div. 13 125.584d 50-417 125.585 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 2 125.601 et seq. Ch. 12 125.651 et seq. Ch. 12 125.901 et seq. Ch. 12 125.1035 et seq. Ch. 28 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 6-31 50-405 50-513 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 12 Ch. 12, Art. II 12-31 125.1605 12-32 125.1628- 
125.1636 12-32 125.1631 12-34 125.1801 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. III 12-61, 12-62 12-64 125.1805(4) 12-66 125.2301 et seq. Ch. 28 50-409 125.3101 et seq. 50-56 2-125.1 125.3801 et seq. 2-116 2-125.1 128.1 et seq. Ch. 10 129.11 et seq. Char. § 7.27 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Char. Ch. 7 133.9 Ch. 38 134.1 et seq. Char. Sched. § 9 141.101 et seq. 48-157 48-275 141.261 et seq. Ch. 38 141.421 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Char. Ch. 7 141.435 Char. § 7.3 141.501 et seq. 42-31, 42-32 141.631 42-33 141.662 42-33 141.701 et seq. 42-32 141.760, 
141.761 42-32 141.787 42-32 141.1001 et seq. Char. Ch. 7 141.1201 et seq. Char. Ch. 7 168.1 et seq. Char. § 4.9 Ch. 14 14-1 14-6 168.24a Char. § 4.17 168.25 Char. § 4.10 168.323 Char. § 4.16 168.327 Char. § 4.25 168.491 et seq. Char. § 4.8 168.568 et seq. Char. § 4.16 168.631 et seq. Char. § 4.7 168.635a Char. § 4.11 168.644 Char. § 4.5 168.644a Char. § 4.6 Char. § 5.3 14-1 14-5, 14-6 168.644f Char. § 4.13 14-4 14-6 168.644g Char. § 5.3 14-2, 14-3 168.644h Char. § 4.23 Char. § 5.3 168.644l 14-5 168.646a Char. § 4.13 168.720 Char. § 4.12 168.851 Char. § 4.18 168.861 et seq. Char. § 4.19 168.951 et seq. Char. § 4.25 Char. § 4.28 169.224 50-509 201.37 Char. § 4.29 206.504 42-33 211.1 et seq. Char. § 7.5 Char. § 7.7 18-69 18-105 Ch. 42 211.2 Char. § 7.12 211.7 et seq. Char. § 7.8 211.10 et seq. Char. § 5.11 Char. § 7.9 211.24 et seq. Char. § 7.10 211.30(1) Char. § 7.12 211.30(3) Char. § 7.15 211.31 Char. § 7.15 211.39 Char. § 7.17 211.43b Ch. 2, Art. V Char. § 7.27 211.44 et seq. Char. § 7.18 42-3 211.55 et seq. Char. § 7.25 211.741 38-12 211.741 et seq. Char. § 11.5 Ch. 38 38-9 38-12 40-42, 40-43 211.744 Char. § 11.12 211.761 et seq. Char. § 11.11 Ch. 38 213.21 et seq. Char. § 2.1 247.61 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 247.171 et seq. Ch. 40 247.291 et seq. Ch. 40 247.321 et seq. Ch. 40 252.201 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 50-287 252.301 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. VI 257.1 et seq. 18-31 18-92 Ch. 46 46-1 46-56 46-201 50-2 257.264(b) 30-252 257.319 30-251 257.605, 
257.606 Ch. 46 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 46, Art. II 257.608 50-509 257.610 Ch. 46 257.625 46-1a 257.625k 8-301 257.672 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 257.951 et seq. 46-2 257.1301 et seq. 8-304 287.261 et seq. Ch. 4 324,4301 et seq. Ch. 36 324.101 et seq. Ch. 18 324.3108 Ch. 22 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 48 324.8901 et seq. 30-91, 30-92 36-89 324.9301 et seq. Ch. 22 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 36 36-5 36-34-36-37 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 36 324.11505 36-171 324.11507 36-15 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 36 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 36 324.41902 30-223 324.52701 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 333.2850 10-31 333.6103 30-251 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 333.7106 30-191 333.7212- 
333.7220 30-191 333.7451 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 333.12501 et seq. Ch. 28 333.20901 et seq. Ch. 16 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 36 338.41 et seq. 8-51 338.881 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VI 6-181 16-32, 16-33 338.883f et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 338.1051 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 16-32, 16-33 393.502 42-33 400.701 et seq. 50-127 408.551 et seq. 2-156 408.681 et seq. Ch. 32 436.1703 30-252 442.211 et seq. 8-121 445.371 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 445.401 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 445.401-445.407 34-33 445.471 34-33 445.471 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 445.472 34-33 445.481 et seq. 8-151, 8-152 445.1561 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III 446.201 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 450.62 et seq. 12-31 484.2102 44-93 484.2251 44-94 560.101 et seq. Ch. 26 26-31, 26-32 26-34-26-37 26-64 26-68 26-87 26-90, 26-91 26-116 50-332 560.108 26-32 26-68 560.109 26-32 26-68 560.112- 
560.119 26-90 560.138 Ch. 22 560.194 Ch. 22 600.101 et seq. 1-51 600.8302 1-58 600.8302(4) 18-138 600.8395 Ch. 46, Art. II, 
Div. 2 46-51 600.8396 1-51 600.8701 et seq. 1-2 1-31 600.8705 1-53 1-55 600.8707(6) 1-51 600.8709 1-55 600.8731 1-58 600.9921 Char. § 4.1 Char. § 4.5 Char. § 4.23 Char. § 4.29 Char. § 5.2 Char. § 5.8 Char. § 6.7 Char. Ch. 9 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 7.31 691.1402 Ch. 40 691.1408 Ch. 2, Art. III 712A.1 et seq. 1-52 722.1-722.6 30-251 722.111 et seq. 50-127 722.751 Ch. 30, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 722.754 Ch. 30, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 750.1 et seq. Ch. 30 750.167(1)(e) 30-125 750.167(1)(f) 30-151 750.167(1)(i) 30-152 750.167(1)(j) 30-152 750.167(1)(l) 30-123 750.170 30-124 750.200 et seq. Ch. 20 750.224 et seq. 30-222 750.227 30-222 750.234 et seq. 30-221 750.240 30-32 750.240 et seq. Ch. 20 750.248 1-8 750.301 et seq. 30-152 30-155 750.377 et seq. 30-93 750.387 10-8 750.448 et seq. 30-152 750.449 30-153 750.459 30-154 750.479 30-31 750.493(d) 30-224 750.546 et seq. 30-95 750.547 30-94 750.1707 30-127 752.541 et seq. 30-122 752.901 et seq. 36-89 767.39 30-2 5660.101 et seq. 26-35  
